ABS46936
5
ABS57510.1177/0002764212469365American Behavioral ScientistHalfaker et al.
© 2011 SAGE Publications
Reprints and permission: http://www.
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav

Article

The Rise and Decline of
an Open Collaboration
System: How Wikipedia’s
Reaction to Popularity Is
Causing Its Decline

American Behavioral Scientist
57(5) 664­–688
© 2012 SAGE Publications
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0002764212469365
abs.sagepub.com

Aaron Halfaker1, R. Stuart Geiger2,
Jonathan T. Morgan3, and John Riedl1

Abstract
Open collaboration systems, such as Wikipedia, need to maintain a pool of volunteer
contributors to remain relevant.Wikipedia was created through a tremendous number
of contributions by millions of contributors. However, recent research has shown that
the number of active contributors in Wikipedia has been declining steadily for years
and suggests that a sharp decline in the retention of newcomers is the cause. This
article presents data that show how several changes the Wikipedia community made
to manage quality and consistency in the face of a massive growth in participation
have ironically crippled the very growth they were designed to manage. Specifically,
the restrictiveness of the encyclopedia’s primary quality control mechanism and
the algorithmic tools used to reject contributions are implicated as key causes of
decreased newcomer retention. Furthermore, the community’s formal mechanisms
for norm articulation are shown to have calcified against changes—especially changes
proposed by newer editors.
Keywords
Peer production, governance, quality control, retention, Wikipedia

1

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
3
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
2

Corresponding Author:
Aaron Halfaker, University of Minnesota, 200 Union St SE, Keller Hall 4-192A, Minneapolis, MN 55455.
Email: aaron.halfaker@gmail.com

Halfaker et al.

665

Open collaboration systems, such as Wikipedia, require a large pool of volunteer contributors. Without volunteers to occupy necessary roles, these systems would cease to
function. Like any volunteer community, open collaboration systems need to maintain
an inner circle of highly invested contributors to manage and direct the group. However, with statistical predictability, all contributors to such systems will eventually
stop contributing (Panciera, Halfaker, & Terveen, 2009; Wilkinson, 2008).
The success of an open collaboration project appears to be highly correlated with
the number of participants it maintains. Projects that fail to recruit and retain new
contributors tend to die quickly (Ducheneaut, 2005). To maintain a pool of contributors, the organization must continually socialize newcomers into it. Some newcomers
must move from the periphery of the community to the center (Bryant, Forte, &
Bruckman, 2005).
Historically, Wikipedia has managed this process effectively. The community grew
from hundreds of active editors in 2001 to thousands in 2004 and peaked in March of
2007 at 56,400 active editors. The work of this massive group has propelled the encyclopedia to a high level of quality and completeness (Giles, 2005). Suh, Convertino,
Chi, and Pirolli (2009) describes this growth as a self-reinforcing mechanism: As
Wikipedia became more valuable, the project attracted more contributors to increase
its value.
Then, at the beginning of 2007, things changed. Participation entered a period of
decline.1 Why? Recent research suggests different explanations. Suh et al. (2009)
argue that the decline could be the result of increasing completion of articles in the
context of a population model. However, of Wikipedia’s “Core 1,000,” most important
articles are still of poor quality, and across the encyclopedia, only 14,072 (0.362%)
articles are rated “good” quality.2
Other researchers point to failed socialization systems. Indeed, evidence suggests
that it is difficult for newcomers to find work to do (Krieger, Stark, & Klemmer, 2009)
and to discover where to ask for help. Generic, standardized socialization tactics (such
as generic welcome messages) are common on Wikipedia, but these tactics are demonstrably less effective at encouraging sustained contribution than personalized variants
(Choi, Alexander, Kraut, & Levine, 2010). Wikipedians have organized mentoring
systems to support socialization, but they fail to serve most newcomers (Musicant,
Ren, Johnson, & Riedl, 2011).
Also, the editing community could simply be “right-sizing.” Perhaps now that the
main work of the encyclopedia is done, there is no need for the 56,000 editors who
were active in 2007. Two pieces of data argue against this theory. First, as noted
above, the vast majority of articles in Wikipedia are still below community standards
for “good” articles. Second, underrepresented groups still find it challenging to join.
For instance, one study found that only 9% of edits are made by female editors and
that articles of particular interest to women are shorter than articles of interest to
men (Lam et al., 2011). Until editors are representative of the population of potential
contributors, it is difficult to argue that the socialization practices are sufficiently
effective.

666		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

In this article, we define a type of Wikipedia editor whom we call a desirable newcomer. The first few edits of these newcomers indicate that they are trying to contribute productively (i.e., acting in good faith) and, therefore, likely will become valuable
contributors if they remain in the community. We show empirically that, although the
proportion of desirable newcomers who arrive at Wikipedia has been holding steady in
recent years, a decreasing fraction of these newcomers survive past their initial contributions. We demonstrate that the decline has been caused, at least in part, by the
Wikipedia community’s reactions to the enormous influx of contributors between
2004 and 2007. To maintain quality and efficiency during this period, the community’s
views toward the goals of the project changed. These new views were instantiated in a
set of policies, and a suite of algorithmic tools were developed for enforcement. Over
time, these changes resulted in a new Wikipedia, in which newcomers are rudely
greeted by automated quality control systems and are overwhelmed by the complexity
of the rule system. Since these changes occurred, newcomers—including the crucial,
desirable newcomers—have been leaving Wikipedia in droves.
This article makes three contributions to understanding the declining retention in
this context. First, we implicate Wikipedia’s primary quality control mechanism
(Stvilia, Twidale, Smith, & Gasser, 2005), the rejection of unwanted contributions,
as a strong negative predictor of the retention of high-quality newcomers and show
that these newcomers’ contributions are being rejected at an increasing rate. Next,
we show how algorithmic tools, which were built to make the work of controlling
the quality of Wikipedia’s content more efficient, exacerbate the effect of rejection
on desirable newcomer retention and circumvent Wikipedia’s conflict resolution
process. Finally, we show how calcification has made Wikipedia’s policy environment less adaptable and increased the difficulty of contributing to community
rules—especially for newcomers.

Motivation and Hypotheses
Rejection of Newcomers
Stvilia et al. (2005) argues that Wikipedia’s open contribution system constitutes an
informal peer review whereby all contributions are initially accepted; other editors
perform reviews and reject unwanted contributions. This review system is apparently
effective at producing value.
Yet Halfaker, Kittur, and Riedl (2011) found that this kind of rejection significantly
reduces newcomers’ contribution rates. When considering this potentially demotivational effect of reverted edits in the context of increased rejection for newcomers
observed by Suh et al. (2009), it is tempting to conclude that rejection of contributions
is scaring away newcomers. However, Halfaker et al. did not look for temporal effects,
and although they controlled for vandalism reverts, they did not control for the quality
of the contributors and thus could not draw conclusions about the quality of the rejecting edit itself.

Halfaker et al.

667

Thus, these observations could be explained by a decline in the quality of newcomers. Such a decline could be caused by an early-adopter affect, whereby users who
were most interested in Wikipedia’s success flocked to the site when it was young.
Perhaps late adopters were less devoted and less likely to contribute productively. If
such an effect were taking place, the rise in rejection of newcomer contributions would
be a sign of health for the community. In other words, these observations could simply
be the product of the Wikipedia’s review system doing its job.
However, there are many reasons to believe that the rate of rejection of newcomers’
contributions would increase regardless of changes in quality and intentions of newcomers. Suh et al. (2009) argues that the rising rate of reverts among all editors (including newcomers) could be attributed to increasing conflict regarding the amount of
available work, which naturally decreases as the encyclopedia reaches completion. In
a related study, Halfaker, Kittur, Kraut, and Riedl (2009) showed that editors were
more likely to get into conflict when editing the same parts of articles.
Changes in the community’s views toward the project’s goals could also be a cause
of increased rejection. For example, the definition of “unwanted” contribution has
certainly changed over time. While presenting at Wikimania in 2006, Jimmy Wales
urged Wikipedians to change their focus from quantity to quality. This presentation
signified a shift from Wikipedia as a catch-all for encyclopedia-like content to a more
restrictive project. In a study of the birth and death rate of articles in Wikipedia, Lam
and Riedl (2009) observed that the rate at which new articles were rejected substantially increased following Mr. Wales’s keynote.
There are also external pressures for Wikipedia to tighten its review process. After
high-profile cases of libel (e.g., the Seigenthaler libel incident3), the community strengthened norms and enforcement surrounding biographies of living persons. The official
policy page states, “Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly
sourced. . . should be removed immediately and without waiting for discussion.”4 Since
Wikipedia has historically benefited from an abundance of contribution, rejecting a few
good contributions in favor of removing damage was seen as a reasonable trade-off.
Over time, the encyclopedia may also be becoming more difficult to contribute to
because of the increasing completeness of articles. In an analysis performed by
Halfaker, recent newcomers were shown to be more likely to contribute to longer,
more complete articles (4 times longer in 2009 than in 2004), and the length of the
article at the time of contribution was a significant predictor of rejection.5
We suspect that the increased rates of rejection are explained by changes in the way
that Wikipedia deals with damage and that this pattern of rejection negatively affects
the retention of desirable newcomers.
Hypothesis 1: Rejection and retention: Increasing rates of rejection have caused
a decrease in the retention of desirable newcomers.
As an examination of this hypothesis, we report new results that demonstrate the
following:

668		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

• The quality of newcomers has not decreased substantially since the middle of
Wikipedia’s exponential growth.
• During exponential growth, the rate of rejection for edits made by desirable
newcomers rose and the survival rate of desirable newcomers fell.
• Rejection of desirable newcomer contributions is a significant, negative predictor of retention.

Tool Use and Consequences
The Wikipedia community has a long history of building algorithmic tools that operate on Wikipedia’s content to serve a wide variety of needs. These tools can generally
be divided into two categories: Robots or bots are autonomous computer programs
that perform edits with little or no human intervention; human-computation tools are
extensions or standalone programs that enhance a user’s ability to interact with the
wiki platform but still rely on human judgment to perform operations.
Bots. The roles of bots in Wikipedia have grown substantially in both size and scope
since the early days of Wikipedia. The first bots enabled power users to perform many
repetitive activities faster than any human could manually. In 2006, Wikipedia administrator Tawker initiated a new genre: the vandal fighter bot. To deal with a coordinated
attack by deviant users adding references to “Squidward”—a cartoon character—across
the encyclopedia, Tawker built a bot that monitored and identified damaging changes to
the encyclopedia in real time using a simple text pattern matcher. This form of fast-paced
content curation was quickly expanded to other easily identifiable acts of vandalism. By
mid-2012, the use of vandal fighter bots became wide-spread. ClueBot NG, Wikipedia’s
most prolific vandal fighter bolt, uses machine learning and neural network approaches
to identify and reject more than 40,000 acts of vandalism a month, with a median time to
revert of 5 seconds. However, despite the use of state-of-the-art techniques, only the
most egregious vandalism can be caught by these fully autonomous workers.
Human-computation tools. To efficiently catch the damage that bots miss, a number of tools were developed to more efficiently reintroduce human judgment into the
vandal-fighting task. Some tools, like Twinkle and Rollback, extend the basic functionality of Wikipedia’s web-based interface, adding contextually relevant buttons
and links that automate tasks for a human user. For example, from an article’s revision history, an editor with Twinkle installed can remove all of an editor’s most
recent contributions to an article and send those contributors a prewritten message
telling them not to vandalize the encyclopedia again. Stand-alone tools, such as
Huggle, organize a well-defined set of tasks into one interface, such as the presentation of suspected vandalism edit “diffs” and the ability to approve or reject edits with
a single click.6
These algorithmic tools have apparently made quality control both more efficient
and more effective. Previous work has shown that the duration during which vandalism is visible in an article has been decreasing (Kittur, Suh, Pendleton, & Chi, 2007;
Priedhorsky et al., 2007). These tools also reduce the amount of volunteer effort that

Halfaker et al.

669

must be devoted to rejecting unwanted contributions by organizing work into a
queue and performing several algorithmic operations for each human operation.
However, recent work suggests that the efficiency of these tools may have some
negative impact on the experiences of a newcomer. An analysis performed by Geiger
found that newcomers generally find their newly-created articles are deleted faster
than they can contribute to them.7 A related study by Geiger, Halfaker, Pinchuk, and
Walling (2012) showed that these algorithmic tools have been taking an increasing
role in “welcoming” newcomers via warning messages. By late 2007, more than half
of new users received their first message from an algorithmic tool. That figure grew to
75% by mid-2008.
Although the use of algorithmic tools appears to have dramatically increased the
efficiency of Wikipedia’s quality control system, we suspect that the use of these tools
to reject contributions has been negatively affecting the retention rate of desirable
newcomers because of their impersonal nature and the aggressive editing patterns they
encourage.
Hypothesis 2: Tool use and consequences: The use of algorithmic tools to reject
newcomer contributions is exacerbating the decrease in desirable newcomer
retention.
As an examination of this hypothesis, we report new results that demonstrate the
following:
• The use of algorithmic tools to reject newcomer contributions has been
increasing.
• The use of algorithmic tools by old-timers to reject the contributions of newcomers correlates strongly with a breakdown in Wikipedia’s preferred conflict resolution process.
• The use of algorithmic tools to revert newcomer edits significantly increases
the negative effect of rejection on desirable newcomer retention.

Calcification of Norms Against Newcomers
Research conducted during Wikipedia’s growth period has drawn links between
Wikipedia’s success and editors’ ability to participate in the creation, modification, and
enforcement of the rules that govern editing. As the editor community grew, implicit
norms were formalized into a growing corpus of official rules and procedures (Butler,
Joyce, & Pike, 2008), and rule creation and enforcement became increasingly decentralized (Beschastnikh, Kriplean, & McDonald, 2008; Forte, Larco, & Bruckman, 2009).
The trends toward decentralization and norm formalization in Wikipedia governance may have been natural and healthy responses to community growth (Forte et al.,
2009). Formally documenting community practices facilitated wider dissemination in
the expanding community, new rules were created to meet emergent needs. By

670		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

2005, three primary types of documented norms had emerged: policies, guidelines,
and essays. Formal norms (policies and guidelines) reflect community consensus and
can be enforced. Informal norms (essays) are not enforceable rules per se and need not
reflect consensus but do often reflect community concerns (Morgan & Zachry, 2010)
and may be widely known and highly cited (such as the “Bold, Revert, Discuss”
(BRD) essay referred to below).
The formalization of implicit norms into rules and the embedding of these rules in
technologies, such as bots and templates, facilitated distributed “peer processes” that
functioned efficiently at scale (Viegas, Wattenberg, Kriss, & van Ham, 2007).
Decentralized policy creation and enforcement allowed policies to reflect current
community concerns as more editors—and, increasingly, newer editors—began to
write and cite policies (Beschastnikh et al., 2008). These findings have led researchers
(Forte et al., 2009; Viegas, Wattenberg, & McKeon, 2007) to characterize growth-era
Wikipedia as an example of successful commons-based governance (Ostrom, 1990)
because policies reflect local circumstances, are flexible enough to change in response
to emergent needs, and are open to revision and renegotiation by the individuals who
are governed by them.
No systematic analysis has been performed to track the continuation of these trends,
or their impacts, into the decline period. However, evidence suggests that both decentralization and norm formalization have slowed. For example, decentralization has its
limits: Senior editors tend to have greater “power of interpretation” over policy
(Kriplean, Beschastnikh, McDonald, & Golder, 2007; Morgan, Mason, & Nahon,
2012) and greater control of community processes (Keegan & Gergle, 2010) than
newer editors. And the institution of an official peer review process for new policy
proposals in 2005 may have slowed new policy creation (Forte et al., 2009).
Furthermore, more recent analysis shows a gradual decline in participation by newer
editors in the areas of Wikipedia dedicated to drafting and discussing policy, indicating
that senior Wikipedians may now be more responsible for curating and interpreting
community policy than ever before.8
Although policies were originally created to maintain efficiency and stability in the
face of a massive growth, decline-era newcomers may face entrenched social practices
and technologically embedded processes that are no longer open to renegotiation. If
decentralization in governance and dynamic norm formalization were key to
Wikipedia’s successful socialization of new members during the growth period, we
suspect that policy calcification and increasing centralization of policy interpretation
may negatively affect the retention rate of desirable newcomers.
Hypothesis 3: Norm formalization and calcification: Formalization of norms has
made it more difficult for newer generations of editors to shape the official
rules of Wikipedia.
As an examination of this hypothesis, we report new results that demonstrate the
following:

Halfaker et al.

671

• With the introduction of a structured process for formalizing norms, the creation of new formal norms has begun to slow, and the rate of rejection of contributions to formal norms has increased significantly—especially for newer
editors.
• As policy creation has slowed and the rejection rate has increased, editors
have begun contributing more to nonbinding, informal norms (essays),
whereby their contributions are significantly less likely to be rejected.

Methods
First Edit Session
To explore the reaction to newcomers during their first experience editing Wikipedia
as a registered user, we borrow the concept of an edit session that was briefly discussed by Panciera et al. (2009). We define an edit session as a sequence of edits
performed by a registered editor to Wikipedia with less than 1 hr’s time between any
two edits in the sequence. Given the long time some edits can take (e.g., article
initiation, section writing, etc.), we expect an hour to account for time spent making
an edit to an article. An hour is a common session time-out used in online systems
to make up for the stateless nature of HTTP. We base several metrics of editor characteristics described in this section on the contributions editors make during their
first edit sessions.
Detecting rejected contributions. Rejection of contributions in Wikipedia comes in
two common forms: reverted edits and deleted edits.
A reverted edit, or a “revert,” is a contribution to an article that has been completely
removed by another editor. This operation is common for removing damaging or otherwise inappropriate contributions. We use the approach described by Halfaker et al.
(2009) to identify identity reverts, which restore an article to exactly the state it was in
at some time before the reverted edit was made. Identity reverts are by far the most
common revert type.
A deleted contribution is an edit that was made to an article that was eventually
deleted. We track deleted contributions through the deleted revisions in the “archive”
table of the MediaWiki database, so detection is trivial. In the case of newcomers,
deleted edits often represent the creation of an article that is later deleted.
For both reverted and deleted edits, we limit our analysis only to encyclopedia
articles since reverted and deleted contributions in other namespaces often represent
different types of operations, such as archiving and restructuring.
Effect of rejection on retention. To look for significant effects of rejection and other
features of newcomer activity on retention, we apply a logistic regression over newcomers to predict a Boolean metric we refer to as survival.
We define editors as surviving when they perform an edit at least 2 months after
their first edit session. We employ an artificial sunset at 6 months such that if the surviving edit does not occur until 6 months after the first session, it does not count. This

672		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

cutoff allows us to fairly compare newcomers who started editing early in Wikipedia’s
history to newcomers who started up to 6 months before the end of our available data.
To examine the effects of editors’ first sessions on survival, we define a set of independent variables:
• Reverted: (Boolean) Was the editor reverted in his or her first session?
• Deleted: (Boolean) Was the editor’s work deleted in his or her first session?
• Session edits: The number of edits completed during the first session—a
proxy for an editor’s initial investment in Wikipedia.
• Year: The time at which the editor began editing in years since Wikipedia’s
inception (2001).
• Messaged: (Boolean) Was the editor sent a message by another editor within
the 2-month survival period?
• Tool reverted: (Boolean) Was the editor reverted by an algorithmic tool in his
or her first session?
Newcomer quality. To control for the primary confounding factor in the logistic
regression over editor survival, newcomer quality, we hand-coded a random sample of
Wikipedia newcomers with the help of some Wikipedian volunteers.9
We randomly sampled newcomers on the basis of when they started editing from
semesters between 2001 and 2011 such that there were 100 newcomers per semester.
This sampling approach allows for generating statistics for comparison over time.
We built a tool for performing this qualitative analysis that allowed our coders to
view a newcomer’s first-session edits but hid all information about when the edit took
place to protect against a temporal bias. The tool instructed the coders to categorize
newcomers into four ordinal categories:
1. vandal (editing to cause harm or offend, e.g., slurs, insults, and libel),
2. bad faith (damage for fun, e.g., humorous falsehoods),
3. good faith (trying but not productive, e.g., non-neutral content), and
4. golden (valuable contributions).
To check for interrater reliability, we produced an overlapping set by randomly
sampling 100 newcomers from the primary sample to be coded by all five raters. The
overlapping set was randomly shuffled into the work of each coder to control for an
order bias. Kendall’s coefficient of concordance was lower than expected (W = 0.413,
p < .001), so we base our results on an ordering of the two desirable categories (golden
and good faith) versus the two undesirable categories (vandal and bad faith). The concordance between those categories was much more respectable:
• 93.6% ratings agreed with the group,
• 4.6% were too high (good rating of bad editor), and
• 1.8% were too low (bad rating of good editor).

Halfaker et al.

673

Tracking algorithmic tools. To track the use of algorithmic tools, we employ various
techniques described in Geiger et al. (2012). Because of norms around the use of such
tools, we can determine whether algorithmic tools were used to make a contribution or
to reject another editor’s contribution by identifying comments left by the tool.
Conflict discussion reciprocation. In Wikipedia, one of the most long-standing and
widely cited essays is the BRD cycle.10 This essay envisions the editorial process in
Wikipedia as mediated by discourse instead of constant back-and-forth reverts (an
“edit war”). Specifically, the essay states that
1. editors ought to be bold in making whatever changes to articles they deem
necessary,
2. other editors ought to be equally bold in reverting those changes if they do
not approve, and then
3. after being reverted, the original editor should use the article’s talk page to
discuss the change with others, most notably, the editor who reverted the
change.
Both Wikipedians and researchers of Wikipedia have argued that article talk pages
are a critical aspect of how content is negotiated in Wikipedia (Schneider, Passant, &
Breslin, 2010; Viegas, Wattenberg, Kriss, et al., 2007). To explore our intuition that
editors using algorithmic tools would reciprocate at lower rates than those who were
not using tools, we performed the following analysis of the BRD cycle. First, we identified every instance of the first three elements constituting the BRD cycle: an editor’s
making a change to an article, another editor’s reverting that change within 14 days,
and the first editor’s writing to the article’s talk page in response. If the reverted editor
made a post to the article’s talk page within 7 days, we classified that as an initiation.
We then examined future comments in the article’s talk page to see whether the editor
who made the revert responded to the talk page post within 7 days. If the reverting
editor made a post to the talk page, we classified that as a reciprocation.
Because this analysis was done algorithmically, reciprocation may be overrepresented if, for example, the reverting editor responded to a different post and ignored
the post by the reverted editor. Since we hypothesize lower rates of reciprocation, this
possible overrepresentation was deemed acceptable. To minimize cases in which talk
page vandalism or countervandalism appeared like a BRD initiation or reciprocation,
we disregarded any talk page posts that either were reverted within 12 hr or were
themselves reverts of earlier revisions. Because we were interested in how tools are
affecting the relationship between new and veteran editors, we looked only at cases in
which the reverting editor had been registered for more than 30 days and the reverted
editor had been registered for less than 30 days.
Policy growth and calcification. To examine the activity surrounding norm formalization in Wikipedia, we used the category hierarchy to identify the pages considered to
be policies, guidelines, and essays. To measure the growth of norms over time, we
used a set of metrics to track activity in norm pages.

674		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

• Contributors: The number of registered editors that contributed to norm pages
• Contributions: The number of contributions to pages in a norm category
• Length change: The change to the overall length of pages in a norm category
To look for evidence of calcification, we used a logistic regression over the Boolean
outcome of whether a contribution to a norm page was reverted. We define a set of
independent variables:
• Editor tenure: The age of an editor in years since account registration.
• Year: The time in years since Wikipedia’s inception (2001).
• Essay: (Boolean) Is the page an essay?
To identify policy proposals, we performed a text analysis on a diff data set published by the Wikimedia Foundation.11 Using the data set, we tracked additions and
removals of the “{{proposed}}” template to determine when pages were nominated
for the formalization process. We assumed that pages currently categorized as policies
or guidelines were formalized whereas pages outside of those categories were not.

Hypothesis 1: Rejection and Retention
Results
To explore the validity of Hypothesis 1, we first looked for a significant relationship
between rejected edits and survival. As described in the Method section, we use a
logistic regression over the first-session edits to determine the likely effects of various
first edit session metrics.
The “All Newcomers” column of Table 1 shows a significant, negative effect for
editors who were reverted or had their revisions deleted in the first edit session. This
result supports our hypothesis and reaffirms the conclusion of Halfaker et al. (2011)
that reverts of contributions reduces the rate of survival. The regression also reports a
significant negative effect for year. This suggests that although rejection is a strong
negative predictor for survival, there are other independent effects over time that are
reducing the rate of survival of newcomers.
However, these results alone do not represent a good test of Hypothesis 1 since
vandals and other unwanted editors could represent the rejected and nonsurviving
editors. To explore this confound, we turn to our analysis of the quality of
newcomers.
Figure 1 shows that whereas the combined proportion of newcomers falling into the
two good categories fell from 92.2% in the first semester of 2005 to 79.8% in the first
semester of 2006, the combined proportion of desirable newcomers stays relatively
consistent from 2006 forward. Notably, this shift to a new consistency in 2006 occurred
about 1 year prior to the peak and decline in Wikipedia’s active contributors that began
in 2007 (see Figure 2).

675

Halfaker et al.
Table 1. Coefficients of a Logistic Regression Over the First Edit Session of Two Sets of
Randomly Sampled Wikipedia Users Predicting Survival.
All Newcomers
(n = 100,000; AIC = 46,013)

Desirable Newcomers
(n = 1,708; AIC = 1,720)

Variable

Est.

SE

Pr(>|z|)

Est.

SE

Pr(>|z|)

(Intercept)
Year
Session edits
Deleted
Reverted
Messaged
Tool revert

−1.98
−0.40
0.18
−1.45
−0.68
0.54
−0.67

0.017
0.012
0.009
0.037
0.035
0.027
0.062

<.001
<.001
<.001
<.001
<.001
<.001
<.001

−1.30
−0.59
0.24
−0.80
−0.50
0.68
−2.16

0.089
0.069
0.064
0.217
0.173
0.127
1.086

<.001
<.001
<.001
<.001
.004
<.001
.047

Note: The coefficients of a logistic regression over the first edit session of two sets of randomly sampled
Wikipedia users predicting survival are presented. All newcomers represents a purely random sample of
registered users from Wikipedia. Desirable newcomers represents the subset of editors sampled for quality
analysis that were determined to be at least acting in good faith. AIC = Akaike information criterion; Est. =
estimated coefficient.

Figure 1. Quality of newcomers over time.

The proportion of editors falling into the two good-faith quality categories is plotted over time.

Figure 3 shows a general increase in the rate of rejection for desirable newcomers
over time. As hypothesized, the rate of rejection rises substantially for good-faith editors (editors who appear to be trying to be productive but are unsuccessful). The most
substantial change to the rate of rejection of desirable newcomers occurred during the

676		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

Figure 2. The English Wikipedia’s editor decline.

The number of active, registered editors (≥5 edits per month) is plotted over time.

Figure 3. Reverts of desirable newcomer contributions over time.
The proportion of good (“good faith” and “golden” combined) newcomers with at least one reverted
first-session edit is plotted over time.

time between the first semester of 2006 and the first semester of 2007 (during transition from growth to decline). We observed a shift of 6.1% to 18.2% desirable newcomers who experienced rejection in the form of a revert.
Figure 4 shows that the increasing rate of reverted desirable newcomers corresponds closely with a decline in the survival rate for desirable newcomers. Again, we
found the most substantial shift to occur during the time span that Wikipedia’s editing
community transitioned from growth to decline. In the first semester of 2006, 25.6%

Halfaker et al.

677

Figure 4. Survival of desirable newcomers over time.

The proportion of surviving good (“good faith” and “golden” combined) newcomers is plotted over time.

of desirable newcomers continued editing for at least 2 months. Within a year, the
desirable newcomer survival rate falls to 11.7% and does not recover.
To determine whether the rejection of first-session contributions has the same effect
on desirable newcomers as it does on overall newcomers, we performed a similar
regression to predict survival over only the desirable newcomers. Table 1 shows that
each one of the predictors affects all newcomers and desirable newcomers in the same
direction.
These results support our hypothesis. It appears that the rising rate of rejection of
newcomers’ first-session contributions is predictive of the decrease of newcomer
retention.

Discussion
Our results suggest that rejection of contributions, especially for desirable newcomers, has substantially affected the decline. In both of our regressions, rejection in the
forms of both reverted and deleted contributions to articles were independently significant predictors of the retention of desirable newcomers. Rejection is reported to be
a significant predictor of retention independent of the age of the project. This means
that rejection was likely to be a demotivator to newcomers who joined the project long
before retention of newcomers became an issue.
We also found that across the lifetime of Wikipedia, the probability that contributions made by desirable newcomers are rejected has increased. Our impression from

678		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

Figure 5. Use of algorithmic tools to reject newcomers edits.
The proportion of rejected first-session contributions is plotted over time for newcomers by the
mechanism used for rejection.

the qualitative hand-coding of newcomer quality is that the majority of the time, these
rejections were attributable to misunderstandings about the norms of the community.
This result suggests that “unwanted” but not intentionally damaging contributions
may have been handled differently in the past.
One such way of dealing with imperfect contributions without sacrificing quality is
to “massage” them into a form that is valuable for an article. Perhaps the increasing
use of tools that afford only two possible reactions, accept or reject, are making it more
likely that contributions are rejected outright.

Hypothesis 2:Tool Use and Consequences
Results
Newcomer rejection. To explore the potential role of algorithmic tools as gatekeepers
to the community, we built on the work of Geiger et al. (2012) by examining the rate
of interaction around rejection between newcomers and the actions of algorithmic
tools. Figure 5 shows the growing use of algorithmic tools to reject the contributions
of newcomers in Wikipedia. The plot shows that around the beginning of exponential
growth, which is the same time that the first algorithmic tools for rejecting contributions were released, the proportion of newcomer contributions that were rejected using
tools rose to ~30%.
The majority of tool-based rejection of newcomers came from human-computation
tools, tools that borrowed human judgment. This seems reasonable, given that, as

Halfaker et al.

679

Figure 6. “Bold, revert, discuss” (BRD) reciprocation rates over time by tool.
The proportion of newcomer BRD initiations that resulted in old-timer reciprocation is plotted over
time by the algorithmic tool used.

reported by Geiger (2011), there were several early controversies regarding the way
registered editors were treated by bots that resulted in a normative framework that
forced bot developers to tread lightly when dealing with community members.
Discussion reciprocation. For editors who revert manually, the rate of reciprocation
has dropped slightly, from a peak of 67% in 2005 to 56% in 2010. The overall rate of
reciprocation has dropped dramatically, since none of the major bots are programmed
to reciprocate BRD initiations.
Curiously, Figure 6 suggests that a large number of newcomers (2,250 BRD initializations from 918 unique registered editors) are attempting to enter into dialog with an
algorithmic editor after being reverted by them. This might indicate a potential issue
with using fully automated bots to revert contributions.
Most striking is the rate of reciprocation by users of Huggle, a stand-alone program
that is designed specifically to allow humans to judge and revert edits as fast as possible. Editors who revert using Huggle have an average response rate of 7%, compared
to editors who use the browser-based extension Twinkle, which has an average
response rate of 53%—only slightly lower than editors who revert manually.

680		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

Figure 7. Rate of tool-based reverts of desirable newcomers.
The proportion of reverted desirable newcomers (“good faith” and “golden” combined) who were
reverted using algorithmic tools is plotted over time.

The Rollback feature is a sort of confluence of different revert tools since it can be
used in the browser as well as in a variety of plug-ins and stand-alone programs to
revert content en masse. Users of Rollback show a rate of reciprocation around 30%;
this is in between Huggle and Twinkle, likely because of the many different ways in
which the functionality is accessed.
Rejection and retention. To explore whether rejection via algorithmic tools is a significant predictor for survival in Wikipedia, we included a Boolean independent variable in the regressions described in Table 1. Both columns report a significant negative
effect for tool revert on the survival of newcomers. This result suggests that reverts of
desirable newcomer contributions by Wikipedians using automated tools exacerbate
the negative effect of rejection on survival.
Since the exponential growth of Wikipedia, the rate at which desirable newcomers
are reverted using tools also appears to be rising. Figure 7 shows the rise of tool-based
rejection of newcomer contributions since starting at 0% in 2006 to 40% in 2010.

Discussion
Our analysis shows that algorithmic tools have had an increasing role in rejecting the
contributions of newcomers. Given that Geiger et al. (2012) shows that these tools are
also taking over the task of “welcoming” newcomers via warning messages posted on
their talk page, this suggests that newcomers are increasingly rejected by and warned
by not-entirely-human actors. Our results also show that when these newcomers

Halfaker et al.

681

Figure 8. Norm page growth over time.

The change to overall length of the three norm types is plotted by year.

attempt to interact with Huggle users through the community’s preferred approach
about their rejected contributions, they tend to be ignored. Together, we see this as a
shift from human, personal interaction to mechanical, impersonal interaction that took
place during the exponential growth of the community.
The regression analysis over survival shows a significant, exacerbating effect for
the newcomers whose contributions were rejected using tools. The BRD analysis
showcases one instance in which tool users are generally not interacting in a way
that we assume would be positive and helpful to newcomers. Overall, we suspect
that this impersonal, noncommunicative nature of interaction has other, possibly
more-difficult-to-measure, implications that are exacerbating the effect of rejection
on retention.
Bruno Latour (1988) famously analyzed the social roles of walls, doors, and pneumatic door closers to demonstrate the functional equivalence between humans and
objects in producing social order. Considering that these algorithmic tools and agents
are predominantly deployed to protect the encyclopedia from the potentially damaging
contributions of less experienced editors, it may be more appropriate to refer to such
algorithms as gates instead of gatekeepers. As Latour illustrates, when tasks are delegated from humans to technologies (or vice versa), there are often dramatic shifts in
social practices and responsibilities. Given how certain patterns of exclusion are
embedded into Wikipedia’s technological and social structure (Geiger, 2011), this
highly automated approach to policy enforcement is likely to have even farther-reaching effects on the community than those we describe in this article.

Hypothesis 3: Norm Formalization and Calcification
Results
To explore Hypothesis 3, we first looked for changes in the rate of new policy creation
following the introduction of a structured proposal process in 2005.
Figure 8 shows that growth of policies and guidelines began to slow in 2006, just
as Forte et al. (2009) report. The results from our analysis of new policy and guideline

682		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

proposals show that the number of new policy proposals accepted via this process
peaked in 2005 at 27 out of 217 (12% acceptance). The year 2006 saw an even larger
number of proposed policies but lower acceptance, with 24 out of 348 proposals
accepted (7% acceptance). From 2007 forward, the rate at which policies are proposed
decreases monotonically down to a mere 16 in 2011, whereas the acceptance rate stays
steady at about 7.5%.
Existing formal norms continued to be revised and expanded through 2006, which
closely correlates with the end of the community growth (see Figure 2). After that
point, contribution to existing policies and guidelines begins to decline.
To look for effects of policy calcification on overall norm formalization, we compared the rate of creation and contribution to formal norms (policies and guidelines)
and informal norms (essays). We find an increase in essay creation that corresponds to
the decline in policy creation. Sixty-nine essays were written in 2005, 164 in 2006, and
the rate does not fall below 185 per year thereafter. This initial growth in new essays
appears to be attributable in part to the conversion of failed policy and guideline proposals: In 2006, 22% of new essays began as failed policy proposals. However, the
percentage of essays that started out as rejected policies or guidelines decreases sharply
to 12% in 2007 and to 1% by 2011.
Figure 8 shows that the growth of essays overtakes both policies and guidelines in
2006 and continues to rise to 1.52 MB of new content per year by 2008. From that
point forward, the volume of content contributed to essays remains consistently above
policies and guidelines. The number of distinct contributors to essays over time (not
shown) follows a similar pattern.
To look for evidence of calcification of policies against contributions, we performed a logistic regression (described in the Method section) to predict the rejection
of new contributions to all three types of formalized norm. Table 2 shows a significant,
positive effect for the year in which contributions were made, which suggests that over
time, contributions to all types are more likely to be rejected independent of the tenure
of the editor making the contribution.
However, the regression also reports a significant negative interaction between the
year in which the contribution was made and the Boolean variable that codes for essays
with a coefficient at a comparable scale (–0.12 vs. 0.10). This suggests that for essays,
the increasing rate of rejection is almost entirely negated. The significant, negative effect
reported for the editor’s age (tenure) suggests that more-senior editors are less likely to
have their contributions to norms rejected in general, but again, we see a reversed effect
with the interaction with essay (–0.29 vs. 0.06). This suggests that newer editors are
significantly more likely to be successful when contributing to essays.

Discussion
Our analysis shows that the documentation of new formal norms has declined, and
it has become more difficult over time for Wikipedia editors to contribute to existing
policy—especially editors from more recent cohorts. We offer the rising rate of

683

Halfaker et al.

Table 2. Coefficients of a Logistic Regression Over the Contributions of Registered Editors
to Norm Pages Predicting Success (i.e., not reverted).
Variable

Est.

SE

Pr(>|z|)

(Intercept)
Editor tenure
Year
Essay
Editor tenure:essay
Year:essay

−1.50
−0.29
0.12
−0.38
0.06
−0.10

.043
.006
.006
.135
.019
.019

<.001
<.001
<.001
.005
.002
<.001

Note: n = 120,535. Akaike information criterion = 16,801. Est. = estimated coefficient.

rejection as evidence of calcification and explain the slowing growth of formal
norms as the likely outcome of such a process.
We see at least two consequences of policy calcification that bear directly on
newcomer socialization and retention. First, the calcification of policy is disproportionately felt by newer editors, who see their policy edits rejected at a higher rate.
This suggests that under Wikipedia’s current policy regime, rules are less open to
revision by affected editors than they were during the growth period, decreasing the
dynamic flexibility that was key to Wikipedia’s adaptive success and increasing the
power imbalance between newer and older editors. Second, although newer editors
are contributing more to essays—where their contributions are less likely to be
reverted—essays are not official, enforceable rules and are not widely cited.
Although an increase in essay writing is an encouraging sign of newer editors’ continued interest in participating in community governance, it is not an effective mechanism for social change. As the BRD analysis above suggests, the informal norms
documented in essays are trumped by formal norms embedded in bots and human
computation tools.

Conclusion
Wikipedia has changed from the encyclopedia that anyone can edit to the encyclopedia that anyone who understands the norms, socializes himself or herself, dodges the
impersonal wall of semi-automated rejection, and still wants to voluntarily contribute
his or her time and energy can edit.
Rejection of unwanted contributions is Wikipedia’s primary quality control mechanism (Stvilia et al., 2005) and it works (Giles, 2005). However, as the scale has
increased, rejection of newcomer contributions has increased, with the unintended
consequence of driving away well-meaning newcomers. However, outright rejection
of a contribution is not the only way to control quality. A contribution that adds some
type of value but possibly in the wrong context, location, or formatting can be accepted
via a rewrite. We suspect that the growing use of algorithmic tools may have affected

684		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

a transition from rewrites to reverts because of the fact that these tools often afford
only the decision of “accept” or “reject.”
However, these tools were instrumental in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of managing damage and deviant users (Geiger & Ribes, 2010). Without algorithmic tools, substantially more volunteer effort would be needed to protect the
encyclopedia from damage, and quality would likely suffer.
Even newcomers who make it through their initial contributions are encountering
resistance while attempting to enter Wikipedia’s inner circle. Although Wikipedia successfully democratized policy creation and enforcement during the time of exponential
growth, we have shown that the community’s artifacts of governance have calcified,
making rules less adaptable and harder to contribute to, especially for newer editors.
These editors increasingly appear to be moving to less formal spaces to construct and
discuss ideas about Wikipedia’s goals, processes, and organization. However, lacking
the exposure and enforceability of policy, these contributions are unlikely to gain wide
currency within the community, shift community norms around interacting with newcomers, or help the community tackle issues related to the editor decline.
Although there are many lessons to be learned from the story of Wikipedia’s rise and
decline, we conceptualize this as a case of sociotechnical gatekeeping and its consequences. Wikipedia’s challenges may seem unique to its status as one of the largest collaborative projects in human history, but the widespread use of algorithmic tools to
maintain social order online makes Wikipedia’s response quite relevant to a variety of
other collaboration projects. Online communities generally must deal with how to
enforce norms and regulate behavior. A variety of strategies can be taken to this effect.
For example, Lampe and Resnick (2004) studied the highly distributed system of
metamoderation and “karma” used in Slashdot to remove inappropriate comments and
bring the most interesting and insightful commenters to the top of a discussion thread.
Another study, by Gillespie (2010), examined the copyright infringement detection algorithms used by YouTube to automate the process of identifying and removing infringing
context. Although concerns surrounding new user retention are not as immediately
pressing for those two websites as for Wikipedia, they show two alternative responses to
the various issues that arise in mediating participation online. In general, the case of
Wikipedia shows how in all mediated platforms, designers, managers, and community
members must think about the relationship between the tools that social systems use for
enforcement and the kinds of social activities that those tools afford and restrict.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Oliver Keyes, Maryana Pinchuk, and Steven Walling for their work in assessing
newcomer quality and the support of the National Science Foundation, under Grants IIS
09-68483 and IIS 11-11201.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.

Halfaker et al.

685

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article: Grants IIS 09-68483 and IIS 11-11201 from the National
Science Foundation.

Notes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

See http://strategy.wikimedia.org/wiki/Editor_Trends_Study.
See http://enwp.org/WP:FAS - http://enwp.org/WP:GAS.
See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia_biography_controversy.
See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Biographies_of_living_people?oldid=487355138
See http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Research:Newbie_reverts_and_article_length.
Diff refers to the visual presentation of the changes made by a single edit to an article.
See http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Research:The_Speed_of_Speedy_Deletions.
See http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Research:WikiPride.
Five raters = two researchers + three Wikipedians.
See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:BOLD,_revert,_discuss_cycle.
See http://dumps.wikimedia.org/other/diffdb.

References
Beschastnikh, I., Kriplean, T., & McDonald, D. W. (2008). Wikipedia self-governance in action:
Motivating the policy lens. In Proceedings of the 2008 AAAI International Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media (pp. 27-35). Palo Alto, CA: Association for the Advancement of
Artificial Intelligence.
Bryant, S. L., Forte, A., & Bruckman, A. (2005). Becoming Wikipedian: Transformation of participation in a collaborative online encyclopedia. In GROUP ’05: Proceedings of the 2005
International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work (pp. 1-10). New
York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Butler, B., Joyce, E., & Pike, J. (2008). Don’t look now, but we’ve created a bureaucracy: The
nature and roles of policies and rules in Wikipedia. In CHI ’08: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1101-1110). New York, NY:
Association for Computing Machinery.
Choi, B., Alexander, K., Kraut, R. E., & Levine, J. M. (2010). Socialization tactics in Wikipedia and
their effects. In CSCW ’10: Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (pp. 107-116). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Ducheneaut, N. (2005). Socialization in an open source software community: A socio-technical
analysis. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 14(4), 323-368.
Forte, A., Larco, V., & Bruckman, A. (2009). Decentralization in Wikipedia governance. Journal of MIS, 26(1), 49-72.
Geiger, R. S. (2011). The lives of bots. In G. Lovink., & N. Tkacz (Eds.), Critical point of view:
A Wikipedia reader (pp. 78-79). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Institute of Network Cultures.
Geiger, R. S., Halfaker, A., Pinchuk, M., & Walling, S. (2012). Defense mechanism or socialization tactic? Improving Wikipedia’s notifications to rejected contributors. In Proceedings of

686		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

the Sixth International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (pp. 122-129). Palo Alto,
CA: Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.
Geiger, R. S., & Ribes, D. (2010). The work of sustaining order in Wikipedia: The banning of
a vandal. In CSCW ’10: Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (pp. 117-126). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Giles, J. (2005). Internet encyclopedias go head to head. Nature, 438(7070), 900-901.
Gillespie, T. (2010) The politics of platforms. New Media and Society, 12(3), 347-364.
Halfaker, A., Kittur, A., Kraut, R. E., & Riedl, J. (2009). A jury of your peers: Quality, experience and ownership in Wikipedia. In WikiSym ’09: Proceedings of the 5th International
Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration (Article 15). New York, NY: Association for
Computing Machinery.
Halfaker, A., Kittur, A., & Riedl, J. (2011). Don’t bite the newbies: How reverts affect the quantity and quality of Wikipedia work. In WikiSym ’11: Proceedings of the 7th International
Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration (pp. 163-172). New York, NY: Association
for Computing Machinery.
Keegan, B., & Gergle, D. (2010). Egalitarians at the gate: One-sided gatekeeping practices
in social media. In CSCW ’10: Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 131-134). New York, NY: Association for Computing
Machinery.
Kittur, A., Suh, B., Pendleton, B. A., & Chi, E. H. (2007). He says, she says: Conflict and
coordination in Wikipedia. In CHI ’07: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 453-462). New York, NY: Association for Computing
Machinery.
Krieger, M., Stark, E. M., & Klemmer, S. R. (2009). Coordinating tasks on the commons:
designing for personal goals, expertise and serendipity. In CHI ’09: Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1485-1494). New York,
NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Kriplean, T., Beschastnikh, I., McDonald, D. W., & Golder, S. A. (2007). Community, consensus, coercion, control: cs*w or how policy mediates mass participation. In GROUP
’07: Proceedings of the 2007 International ACM Conference on Supporting Group Work
(pp. 167-177). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Lam, S. K., & Riedl, J. (2009). Is Wikipedia growing a longer tail? In GROUP ’09: Proceedings
of the 2009 International ACM Conference on Supporting Group Work (pp. 105-114). New
York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Lam, S. K., Uduwage, A., Dong, Z., Sen, S., Musicant, D. R., Terveen, L., & Riedl, J. (2011).
WP:clubhouse? An exploration of Wikipedia’s gender imbalance. In WikiSym ’11: Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration (pp. 1-10). New
York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Lampe, C., & Resnick, P. (2004). Slash(dot) and burn: Distributed moderation in a large online
conversation space. In CHI ’04: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (pp. 543-550). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Latour, B. (1988). Mixing humans and nonhumans together: The sociology of a door-closer.
Social Problems, 35(3), 298-310.

Halfaker et al.

687

Morgan, J. T., Mason, R. M., & Nahon, K. (2012). Negotiating cultural values in social media:
A case study from Wikipedia. In HICSS ’12: Proceedings of the 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 3490-3499). Washington, DC: IEEE Computer
Society.
Morgan, J. T., & Zachry, M. (2010). Negotiating with angry mastodons: The Wikipedia policy
environment as genre ecology. GROUP ’10: Proceedings of the 16th ACM International
Conference on Supporting Group Work (pp. 165-168). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Musicant, D. R., Ren, Y., Johnson, J. A., & Riedl, J. (2011). Mentoring in Wikipedia: A
clash of cultures. In WikiSym ’11: Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on
Wikis and Open Collaboration (pp. 173-182). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective action.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Panciera, K., Halfaker, A., & Terveen, L. (2009). Wikipedians are born, not made: A study of
power editors on Wikipedia. In GROUP ’09: Proceedings of the ACM 2009 International
Conference on Supporting Group Work (pp. 51-60). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Priedhorsky, R., Chen, J., Lam, S. K., Panciera, K., Terveen, L., & Riedl, J. (2007). Creating,
destroying, and restoring value in Wikipedia. In GROUP ’07: Proceedings of the ACM 2007
International Conference on Supporting Group Work (pp. 259-268). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Schneider, J., Passant, A., & Breslin, J. G. (2011). Understanding and improving Wikipedia
article discussion spaces. In SAC ’11: Proceedings of the 2011 ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing (pp. 808-813). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Stvilia, B., Twidale, M. B., Smith, L. C., & Gasser, L. (2005). Information quality work organization in Wikipedia. American Society for Information Science and Technology, 59(6),
983-1001.
Suh, B., Convertino, G., Chi, E. H., & Pirolli, P. (2009). The singularity is not near: Slowing growth of Wikipedia. In WikiSym ’09: Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium
on Wikis and Open Collaboration (Article 8). New York, NY: Association for Computing
Machinery.
Viegas, F. B., Wattenberg, M., Kriss, J., & van Ham, F. (2007). Talk before you type: Coordination in Wikipedia. In HICSS ’07: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (pp. 78-88). Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society.
Viegas, F. B., Wattenberg, M., & McKeon, M. M. (2007). The hidden order of Wikipedia. In
OCSC ’07: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Online Communities and
Social Computing (pp. 445-454). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Wilkinson, D. M. (2008). Strong regularities in online peer production. In EC ’08: Proceedings
of the 9th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce (pp. 302-309). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.

688		

American Behavioral Scientist 57(5)

Author Biographies
Aaron Halfaker is a computer science PhD candidate working in the GroupLens research lab
at the University of Minnesota. He studies online communities using data mining, statistical
modeling, and experimentation to identify the “moving parts” of social interaction and collaboration. He sees social production systems as living (and sometimes dying) complex organisms
that people could affect (grow, optimize, or adapt) if they understood them better.
R. Stuart Geiger is a doctoral student in the School of Information at the University of
California, Berkeley. A computational ethnographer, he studies how social organization is made
possible in distributed and decentralized organizations. His research currently focuses on the
social roles of software in the operation and administration of Wikipedia and scientiﬁc research
networks.
Jonathan T. Morgan is a PhD candidate at the University of Washington’s Department of
Human Centered Design and Engineering and a research strategist with the Wikimedia
Foundation, where he works on new editor engagement projects and data analytics. His
research explores the way people interact when they are working together on complex, creative
tasks online and the development of tools to support them in their work.
John Riedl is a professor of computer science at the University of Minnesota, where he has
been a faculty member since 1990. In 1992, he cofounded the GroupLens project on recommender systems and has been codirecting it since. He also cofounded Net Perceptions, the
leading recommender systems company during the first Internet boom. GroupLens has been
deeply involved in understanding how intelligent user interfaces can help online communities
work and play together better. He has been named a Fellow of the ACM and IEEE and is founding coeditor in chief of the ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems journal. He has
coauthored Best Paper winners at the IUI, WikiSym (twice), CSCW, and Data Engineering
conferences. He has also received the MIT Sloan School Award for Innovation in E-Commerce,
the Computer Science Teaching Award (four times), and the George Taylor Award for
Exceptional Contributions to Teaching. He has authored more than 100 publications, including
one book and many papers.

