Charles Birkeland Editor

Coral Reefs
in the
Anthropocene

Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene

The cover photograph is courtesy of Jacob Asher, NOAA, Coral Reef Ecosystem Division. The photograph is from Jarvis Island.

Charles Birkeland
Editor

Coral Reefs in the
Anthropocene

Editor
Charles Birkeland
Department of Biology
University of Hawaii at Manoa
Honolulu, HI, USA

ISBN 978-94-017-7248-8
ISBN 978-94-017-7249-5
DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5
Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg New York London

(eBook)

Library of Congress Control Number: 2015952009
# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction
on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic
adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not
imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and
regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are believed
to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty,
express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been
made.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer Science+Business Media B.V. Dordrecht is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Robert Earl Johannes

26 September 1936–4 September 2002
The book is dedicated to Bob Johannes who continuously opened new doors to
the understanding and management of coral reefs. His pioneering work was
exceptionally original and influential because he followed his own insight into
truly important processes and was not constrained by mainstream paradigms
and by the perspectives of his peers and administrators. He was able to
perceive the value of knowledge of peoples of other cultures and training.
He recognized that Pacific islanders sometimes knew the biology and life
histories of coral reef fishes better than did the scientists and that many of

v

vi

their management practices were more effective. He was able to listen to the
local fishermen, placing their knowledge as complementary to science.
Bob was a real pioneer because he was true to himself. As he developed a
previously unrecognized field of study and became a leader in this new field, he
would ponder what was important to the world, and then on several occasions,
he would make seemingly abrupt and dangerous changes in direction of his
career. His dissertation at the University of Hawaii was involved with the
processes that control coastal and oceanic productivity. During his postdoc at
the University of Georgia, his host Lawrence R. Pomeroy noted that “Bob was
one of the true pioneers of marine microbial ecology – before there was a
recognized field of marine microbial ecology. His work is still cited as landmark stuff.” Bob then focused on the ecology of coral reefs. He coedited books
on tropical marine pollution in 1975 and on coral reef research methods in
1978. His first student Chris D’Elia said “While Bob is appropriately
remembered as a prolific author and researcher, he had strong leadership
skills as well. For example, he did an exceptional job as chief scientist on the
1971 Symbios Expedition.”
Bob Johannes was also one of the first to recognize and act on the importance of having the general public be aware of the implications of new findings
in coral reef ecology. In 1972, he produced a movie “Cloud Over a Coral
Reef” on reef degradation in Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii, resulting from substantial
nutrient input from a sewer outflow and urban runoff. The movie was made
with the hope that it could help provoke some public action to correct the
problem. Some of his colleagues gave him a bit of flak for this because in the
early 1970s there was a prevalent opinion that scientists should practice pure
science and leave communicating with the public for someone else to do.
Bob Johannes was always ahead of his time. In closing his 1975 review of
pollution and degradation of coral reef communities, he concluded that “environmental crises develop faster than they can be completely assessed. In this
context it is more important to make interim decisions in time than to make
scientifically satisfying decisions later. Pollution biologists sometimes inject
too much traditional laboratory caution into matters of immediate practical
concern. They hesitate because their information is not final. . . environmental
post mortems become their stock and trade. ‘They measure and we weep.’”
In Palau during the mid-1970s, Bob Johannes discovered the value of
traditional community-based resource management systems and began to
develop the concept of integrating indigenous knowledge with Western science. His method of living in Palau and learning by discussing fishing
practices with the elder fishermen was so outlandish at the time; some of his
colleagues had concluded he had “dropped out.” The book he produced in
1981 on his findings, Words of the Lagoon, has become a classic on
community-based resource management. In 1978, Bob wrote a review of the
traditional marine conservation methods in Oceania and their demise. In
2002, he wrote a more hopeful review of the renaissance of communitybased marine resource management in Oceania. Tom Graham wrote that

vii

“Although Bob took no credit for these positive changes, they can easily be
traced in large part to his efforts during the last 25 years to reveal the value of
customary models of resource management, as well as his success at inspiring
others to help salvage what was left of them.”
Johannes respected the importance of rigorous science in testing
hypotheses, but he stressed that also taking a less constrained multicultural
perspective can allow us to have a better chance of having the right hypotheses
to test. In The Plight of the Osfish, or Why Quantitative Sophistication Is No
Substitute for Asking the Right Questions, he told of how a fisheries agency
used a rigorously designed survey of fishermen to approach the mystery of why
the bonefish populations were declining through the years. The fishermen were
selected randomly for the review and were asked to check which of the
alternative answers to questions seemed correct. An independent investigator
named “Bert” made a point of asking the older men, some so old they no
longer did much fishing (a biased, non-random selection), and interviewed
them with an open flexible discussion (not easily analyzed quantitatively like
the forms with checked alternatives), allowing the older men to simply express
their opinions rather than choosing among a well-organized series of
alternatives. The interviews with the elders provided the correct insight into
what was happening with the bonefish because the quantitative forms were not
asking the right questions.
Toward the end of his life, with the support of a Pew Fellowship and
leveraged funds from the Nature Conservancy and the South Pacific Forum
Fisheries Agency, Bob Johannes undertook extensive investigations of the
ecological, economic, and social effects of the suddenly arising billion-dollar-per-year live reef food fishery and destructive fishing practices such as
fishing with cyanide and explosives.
Bob Johannes taught us that we must respond to environmental or managerial crises in time with the best available information, we should keep a
multicultural perspective on problems so we have a better chance of asking
the right questions, and we should integrate indigenous knowledge with
Western science, but his most important contribution was his discovery that
the diverse and unpredictably variable multispecies reef fisheries are too
complex to manage with rigorous scientific algorithms for optimal or sustainable yield, and so he made a compelling case for adaptive data-less management. Attempts to manage coastal finfisheries to achieve optimal yields have
been dismal, but Bob reported examples of successful indigenous adaptive
data-less management. To establish a priori regulations based on quantitative
assessments is comparable to attempting the programming of an automobile to
go between home and the office downtown using data on distances, speeds,
timings of stoplights, etc. The conditions of such trips are just too variable for
this to work. The more successful approach is to use a driver to flexibly adjust
to unexpected numbers of pedestrians, behaviors of motorists, and unexpected
events such as jaywalkers, ambulances, and fender benders. However, by
“data-less,” Bob did not mean we should do away with quantitative research

viii

(which would be “dataless”). Quantitative research is still important, but it
must be complementary to a flexible adaptive management based on indigenous knowledge. If we demand quantitative research for the management of
each coastal marine system, it would not be cost-effective even if it were
theoretically possible.
The Authors

Preface

When Life and Death of Coral Reefs came out in 1997, it was just before the 1997–1998
circumtropical warming and bleaching event, an event that awakened us to the realization that
processes affecting coral reefs were expanding to a global scale. Our basic perspectives on
coral reefs have been changing at an accelerating pace, so each new book is produced with a
whole new paradigm. This book is new, not an update or revision. Even in some chapters
covering the same subject in the two books, a change in perspective is required by the
unfolding of our perception of the nature of forces affecting coral reef systems. For example,
in Life and Death of Coral Reefs, Barbara Brown provided an excellent timeless review of the
conceptual framework of disturbances, organizing her chapter around different scales of
tolerances and on the different kinds of natural and human disturbances. In this book, Margaret
Miller shifted the focus from disturbance as events to disturbance as continuing trends. The
fact that coral disturbance regimes are continuing to worsen while recovery capacities are
waning compels us to accept that management strategies must focus on both of these
processes.
New perspectives are also being provided by new tools. Nancy Knowlton and Matthieu
Leray give a tour through the disparate ways the techniques of molecular genetics have caused
major changes in our understanding of the evolutionary history of corals and have transformed
our understanding of ecological and biological processes of coral reefs. Molecular biology
opens more doors to coral reef science than the telescope did to astronomy because molecular
genetics leads us through more dimensions. Dan Barshis follows this with an explanation of
the genomic potential for coral survival of global changes in ocean chemistry and climate. The
new perspectives of each chapter in this book are important for efforts in conservation, not just
science.
Peter Glynn and Derek Manzello explain that while the effects of ocean acidification on the
metabolic expense of calcification may vary among genera of corals, the acceleration of
bioerosion by lower pH is general and critical. Adapting to ocean acidification by itself is
facing an indifferent nonresponsive physical factor, but adapting to bioeroders is coevolving in
an arms race. Dennis Hubbard takes us through how changes in seawater temperature, storm
intensity, aragonite saturation state, and pH bring major shifts in the balance between
carbonate production, destruction, and export. From a global perspective, Pamela Hallock
spells out how the production and preservation of reef limestones is intimately connected to
the Earth’s biogeochemical cycles, especially of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus.
She elucidates how records preserved in limestones provide scientists and policy makers with
insights into likely consequences of human activities for the future, not only of reefs but of the
diversity of ecosystems on Earth.
Gisèle Muller-Parker, Chris D’Elia, and Clay Cook tell how cost-benefit analysis is a useful
approach to examine symbioses in the context of environmental change and human impacts
upon corals and coral reefs. By using new tools developed to assess the stability of the
symbiosis, we may be better able to understand and predict the effects of future stressors
and perturbations that threaten reef ecosystems.

ix

x

Preface

Esther Peters explains how the multitude of stressors affecting reef organisms, particularly
along heavily urbanized coastlines, and the introduction of species to distant reefs by global
transport are contributing to disease in coral reefs. She presents new developments in disease
diagnoses, an overview of diseases of reef organisms, and how diseases have adversely
affected coral reefs. The application of concepts from the field of conservation medicine
aids our understanding of diseases and their influence on organisms of reef ecosystems
Mark Hixon tells how the coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle is an accepted generalization
embedded within a complex web of biotic interactions and abiotic conditions that bring
exceptions. He provides rules of thumb for management that are essential for fostering the
ecological resilience of coral reefs.
The introductory chapter reveals how the trophic structure of the coral reef ecosystem
provides the greatest difference between gross productivity and net productivity, perhaps of
any marine system. To export a substantial supply of food for humans, the net production
might be enhanced by reducing the upper trophic levels, and this has generally been happening
nearly globally before coral reef science became active. The final chapter tells how some
islanders harvest reef resources for subsistence and local market yet maintain the integrity of
the coral reef system by harvesting the intermediate-sized individuals from fish populations
and taking the interest rather than the capital. The Palauans have exemplified the globalization
of their economy while maintaining the integrity of their coral reef systems by keeping
resource consumption local and having their international economy service-based rather
than export-based.
Until recent decades, the conditions during the present Neogene Period were the best
experienced for reef building by scleractinian corals since the Middle Jurassic. Although the
hermatypic scleractinia were diverse through 130 million years previous to the Neogene, the
shallow ocean waters were low in magnesium, low in pH, and high in temperature, so reef
construction was meager. The Anthropocene may be returning corals from temporarily
magnificent reef accretion to the “norm.” We may keep the corals, but lose the ecosystem
services of reefs.
Honolulu, HI, USA

Charles Birkeland

Acknowledgments

I am especially grateful to Mark Nakamura for producing many of the figures in three of the
chapters. Joan Roughgarden, Bob Steneck, and Charlie Veron graciously allowed me to copy
or use their diagrams. Jacob Asher, Larry Basch, Dave Burdick, Richard J. Hamilton, Danielle
Jayewardene, Russell T. Sparks, Charlie Veron, and Bill Walsh generously allowed me to use
their photographs.
Gerry Davis, Peter Edmunds, Doug Fenner, Zac Forsman, Peter Houk, Noah Idechong,
Trina Leberer, Bert Leigh, Sonia Rowley, Nanae Singeo, Celia Smith, Lance Smith, George
D. Stanley, Jr., Kaho Tisthammer, Peter Vroom, Bill Walsh, and Ivor Williams provided
valuable comments and suggestions.
This publication incorporates Fig. 12.4 which is # Australian Institute of Marine Science
and CRR Pty Ltd [2000]. The Australian Institute of Marine Science does not necessarily
endorse any modification to that material.

xi

Contents

1

Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Charles Birkeland

1

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History . . . . . . .
Pamela Hallock

17

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dennis K. Hubbard

43

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peter W. Glynn and Derek P. Manzello

67

5

Interactions Between Corals and Their Symbiotic Algae . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gisèle Muller-Parker, Christopher F. D’Elia, and Clayton B. Cook

99

6

Exploring Coral Reefs Using the Tools of Molecular Genetics . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
Nancy Knowlton and Matthieu Leray

7

Genomic Potential for Coral Survival of Climate Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
Daniel J. Barshis

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
Esther C. Peters

9

Geographic Differences in Ecological Processes on Coral Reefs . . . . . . . . . . . 179
Charles Birkeland

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
Mark A. Hixon

11

Coral Disturbance and Recovery in a Changing World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
Margaret W. Miller

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints
of Life-History Traits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
Charles Birkeland

Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 265

xiii

Contributors

Daniel J. Barshis Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk,
VA, USA
Charles Birkeland Department of Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu,
HI, USA
Clayton B. Cook Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute at Florida Atlantic University,
Fort Pierce, FL, USA
Christopher F. D’Elia School of the Coast & Environment, 1002-P Energy, Coast &
Environment Building, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA
Peter W. Glynn Division of Marine Biology and Fisheries, Rosenstiel School of Marine
and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Pamela Hallock Department of Marine Sciences, University of South Florida at
St. Petersburg, St. Petersburg, FL, USA
Mark A. Hixon Sidney & Erica Hsiao Endowed Chair in Marine Biology, Department
of Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA
Dennis K. Hubbard Department of Geology, Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH, USA
Nancy Knowlton Department of Invertebrate Zoology, National Museum of Natural History,
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, USA
Matthieu Leray Department of Invertebrate Zoology, National Museum of Natural History,
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, USA
Derek P. Manzello Ocean Chemistry and Ecosystems Division, Atlantic Oceanographic
and Meteorological Laboratory, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Miami,
FL, USA
Margaret W. Miller Southeast Fisheries Science Center, NOAA/NMFS, Miami, FL, USA
Gisèle Muller-Parker Division of Graduate Education, National Science Foundation,
Arlington, VA, USA
Esther C. Peters Department of Environmental Science & Policy, George Mason University,
Fairfax, VA, USA

xv

1

Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene
Charles Birkeland

Abstract

Although coral reefs cover only 0.00063 of the surface of Earth, they have had important
effects on the atmosphere, ocean chemistry, the shape of the surface of Earth, the diversity
of life, the biogeographic distribution of life, and they provide hundreds of billions of
dollars in value per year in goods and services to tens of millions of humans. All the
continents, islands and freshwater habitats of Earth together occupy more than 460 times
the total surface area of coral reefs, yet host only 19 phyla while coral reefs host at least
30 phyla of animals. The per square meter value of coral reefs in goods and services has
substantially increased since estimated in 1997, but the total value has decreased from loss
of coral-reef habitat and stock of large fishes. Coral reef ecosystems in natural undisturbed
states can be inverted trophic biomass pyramids with especially high primary production,
but meagre yield or net production. Extractive commercial fishing is potentially sustainable
if medium-sized individuals and not large individuals are taken. The net yield for human
consumption can be increased by removing the upper trophic levels, but the system is more
sustainable and beneficial for humans when managed as a service-based economy rather
than an extraction-based economy. The present interglacial period (the Anthropocene) has
been exceptionally favorable to coral reefs for thousands of years until the recent three or
four decades, in which the living coral cover has abruptly declined about 53% in the
western Atlantic, about 40% in the general Indo-Pacific, and about 50% on the Great
Barrier Reef. Reefs are presently threatened by increasing CO2. Although there have been
few, if any, extinctions, reefs are declining in topographic complexity and ecosystem
services. This is most likely the trajectory for future decades and reflects the norm for
much of the geologic history of coral reefs.
Keywords

Pyramid  Biosphere  Economy  Services  Productivity

1.1

C. Birkeland (*)
Department of Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa,
Honolulu, HI 96822, USA
e-mail: charlesb@hawaii.edu

Coral-Reef Ecosystems Have Low
Sustainable Yields Because Diverse
and Intense Interactions Consume
the Production

As a foundation for managing reef resources, we should
outline the reasons why coral-reef systems cannot maintain
their basic structure while supporting an extractive economy. In their natural state, coral-reef communities are

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_1

1

2

typically inverted trophic biomass pyramids with a greater
biomass of consumers (invertebrates and fishes) than primary producers (cyanobacteria, dinoflagellates and other
photosynthetic protists and various phyla of algae).
Although coral-reef systems maintain tremendous primary
production with rapid turnover and energy flow of
producers, nearly all the net production is consumed within
a system of approximately six trophic levels. It has been
recognized by both scientists (e.g., Grigg et al. 1984) and
fishers (testimony at UNEP conferences) that in order to
increase net yield and sustain an economy based on
extracting and selling biomass, it is necessary to diminish
or remove the upper trophic levels. Alternatively, some
islanders have found that system integrity can be maintained
with subsistence fisheries and service-based economies by
taking middle-sized fishes from species populations and
extracting the interest rather than the capital from the population (Sect. 12.6).
Coral-reef ecosystems are among the most productive
ecosystems in the world in terms of gross primary productivity, yet the net productivity (biomass yield or potential
export) per unit area is only about a tenth of that from
upwelling systems even though the upwelling areas have
only about a ninth as much primary productivity per unit
area as coral reefs (Fig. 1.1). The processes of predation and
competition by a diverse array of consumers among six
trophic levels on coral reefs leads to a substantial consumption of resources and reduction of the potential export from
coral-reef systems. Hatcher (1997) found that the relatively
small net (excess) community productivity sets an upper
limit to sustainable yield (export from the reef) of about
2–3% of the gross productivity. Of this 2–3%, only about
10% is in a form usable for consumption by humans. This is
well under 1% of the gross primary production by coral-reef
ecosystems. Kinsey (1983) reviewed the literature on the
metabolic performances of typical undisturbed reefs and
found that biotically heterogeneous reef flats exhibited a
remarkably narrow range in standard of performance. The
community gross diel primary productivity (P) or photosynthesis closely matched the gross diel respiration (R) or community metabolism. Kinsey (1983) compiled most of the
published information at the time on P and R from coral
reefs around the world (mostly from the Pacific) and calculated that for the standard reef flat coral community, the ratio
of community gross primary productivity to community
gross respiration is usually very close to 1 (P/R ¼ 1+/
0.1). This corroborates Nixon’s (Fig. 1.1) and Hatcher’s
(1997) findings that most of what is produced on coral reefs
is consumed on coral reefs and little is left for yield. Metabolic and stored energy are mainly recycled within the
system and used in growth and maintenance of standing
stock consumed locally.

C. Birkeland

Fig. 1.1 Differences between coral reefs and other marine ecosystems
in the relationships of fisheries yield to gross primary production. The
non-coral-reef relationship is based on 49 studies at 25 sites (Redrawn
from Nixon 1982)

Sargent and Austin (1949, 1954) and Odum and Odum
(1955) had previously concluded that the coral-reef ecosystem is basically self-sufficient in primary production, with
nearly all production provided by benthic algae (including
algae from within the coral skeletons) and symbionts
(zooxanthellae, cyanobacteria, Prochloron), with phytoplankton contributing little. The zooplankton is largely
demersal, i.e., resident on the reef, dwelling within or near
the substratum during the day and rising into the water
column at night (Emery 1968; Porter and Porter 1977;
Alldredge and King 1977, 1980; Hamner and Carleton
1979; Birkeland and Smalley 1981). Odum and Odum
(1955) and Gerber and Marshall (1974) documented that
the zooplankton and the rest of the suspension-feeders in
the reef community consume “pseudoplankton”, derived
mostly from within the reef ecosystem. The photosynthetic
pigments in the stomachs of zooplankton were mostly
microscopic fragments from benthic algae. Phytoplankton
from external sources made up almost none of the
production.
The low export of coral reefs might also be attributed in
part to the diverse array of animal/microbe photosynthetic
symbioses that capture the solar energy but recycle and
thereby retain nutrients within the system. The
dinoflagellates Symbiodinium spp. provide caloric intake to
some foraminiferans, scyphozoans, hydrocorals, octocorals,
zoanthids, sea anemones, scleractinians, and bivalves, and
are hosted by some ciliates, flatworms, and nudibranchs,

1

Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene

while cyanobacteria provide photosynthetic intake to some
sponges and the specific cyanobacterium Prochloron
didemni provides calories for some ascidians.
Kinsey (1983) suggested that the “standard” P/R ¼ 1
provides a basis for measuring the effects of stresses and
perturbations in the altered environments. It would be
instructive to determine if any of the widely distributed
locations of measures of P and R ratios (mainly in the
1970s) have changed in the past 30–40 years. For example,
for those sites at which herbivores have since been
overfished, the reefs might experience an overall increased
cover of algae. If this is the situation, we might predict the
P/R > 1. Conversely, when there is substantial nutrient
input from external sources, the trophic characteristics of
the system can change drastically (Birkeland 1988a, b;
Fabricius 2005). If the eutrophication of the coral-reef ecosystem results in a shift from benthic algae and
zooxanthellae being the foundation of primary productivity
to phytoplankton, it is usual that heterotrophic suspensionfeeders occupy much of the substratum and the system could
shift to P/R < 1 (Chap. 9).
This thorough use of available energy by the coral
community might be attributed also to the diverse and
abundant standing stocks of consumers. Mixed benthos
assemblages on reef crests and flats constitute an effective
filter that depletes the water of most suspended particulates
including bacteria, cyanobacteria, phytoplankton, and zooplankton (Glynn 1973; Ayukai 1995; Fabricius and
Dommisse 2000). Even dissolved organic carbon is substantially consumed (Reiswig 1981), making up 90% of
the diet of some sponges (De Goeij et al. 2009). During the
day, the planktivorous fishes form a “wall of mouths” that
remove larvae (Hamner et al. 1988) and at night, the
scleractinians and zoanthids form a “wall of mouths”
(Fabricius and Metzner 2004) making it hazardous for
larvae to recruit to coral reefs (Sect. 12.2). In addition,
parrotfishes alone can subject a reef surface to over
150,000 bites per m2 per day (Carpenter 1986) which can
incidentally add to the dangers of recruiting coral spat.
There is a diverse array of predators of scleractinian corals
that includes 314 species of invertebrates from 5 phyla or
24 families (Stella et al. 2011) and 128 species of fishes
from 11 families (Cole et al. 2008) that collectively prey
on 28 genera of corals. In contrast to nutrient-rich pelagic
areas of upwelling that have only 1½ trophic levels (Ryther
1969) and tremendous potential for yield, coral-reef
ecosystems have relatively little nutrient input with six
trophic levels (Grigg et al. 1984) through which much of
the caloric and nutrient material is recycled and kept
within the system and not exported. Much of the consumed
and assimilated energy is expended as respiration at each
trophic level, so more of the gross production is lost as

3

respiration in a system with six trophic levels than in a
system with two or three.
There is a greater diversity and abundance of vertebrates
per m2 on coral reefs than in any other ecosystem (Chap. 10).
Vertebrates are all consumers. Even among the trophic
levels of consumers, unexploited coral reefs can give the
appearance of inverted trophic biomass pyramids with 80%
of the biomass being the upper trophic level, the piscivores,
and all the lower trophic levels of fishes lumped together
being 20% of the vertebrates (Friedlander and DeMartini
2002; DeMartini et al. 2008; Sandin et al. 2008; Fenner
2014). Although the findings of these surveys may be robust
(Rizzari et al. 2014) insofar as relatively unexploited
populations of piscivores on coral reefs far from human
populations have a greater biomass of larger individuals
compared to populations near human populations, WardPaige et al. (2010), Nadon et al. (2012), and Trebilco
et al. (2013) provide arguments that the abundances of
apex predators can be overestimated because of behavioral
characteristics of fishes. Trebilco et al. (2013) also
admonished that the coral-reef ecosystem was not an
inverted trophic pyramid because of subsidies from external
sources. Indeed, nutrient input from external sources can
drastically affect the trophic structure of coral-reef
communities (Chap. 9; Birkeland 1988a, b; Fabricius 2005;
Fabricius et al. 2010).
Energy flow and turnover are greater at lower trophic
levels, but can this actually produce inverted trophic biomass pyramids in natural undisturbed coral reefs in
locations without substantial nutrient input from external
sources? Odum and Odum (1955) found the biomass of
zooxanthellae to be only about 15% of the animal tissue.
Recent studies have indicated the biomass of zooxanthellae
may be <5% of the coral animal tissue (Thornhill
et al. 2011). This suggests a coral polyp could be an
inverted trophic biomass holobiont in itself. Muscatine
and Porter (1977) and Muscatine et al. (1981) have
indicated it is possible that zooxanthellae could provide
nearly all the caloric requirements of the animal tissue in
corals, although external sources of food are required for
particular elements such as nitrogen and phosphorus. Even
though corals must obtain subsidies for particular nutrients,
the energy flow through a particular biomass of
zooxanthellae (producers) is potentially enough to support
6–20 times its biomass in animal tissue (consumers). However, corals also take up some nutrients from a variety of
external sources such as dissolved organic matter, particulate organic matter, bacterioplankton, fecal material, and
zooplankton, thereby indirectly feeding on byproducts of
the benthic algal web. The degree to which individual
corals depend upon zooxanthellae, zooplankton, or other
materials for energy varies substantially with coral species,

4

habitat depth, and other factors. Polyp size is no longer
considered a reliable indicator of the proportion of energy
provided by zooxanthellae or zooplankton (Sebens 1997).
So for the discussion of inverted biomass trophic pyramids,
the coral animal tissue needs to be lumped with other
animals as consumers and the zooxanthellae need to be
lumped with benthic algae as primary producers.
All animals are consumers, so the trophic pyramid based
on benthic algae includes invertebrates with the fishes. A
relatively undisturbed reef hosts about 200 g m2 of fish in
both the Atlantic and Pacific (Goldman and Talbot 1976;
Williams and Hatcher 1983), with some locations hosting
up to 800 g m2 (Jarvis Island, Sandin et al. 2008). Even
substantially overharvested fish associations such as
Tabuaeran and Kirimati still host 170 and 130 g m2 of
fish respectively (Sandin et al. 2008). For consideration of
whether an inverted trophic biomass exists, we will be very
conservative by taking 150 g m2 for fish, the average of
the severely overfished Tabuaeran and Kirimati, in order to
avoid the issue of fish behavior. Coral tissue is typically in
the range of 40 g m2 (Thornhill et al. 2011; Schoepf
et al. 2013) if living coral cover is assumed to be about
60% on an undisturbed reef. Brock and Brock (1977) found
the biomass of invertebrates in endolithic coral rock at six
sites to range from 97 to 796 g m2, with an average of
317 g m2, but this does not include invertebrates living on
the reef surface. Therefore, since consumer biomass
combines the biomass of fishes (150 g m2, potentially up
to 800 g m2) with the animal tissue of corals (40 g m2)
and other invertebrates (317 g m2, in addition to
invertebrates on the surface of the substrata), the consumer
biomass on severely overfished coral reefs would be at least
500 g m2, not including invertebrates living on the
surface.
For the producers, Bruno et al. (2014) found that
macroalgal cover on “quasi-pristine reefs” generally ranged
between 10% and 30% cover, averaging 22%. Klumpp and
McKinnon (1992) found an overall average production of
150 g C m2 year1 from a number of reefs on the Great
Barrier Reef (GBR). The epilithic algal communities on reef
slopes of the north, central and southern GBR ranged
between 30 and 70% cover, or with a median algal cover
on the GBR being roughly 2½ times the cover on “quasipristine reefs”. Therefore, 150/2.5 ¼ 60 g C m2 year1.
Since biomass is generally composed of R-CHO (molecular
weights
of
C ¼ 12,
O ¼ 16
and
H ¼ 1),
29/12 ¼ 2.4  60 g C m2 year1 ¼ 144 g epilithic algal
biomass produced m2 year1. Coral tissue is 40 g m2 and
5–15% (Odum and Odum 1955; Thornhill et al. 2011) is
zooxanthellae, so if we take the median ratio of
zooxanthellae to coral tissue as 10%, the algal biomass
would be 144 g C m2 year1 plus 4 g m2 or 148 g m2.

C. Birkeland

This is substantially less than the 500 g m2 consumer
biomass.
However, the algal biomass was measured as the annual
biomass production while the biomass of animals was
assessed for a given moment. Many of the animals at
upper trophic levels live for decades and take several
years to mature (Sect. 13.5.3) while the net turnover of
epilithic algal turf biomass is more rapid. Klumpp
et al. (1987) found the net turnover of epilithic algal turf
on two reefs in the Great Barrier Reef and one reef in Papua
New Guinea (outside damselfish territories where the turnover was higher than the usual rate on a reef) to average
about 4% day1, a complete turnover every 25 days or 14.6
times per year. If the algal turf biomass turns over more
often than once a month, and the consumer biomass turns
over less than once per year on the average, then the actual
producer biomass at any one moment may be as much as an
order of magnitude less than that of the consumers. This
may remind us of the 1960s and 1970s when the spectacularly diverse and abundant array of animals (consumers) on
coral reefs was in contrast to the relatively inconspicuous
algae (Figs. 1.2 and 1.3). Macroalgae, however, usually
have slower turnover than turf algae and contribute largely
to the detrital foodweb.
Odum and Odum (1955) found that when boring algae are
included with the epilithic algae, the primary producers
average 703 g m2. This is greater than their findings for
the biomass of epilithic algae. They concluded that “boring
algae” (of which much is Ostreobium) in the coral skeleton
beneath the polyp had about 16 times the biomass of the
zooxanthellae in the polyp immediately above and made “it
possible to explain the great preponderance of organisms
classed as animals”, i.e., if we include the boring algae, the
producers have greater biomass at a given moment than the
consumers. Tribollet et al. (2006) measured 40% of the total
primary productivity in 3-m depth in Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii,
as coming from endolithic algae. Bruggemann et al. (1994a,
b) found that a major portion of the diet of parrotfishes,
especially the large ones, was endolithic algae beneath
sparse turf. Sparisoma viride obtained more energy from
endolithic algae than from large turfs, macroalgae or crustose coralline algae (Bruggemann et al. 1994a). The larger
parrotfishes can have a positive feedback with their major
prey, endolithic algae, by grazing away the epilithic algae
and thereby reducing the shade and allowing the endolithic
algae to expand its range deeper into the reef framework
(Tribollet and Golubic 2005). If endolithic algae are substantially greater in biomass than the epilithic algae, and if
turnover is on the scale of animals, then it is possible that an
inverted pyramid does not occur in coral reef communities.
However, if the average turnover in endolithic algae is more
rapid than the average turnover in animals, inverted

1

Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene

5

Fig. 1.2 Coral-reef scenes in the mid-1970s. As quoted in Jackson
(2014), Sylvia Earle noted in 1972 that “. . .tropical reefs, notable for
their dazzling profusion of animal life, are almost devoid of conspicuous
plants”. Bruno et al. (2014) found that in natural undisturbed baseline
conditions, benthic algae is patchily distributed and can occupy up to
10–30% of the substratum, averaging 22%. Clockwise from upper left:

Ucubsui Reef, San Blas Islands, Caribbean Panama; Islas Secas, Pacific
Panama; Arekabesan Island, Palau; Aunu’u Island, American Samoa;
also Aunu’u. These are not a random selection of photographs, but were
selected to show how easy it was to be impressed with the prevalence of
animal tissue in the 1970s. Odum and Odum (1955) argued that many, if
not most, of the algae were endolithic and out of sight

pyramids on relatively natural unfished coral reefs is most
likely the norm.
Whether or not undisturbed natural reefs can actually
form inverted biomass trophic pyramids, there is intense
predation by a diverse and abundant array of consumers.
This makes recruitment a risky process for most species of
corals and fishes, which selects life-history characteristics
such as relative longevity for repeated attempts at reproduction (Sect. 12.2). It also explains the mediocre net production
from very high gross primary production (Fig. 1.1). If either
the larger individual predators or grazers are taken, the coralreef community will usually undergo some fundamental
changes. By reducing the number of trophic levels and

diversity of consumers, the net productivity of the system
can be increased and the processes of harvesting and marketing can be more efficient. However, the greatest values of
coral reefs lie in their ecosystem services (Costanza
et al. 2014) and coral-reef ecosystems have much more
economic potential for service-based economies than extractive economies (Sect. 12.6.2). For isolated human
populations that need to harvest coral reefs for protein and
maintain the integrity of their food supply, they must exploit
their stocks with two forms of moderation: using slot limits
to take the intermediate size classes of each species taken
and focusing on harvesting the interest or yield, not the
capital (Sect. 12.6.1).

6

C. Birkeland

Fig. 1.3 Abundant Scarus iserti grazing turf algae among corals that
take up most of the space. With little algal availability, the grazers keep
the algae in the early stages of succession with rapid turnover and high
net productivity (Klumpp et al. 1987), promoting the potential for an
inverted trophic pyramid. If the coral is disturbed and the algae expand
their spatial coverage and availability, the grazers can become more
selective and avoid macroalgae with anti-herbivore defenses,
facilitating the takeover of much space by macroalgae (Birkeland
et al. 1985) with less turnover and net production, reducing the tendency towards an inverted trophic pyramid

1.2

Coral Reefs Affect the Global Biosphere

Living coral is a thin veneer, measured in millimeters. Yet
this thin film of living tissue has shaped the face of Earth
more than any other organisms, including humans, by creating limestone structures sometimes over 1,300 m (e.g.,
Enewetak Atoll) from its surface down to its base on volcanic rock, or over 2,000 km long (Great Barrier Reef). About
half the world’s coastlines are in the tropics and about a third
of the tropical coastlines are made of coral reef. About
400 atolls can be found among archipelagoes such as the
Tuamotus, Marshalls, Maldives, Laccadives, Chagos, most
of the Carolines and Kiribati, and some of the Coral Sea
islands and Seychelles, and these atolls have been formed by
coral. In addition to enlarging high islands (such as the entire
northern half of Guam) and extending and protecting
coastlines, ancient biogenic reefs have coated some areas
on continents.
Coral reefs are dynamic systems that influence the chemistry of the oceans and atmosphere. It has been calculated
that roughly half the calcium that enters the sea each year
around the world, from the north to south poles, is taken up
and temporarily bound into coral reefs (Smith 1978). With
each atom of calcium, a molecule of CO2 is also deposited,
with gross CO2 fixation estimated on the order of 700 billion
kg carbon per year. Coral reefs can produce limestone at the
rate of 400–2,000 tons per hectare per year (Chave
et al. 1972), but the rate of calcium carbonate production

or deposition is not necessarily the main factor in calcium
carbonate accretion or accumulation. Healthy coral
communities that are functioning well as coral-reef
ecosystems might not be performing well as reef builders.
Although the rate of limestone production is high, the rate of
reef growth can be low (Kleypas et al. 2001). If the CaCO3 is
created, whether as reef accretion or sediment, it is nevertheless removing CO2 from the atmosphere. Although in the
short term, the process of reef accretion releases CO2 in
minuscule amounts in comparison to the amount released
by human activities, the amount of CO2 accumulated and
stored in reef structure over the past 200 million years has
added up to a substantial portion of Earth’s CO2 and this has
made living conditions more favorable for humans and other
eukaryotes (Chap. 2).
Although corals have changed the shape of the surface of
Earth, living coral reefs are estimated to presently cover only
284,300 km2 (Spalding et al. 2001), only 0.00089 of the area
of the oceans and 0.012 of the areas of the continental
shelves. More importantly, while providing threedimensional structures in shallow water where there would
otherwise be only open water, coral reefs have also become
“hotspots” for biodiversity. Coral reefs host 30 animal phyla
(Paulay 1997), while all the terrestrial and freshwater
habitats host only 19 phyla. A single 5 m2 area of reef
sampled in the Caribbean provided 534 species from
27 phyla and 44 classes (Small et al. 1998). The terrestrial
and freshwater habitats cover 29% of the surface of Earth,
yet the number of phyla in one 5 m2 quadrat on a coral reefs
in the Atlantic is substantially greater than all the terrestrial
and freshwater habitats (rain forests, savannah, temperate
forests, tropical rainforests, tundra, rivers, lakes, bogs) of
the world. Coral reefs in the western Pacific host much
greater diversity than reefs in the Atlantic.
Coral reefs have increased the diversity and affected the
biogeography of marine life on Earth. By creating hundreds
of atolls, reefs produce solid shallow-water substrata in the
middle of the tropical oceans, providing stepping stones for
dispersion that allowed the distribution of species across
extensive spatial barriers that would not have otherwise
occurred after volcanic islands sank (Grigg and Hey
1992). For example, there would have been no coral reefs
or coral reef fauna in the Eastern Tropical Pacific (one of
the four tropical marine faunal provinces of Earth) without
the small reefs on Palmyra Atoll and Kingman Reef
moving by plate tectonics into positions upstream from
the Eastern Tropical Pacific in the North Equatorial Countercurrent (Dana 1975).
Coral reefs are among most biologically productive
ecosystems in the world (Fig. 1.1). The global potential for
coral-reef fisheries has been estimated at 9 million tons per
year, which is impressive in view of the relatively small area
of coral reefs compared to the world ocean, and to the total

1

Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene

marine fisheries of the world being about 75–100 million
tons per year (Smith 1978; Munro 1984). Coral reefs, on the
other hand, are vulnerable to overexploitation if harvested
repeatedly (Sect. 12.5.1).
So these are paradoxes. Although coral reefs are the most
productive ecosystems in the sea, the fisheries of coral reefs
are among the most vulnerable to overexploitation (Sect.
12.5). Despite having the power to create the most massive
structures in the world made by living creatures (including
man), the thin film of living tissue of coral reef is particularly
vulnerable to natural disturbances and effects of human
activities (Chap. 11). Coral reefs and other animal-algal
reefs are the first to go during periods of climate change,
but they have always come back. This combination of
attributes – creative power and fragility, resilience and susceptibility, productivity and vulnerability to overexploitation – makes management of coral-reef systems a
particular challenge to science.

1.3

The Economic Goods and Service Values
of Reefs

In 1997, the value of annual production of coral reefs in both
goods and services was calculated to average
$6,075 ha1 year1 for a global total at $375 billion per
year (Costanza et al. 1997). By 2014, the average per hectare
value of coral reefs in adequate condition has increased
tremendously to about $352,000 ha1 year1, 32% by inflation of the dollar and 5,762% by additional considerations of
services such as storm protection, erosion protection and
revenue from tourism (Costanza et al. 2014). For coral
reefs, the assessment by Costanza et al. (2014) was not
based strongly on extractive economies, but rather on ecosystem services. They emphasized that expressing the ecosystem services in terms of dollar value “does not mean they
should be treated as private commodities that can be traded
in private markets. Many ecosystem services are public
goods or the product of common assets that cannot
(or should not) be privatized”.
Although the calculated value of each hectare of healthy
reef has increased, the global total value of coral-reef goods
and services has dropped (Costanza et al. 2014) because of
the percent area of reefs having been degraded (53% in the
greater Caribbean, Jackson 2014), 19% on average for the
world (Wilkinson 2008). A major factor in calculations is
that the estimation of total shallow living coral cover worldwide in 1978 was over 600,000 km2 (Smith 1978), while it is
now 284,300 km2 (Spalding et al. 2001). However, the
widespread increase in overharvesting of reef fishes may
be an additional factor lowering the quality and value of
goods and services. Overharvesting comes both from
increased populations in less developed countries and from

7

a “gold rush” by developed countries (Anonymous 2000 in
The Economist).
Coral reefs are found in over 100 countries, mostly in the
less economically developed tropical regions. People
depending on coral reefs for part of their livelihood and for
obtaining part of the protein in their diet are estimated to
number in the tens of millions (Salvat 1992). Despite the
vulnerability of reefs to overharvesting for export, reef
fisheries had served for hundreds and, in some locations,
thousands of years as major sources of food for subsistence.
This is certainly a major value of coral reefs. Unfortunately,
the number of people exploiting reefs for protein in
impoverished communities increases when the human population grows more rapidly than the availability of employment opportunities. The feasibility of fishing reefs near shore
without substantial investment in equipment makes reeffishing the only source of food in countries without substantive welfare.
Fishermen might be aware that they could catch larger
fish with less effort if they restrained from fishing for a year
or two, but they have families to feed now. It becomes a
positive feedback process. The large fish are the first to be
caught (Fenner 2014). As the fishes get smaller, it takes a
greater number to feed the families. In order to catch enough
smaller fishes, it becomes necessary to use methods such as
gill nets, traps, muro-ami, and explosives (widely available
as munitions left over from World War II, but easily made
elsewhere from herbicides and sugar). For example, a quarter of the population of the Caribbean resides in Haiti and it
population is growing at 2.5% annually. When Reef Check
surveyed 120 km of Haitian coast in 2011, the largest fish
they observed was 15 cm (6 in.) in length (Anonymous
2011). There is exponentially greater fecundity in the larger
fishes (Sect. 12.5.3) so when relentless fishing pressure
brought about by the need for protein for local people with
low-incomes removes the larger fishes, there is less chance
for the fish population to recover. Even with rich coral
growth, the total value may have decreased in recent decades
because of fewer large fish.
The diverse stocks of fishes on coral reefs are impressive,
especially the stocks in relatively untouched areas with
inverted trophic structure. This unfortunately encourages
the investment into fishery-based economies. An article in
The Economist likened commercial trade in large coral-reef
fish to a “gold rush. . .an extractive industry that eventually
exhausts the resource it exploits” (Anonymous 2000). Even
exploited stocks on coral reefs can be at 200 tons km2, but
the population is especially vulnerable if larger individuals
are taken (Sect. 12.5). Since the 1970s, the catch-per-uniteffort (CPUE) in a number of fish stocks exposed to extractive fisheries has been reduced by about 80% and has not
recovered for decades (Sect. 12.5.1). Coral reefs have perpetually sustained coastal populations in some areas,

8

perhaps for centuries, because people would catch only what
they needed for the immediate future. But with the development of refrigeration, long-distance shipping became possible and opened the world as a potential market. This
removed limits on need, so the development of commercial
fisheries became a gold rush.
Coral reefs indirectly benefit pelagic fisheries by supplying food for more wide-ranging coral-reef or inshore pelagic
fishes. Sudekum et al. (1991) calculated that just two of the
species of jacks, Caranx ignobilis and C. melampygus,
together eat 30,600 metric tons per year of benthic fauna
from French Frigate Shoals, an atoll in the northwestern
Hawaiian Islands.
Introducing alien species to coral reefs for future harvest
is generally not a good idea for fish or algae, but I have not
heard of any problems, only benefits, from the introduction
of large herbivorous gastropods. The herbivorous “topshell”
Trochus niloticus was introduced widely in the North Pacific
(Chuuk, Pohnpei, Marshall Islands, and dozens of atolls in
the Caroline Islands) in the 1920s and 1930s and Guam and
Saipan in the 1950s. In the 1950s, 1980s and 1990s, it was
also introduced widely in the South Pacific including American and Independent Samoas, Tonga, Cook Islands, French
Polynesia (Tahiti and the Tuamotus), and Loyalty Islands
(Eldredge 1994). By 1980, there was an annual global harvest of about 6,000 tonnes (Bouchet and Bour 1980). The
herbivorous “green snail” Turbo marmoratus was also
introduced to the Society Islands and Samoa, but was not
as productive, providing a global harvest of 800 tonnes in
1986 and 1,000 tonnes in 1987 and 1988. These gastropods
are harvested for local subsistence protein and commercially
for the high quality mother-of-pearl in their shells used in
ornamental and curio trade.
Giant clams (Tridacnidae) have also been introduced to
new locations and also reintroduced to locations where they
had previously been overfished to extinction. Transfers have
been performed widely in the Pacific. Tridacna gigas,
T. derasa, and Hippopus hippopus were all introduced to
Independent Samoa, Fiji, Cook Islands, Saipan, Kosrae,
Chuuk and Yap. Tridacna gigas and T. derasa were also
introduced at American Samoa, Tuvalu, Pohnpei, Majuro,
and Guam and T. gigas and H. hippopus at Tonga. I have not
heard of them causing any ecological problems. However,
wild populations of tridacnids are hard to sustain because
they are conspicuous, easy to collect, and must live about
15 or 20 years before they become effectively fecund. Viet
Nam exported 29,000 kg of T. gigas shells in 2000. They
were taken in abundance in Indonesia for a while (1,160 tons
of giant clam shells were taken from outer islands to market
in Jepara, north-central Java, in 1982), but the two largest
species (Tridacna gigas and T. derasa) are suspected to now
be extinct around Java and Bali. Overharvest had also apparently brought Tridacna gigas to extinction in Fiji, New

C. Birkeland

Caledonia, Vanuatu, Kosrae, Pohnpei, Chuuk, Yap, Guam,
Saipan, Northern Marianas, Taiwan, and the Ryukyu
Islands. Tridacna derasa seemed to be harvested to extinction at Vanuatu, Guam, Northern Marianas, and Federated
States of Micronesia (Kosrae, Pohnpei, Chuuk, Yap).
Hippopus hippopus was brought to extinction at Fiji,
Tonga, both Independent and American Samoa, Guam, the
Northern Mariana Islands, and Taiwan (Eldredge 1994).
Some of these extinct populations have been reestablished
by the introductions listed above. Giant clams have also been
shipped to the Caribbean where tridacnids from Palau have
been cultured in Bonaire, Guadeloupe, and south Florida
(Eldredge 1994).
Unlike gastropods which may be able to provide sustainable fisheries on the reef, the giant clams seem to be too easy
to find and collect and have too long a generation time for
field populations to sustain harvest. The Government of
Palau established the Marine Protection Act of 1994 that
prohibited the export of invertebrates from the coral reef, but
allowed export of specimens derived by aquaculture. The
Belau Mariculture Demonstration Center in Palau has shown
that aquaculture and export of giant clams is feasible
(Heslinga et al. 1984).
As with giant clams, an advantage towards sustainability
of the aquarium-fish trade is the potential for aquaculture,
rather than collection from the wild. At least 269 species of
coral-reef fishes can be successfully bred by hobbyists
(Murray and Watson 2014) and there should be economic
incentive to further develop the capabilities for breeding
ornamentals, considering the marine ornamental trade
already amounted to as much as $330 million over a decade
ago (Wabnitz et al. 2003). Harvesting from the wild can have
serious damaging effects to the structure of coral reefs. For
example, the collection of sabellid feather-duster worms
involves digging and dislodging corals, so each one collected is damaging to the reef structure. The average number
of Sabellastarte collected each year for the aquarium trade in
Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii, has been 43,143 (Friedlander
et al. 2008), so that meant the same number of holes and
dislodged chunks were placed in the coral reef substrata each
year. The detaching of corals for the aquarium trade also
fractures the reef substratum, and attaching and retrieving
gill-nets for collecting fishes breaks coral branches and
abrades living coral tissue. Cyanide and Clorox are incidentally toxic to corals and other reef animals not targeted.
It would seem that the aquarium trade would be a more
stable source of income than fish for food because of the
tremendously greater value per gram of product, because of
the spread of the harvest among more than 1,802 species,
and because of the more limited demand in total biomass.
However, there is a positive feedback process such that
when a species becomes rare, it becomes more valuable
(Courchamp et al. 2006). A rare fish can cost as much as

1

Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene

$20,000 (Rhyne et al. 2012b). This is destabilizing because
the demand on common fishes diminishes and the demand of
rare species intensifies.
The marine aquarium trade is a rapidly growing business,
with 871 live coral imported into the United States in 1984,
40,000 in 1988, about 250,000 in 1991, and 1.5 million by
2010 (Derr 1992; Wells and Hanna 1992; Tissot et al. 2010).
Indonesia exports about 900,000 scleractinian colonies per
year and Fiji exports about 600 metric tons of “live rock” per
year (Bruckner 2002). Aquarists in the United States purchase 68% of all live corals and 95% of the “live rock” from
Fiji on the market (Bruckner 2002). Now it is estimated that
on the global scale at least 50 million coral-reef animals are
sold annually in the aquarium trade (Rhyne et al. 2012a).
The number of species of reef fishes that were imported into
the US in 2005 was 1,802 from 50 families (Rhyne
et al. 2012b). The number of individuals imported to the
US each year is about 11 million. These values are low
because they are not including Hawaiian endemic species
and other species not counted because they were not
recorded as imports (Rhyne et al. 2012b). Between 10 and
30 million reef fishes worth up to $750 million are exported
from Southeast Asia annually (Bruckner 2002). About 1,500
people make a living collecting live aquarium fishes in the
Philippines, from which 5,774,579 are imported to the US
(Rhyne et al. 2012b). The export of aquarium fishes from the
Philippines brought in nearly US$ 2.5 million in 1978 and
US$ 2.75 million in 1979 (Salm 1984). About 50,000
persons are employed in the aquarium trade in Sri Lanka
(Craik et al. 1990), the source of 3,288, 434 imports to the
US. The coral-reef aquarium trade operates in the hundreds
of millions of dollars annually, and is growing very rapidly
(Wabnitz et al. 2003).
The number of aquarium fishes taken from the kona
(leeward) coast of the island of Hawaii was about 90,000
in 1973 and 422,823 in 1995 (Tissot and Hallacher 2003). In
2000, fish replenishment areas (FRAs) were established,
taking up 35.2% of the coastline. With the establishment of
these FRAs in 2000, and possibly because of harvesting the
middle-sized individuals, leaving the exponentially more
fecund breeding stock and allowing the juveniles to grow
rapidly (Sect. 12.6.1), the collection stabilized at a reliable
300,000–450,000. This practice of moderation by leaving
areas for replenishment and leaving the larger individuals
provided a secure 2,400–3,600 fish per km of coastline
per year.
A variety of seaweeds are also collected from coral reefs
and used for food, folk medicine, and fertilizer, and sold for
agar and carrageenan. In 1989 alone, the Philippines produced 65,600 metric tons of algae of the genus Eucheuma,
worth tens of millions of dollars (South 1993).
Corals deposit tremendous quantities of limestone. Large
amounts of the coral limestone also contributes to coral

9

rubble and sand. Blocks of living or dead coral are used for
building materials, breakwaters, and cement. In Sri Lanka in
the 1980s, over 2,000 metric tons of live coral skeletons,
7,000 metric tons of coral rubble, and 34,000 m3 of sand
were removed from the coast each year (Wells and Hanna
1992). However, the economic value in many of the
resources are far less when extracted than when left in
place. In favorable environmental conditions, the living
reef can be a self-repairing and self-augmenting breakwater
with rising sea level.
Coral reefs can produce substantial revenue from jewelry
and curios. Jewelry is potentially sustainable because a very
few grams of physical material is exported for a substantial
income. On lagoonal reefs of 19 of the islands (raised atolls)
of the Tuamotus in the late 1980s, high-priced black pearls
from the culture of the coral-reef oyster Pinctada
margaritifera brought $25 million in 1988 and $37 million
in 1990. However, there should be concern that the culture of
dense populations on coral reefs in enclosed lagoons can
facilitate disease. In 1985, a disease affecting
P. margaritifera was first observed in the Gambier Islands
and then in the Tuamotus. By 1988 50–80% of the cultured
stock died of the disease.
In contrast to jewelry, the export of curios can be
devastating. Curios and souvenirs made from black corals,
gorgonaceans (especially sea fans), seashells, giant clams,
dried fishes and echinoderms support a multimillion-dollar
international business. During the mid 1980s, 4,500 metric
tons of shellcraft per year (not including mother-of-pearl)
was being exported from the Philippines (Wells and Hanna
1992). In 1988, 1,456 metric tons of ornamental corals were
imported into the USA (Wells and Hanna 1992). The curio
trade has leveled off about 1990 when the live trade for
ornamental aquarium animals began to expand rapidly
(Bruckner 2002).
There are important alternative nonextractive productions
of corals that are useful for humans (Sect. 1.1). Coral reefs
function as protection against waves for other coastal
habitats, sources of food for pelagic fishes, sources of
genetic diversity for aquaculture and pharmaceuticals, and
as sources of income from tourism and recreation. Scubadiving on coral reefs forms the main base of the economies
of a number of tropical developing countries. Tourism of
coral reefs brings in about $85 million a year to the national
economy of Palau, a Pacific country with a population of
about 21 thousand. Scuba-related tourism brings in about
$23 million annually to Bonaire, about half its gross domestic product in 2002. The total annual value of coral reefs to
Guam is 139 million US$ per year (mpy), of which 114 mpy
is coral-reef tourism and recreation and 4 mpy is commercial
fishery (Brander and van Beukering 2013). The rest was for
environmental services such as protection against storm
waves. Of the total 1,747 mpy value of coral reefs to Hawaii,

10

356 mpy is from reef-related tourism and recreation, while
3 mpy is from commercial fishery. Puerto Rico showed
192 mpy from recreation and tourism and 1 mpy for smallscale fishing. In developed countries like the U.S. and
Australia, the economic value of coral reefs for tourism is
also large. Reef tourism is estimated to be worth about $1.6
billion a year for Florida’s economy, with over two million
tourists visiting John Pennecamp Coral Reef State Park and
Key Largo National Marine Sanctuary alone (Wells and
Hanna 1992). Attributes of the coral-reef ecosystem
(Sect. 1.1) and of its fishes (Sects. 12.5 and 12.6) explain
why coral reefs can support a dependable service-based
economy, but not an export economy.
The potential for pharmaceuticals from natural products
from coral reefs would seem to be greater than from other
systems because biodiversity and ecosystem complexity of
coral reefs is on a higher scale than in other ecosystems
(Sect. 1.1). Rainforests are considered to have a greater
biodiversity at the species level because of insects and
flowering plants. However, coral reef communities have
the greater diversity in terms of prevalent phyla and
kingdoms, a greater diversity of basic animal body plans,
symbiotic relationships, and natural products chemistry. Of
34 animal phyla, 30 are found on coral reefs, while only
19 are found in all the terrestrial and freshwater habitats on
Earth. The potential of coral reefs as a source of new
chemicals for pharmaceuticals compelled the National
Institutes of Health (including the National Cancer Institute
and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences) to
fund the establishment of a laboratory in Micronesia. The
marine laboratory on Chuuk and then Palau was contracted
to provide specimens of at least 5,000 different species of
coral-reef organisms as material for chemical exploration.
Some natural-product chemicals have undergone clinical
analysis. A number of prostaglandins were discovered in
large quantities in the common gorgonacean Plexaura
homomalla (Bayer 1974). Prostaglandin is a potent pharmaceutical that affects a wide range of clinical applications in
humans including assisting the process of childbirth,
terminating pregnancies, and treatment of cardiovascular
disease, asthma, and gastric ulcers. A chemical from the
red alga Portieria hornemannii has shown antitumor activity
for a variety of human tumors (Fuller et al. 1992). Didemnin
B from the coral-reef ascidian Trididemnum solidum has
demonstrated activity against leukemia, a variety of human
tumors, viruses, carcinomas (including melanoma) in clinical trials. The purity of CaCO3 produced by corals makes it
valuable for use in bone-marrow transplants.
Reefs serve as protection against wave action. During
typhoons, the damage from wave action to coastal
communities is much less where there are reefs. On Guam,
the damage from wave action in areas protected by extensive
reef flats was minor, but in areas around the villages of

C. Birkeland

Inarajan and Merizo, where the fringing reefs are narrow,
wave action damaged homes, removed buried caskets from
cemeteries, moved automobiles, carried a refrigerator away
from inside a home, and caused wave-damage as far as a
kilometer inland. In addition, coral reefs protect mangroves
and seagrass beds in some localities, and thus they provide
protection for nurseries of commercially important fishes.
Coral reefs are self-repairing, and the cost of building and
maintaining equivalent breakwaters are nearly always omitted
in the consideration of the commercial value of coral reefs.
As the value of reefs to the economic and social wellbeing of human communities in coastal regions becomes
apparent, the cost assessments of damages to coral reefs
become large. The Government of Egypt claimed US$
30 million for damage to 340 m2 of coral reef in the Strait
of Tiran, although the final settlement was out-of-court for
US$ 600,000, or US$ 1,765 m2 (Spurgeon 1992). This was
considerably less than the cost calculated for reef damage in
Florida. Assuming the minimum nonmarket value for live
coral, assuming the reef would recover naturally rather
quickly, and assuming financial rate of return for lost revenue from tourism of only 3%, the calculations presented in a
legal journal for the minimum damage to the local economy
caused by the grounding of the M/V WELLWOOD on
Molasses Reef off the Florida Keys was $2,833 m2
(Mattson and DeFoor 1985). By these calculations, Molasses
Reef, just one of many reefs off the Florida Keys, is worth
about US$ 400 million. In December 2003, the cruise ship
MV Island Explorer ran aground on Apo Reef in the
Philippines. The ship’s company paid $700,000 for
2,750 m2 of damaged reef. In February 2009, the USS Port
Royal (a navy ship) ran aground on a reef on the south shore
of Oahu. A total of 15 million US$ (8.5 million for loss of
natural resources and 6.5 million for restoration costs) was
paid, which comes to $16,854 m2.
The economy of atolls is nearly completely dependent
upon the coral reefs, whether the economy is based on
fisheries, aquaculture, or tourism. Because of these goods
and services, President Clinton’s Executive Order 13089
established the US Coral Reef Task Force and from 1999
to 2011, to which Congress appropriated approximately
$169 million for the protection of coral reefs. The
Australian Government has spent on average about $32.4
million per year since 1996 for maintaining the Great Barrier
Reef. There are approximately 686 organizations dedicated
to reversing the decline of coral reefs (International Directory of Coral Reef Organizations, www.coralreef.org,
27 January 2013). Yet, despite all this effort and investment,
there is no evidence that the rate of reef degradation has
begun to decrease (Sect. 1.4).
Perhaps the most important role of coral reefs in the lives
of local people is usually not recognized by outsiders. This is
the stabilizing effect of reefs on social structure. Fishing is

1

Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene

often a cooperative activity in which each of the family
members has a clearly recognized role. It has been discerned
from interviews of fishermen in Palau that fishing activities
help solidify the roles and importance of members of the
family. It was stated that reefs may be more important in
providing the opportunity for fishing activities than in
providing the catch. Fishing and reef-gleaning is often perceived as fun and wholesome. In cases where large
developments such as resorts or military bases obstruct
access of local people to traditional fishing or reef-gleaning
areas, the effects cannot be overcome simply with jobs
providing wages by which foods can be purchased. As social
structure deteriorates, the numbers of suicides and criminal
acts increase. The economic costs of such societal maladies
are rarely taken into account in the evaluation of coral reefs,
but nevertheless, these costs of the deterioration of coral
reefs are ultimately paid by all of us.

1.4

Present Situation of Coral Reefs

With all due respect to those contributing effort and funding
towards protecting coral reefs, the millions of dollars that are
being spent will be of no avail unless there is a concentrated
effort to obtain explicit progress in reducing CO emissions.
2
(Ove Hoegh-Guldberg)

Although some human resources associated with coral reefs
are recognized as having been overharvested for hundreds of
years (Jackson 1997; Wing and Wing 2001), coral reef
ecosystems usually recovered rapidly from injuries and
therefore appeared to be in good condition until the
mid-1970s (Fig. 1.2). The general belief was that although
coral reefs were often damaged by local factors such as
hurricanes, crown-of-thorns predation, sedimentation, sewage, chemical pollution, and so forth (Johannes 1975), disturbance and recovery were important in maintaining coralreef diversity (Connell 1978). The diverse mosaic of corals
(Fig. 1.2) were considered to be an array of patches in
various stages of recovery.
Coral reefs were remarkably resilient in that they were
able to recover rapidly, even after relatively large-scale
severe disturbances. For example, only 5 years after a volcanic eruption provided a 70,000 m2 sheet of basalt in the
shallow waters of an Indonesian island, the hardened lava
had been colonized by 124 species of coral and 61.6% +/
7.5% of the surface was living coral cover (Tomascik
et al. 1996). Predation by Acanthaster planci on reefs of
Guam devastated the coral communities along 38 km of
coast (Chesher 1969), but living coral cover on a submarine
terrace increased from <0.9% cover in 1970 to 65% in 1981
(Colgan 1987). Sano (2000) reported recovery of living coral
cover from 0.0 to 100% from 1987 to 1997 at Iriomote Island
in the Ryukyus south of Okinawa. Recovery from extensive

11

devastation of coral in American Samoa took 15 years
(McArdle 2003). The numerous disturbances of reef
communities from A. planci outbreaks in Micronesia
occurred over a large geographic area nearly the size of the
conterminous United States in 1969. Most recovered by
1978–1981 (Birkeland and Lucas 1990). Although there
are sometimes reports of recoveries in less than 10 years
(e.g., Johns et al. 2014), the mode of time needed for coralcommunity recovery from substantial damage was
10–15 years.
It should be clarified that “recovery” in 10–15 years is
here considered in terms of extrinsic (collective) variables
such as living coral cover and species richness. When considering intrinsic (individual colony) variables such as colony size and three-dimensional structure, “recovery” may
take centuries (Fig. 12.1).
Prior to the 1970s, coral communities generally responded
with resilience to event-driven acute disturbances. By the
mid-1970s, coral communities started demonstrating
positive-feedback responses in negative directions to trenddriven chronic disturbances (Fig. 1.4; Chap. 11). New
disturbances began to create conditions that opened new selfreinforcing processes or conditions that changed the trajectory
towards further deterioration. In 1982, Bill Gladfelter called
attention to the spread of the white-band disease that began in
the mid-1970s, affecting Acropora palmata across the greater
Caribbean. He foresaw that this killing of a large portion of a
dominant three-dimensional coral framework-builder would
have continuing effects on ecology of Caribbean coral reefs.
The 1982–1983 El Niño caused extensive coral bleaching
throughout the eastern tropical Pacific, but its effects
continued for at least 6 years through 1989 by opening paths
of influence previously unavailable to Acanthaster planci,
Diadema and Eucidaris, and Stegastes (Glynn 1990). In
1983, 2 years after a disease spread through the main Hawaiian
Islands killing diadematid echinoids (Birkeland 1989), a very
similar diadematid disease spread across the greater Caribbean, from Panama to Bermuda, within a year (Lessios
et al. 1984). The demise of this dominant herbivore Diadema
antillarum had compounding effects on the ecology of Caribbean coral reefs (Hughes 1994).
During the record-breaking 1997–1998 El Niño, the shallow seawater temperatures were especially warm. Extensive
coral bleaching occurred circumtropically, degrading coral
reef communities especially in the Indian Ocean and in the
western Pacific Ocean where approximately 16% of the
living coral cover of the world was killed. Then in an
especially warm 2005, there was a major bleaching event
in Caribbean corals even though it was not an El Niño year
(Wilkinson and Souter 2008).
In the past, corals have typically recovered promptly after
large-scale mortality from outbreaks of crown-of-thorns,
hurricanes, lava flows, and other events. The drop in coral

12

C. Birkeland

Fig. 1.4 Decline in living coral
cover across the greater
Caribbean from 1977 to 2001
(From Gardner et al. 2003) and
decline in coral recruitment in
12 1-m2 plots near Discovery
Bay, Jamaica, 1977–1993 (From
Hughes and Tanner 2000)

community resilience may be based on a lack of replenishment more than coral mortality (Fig. 12.1). There may have
been a substantial decline in coral recruitment from 1977 to
1993 in Jamaica (Hughes and Tanner 2000) and from 1979
to 2004 in Curaçao (Bak et al. 2005). The general decline in
coral recruitment in the past decades has been associated
with the lower abundance of reproductive adult colonies
(Fig. 1.4) and the resulting lower fecundity of the population
as a whole (Brainard et al. 2011; Birkeland et al. 2013).
However, Hughes et al. (2000) found that the amount of
recruitment to coral populations on the Great Barrier Reef
was not significantly correlated with the number of adult
colonies (living coral cover), but with fecundity. In corals,
fecundity decreases as the colony is stressed (Sect. 12.2.2).
Despite common successes in ameliorating local factors that
would have degraded coral-reef communities, the global
changes brought about by increases in CO2 may be chronically stressing corals and thereby reducing fecundity (Sect.
12.2.2).
During the past decade, the governments of Australia,
Queensland, and the United States have invested hundreds
of millions of dollars into the processes of protecting and
restoring coral reefs. There are hundreds of NGOs committed
to protecting coral reefs (www.coralreef.org). These efforts
have produced many local successes, but corroborating the
concerns expressed by Ove Hoegh-Gildberg at the beginning

of this section, local successes have failed to prevent the
global decline of coral reefs. The Great Barrier Reef
(De’ath et al. 2012), the wider Caribbean (Gardner
et al. 2003), and the Indo- Pacific Ocean (Bruno and Selig
2007) have all had significant losses in coral cover over
decadal scales, and even no take reserves (Huntington
et al. 2011) and national parks (Rogers and Muller 2012)
have experienced mass mortality events and coral declines.
Corals in the 360,000 km2 Papahānaumokuākea Marine
National Monument have experienced episodes of bleaching
and disease (Kenyon and Brainard 2006) despite being geographically remote, far from human development, and
protected from direct human disturbances. The Great Barrier
Reef is possibly the best-managed large-scale (345,400 km2)
coral-reef reserve, with about 30% of its area protected
against any fishing or resource removal, but it has lost
50.7% of living coral cover since 1985 (De’ath
et al. 2012). De’ath et al. calculated that the outlook for the
GBR could be favored with the control of crown-of-thorns
seastar outbreaks and improvement of water quality, but the
final sentence in the abstract was “Such strategies can, however, only be successful if climatic conditions are stabilized,
as losses due to bleachings and cyclones will otherwise
increase.” Although there are about 500 marine reserves in
the wider Caribbean, this area has lost 80% of its living coral
cover during the same period that the GBR lost over 50%

1

Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene

(Gardner et al. 2003). The Indo-Pacific has generally lost
about 40% of coral cover between 1968 and 2003 (Bruno
and Selig 2007). For the world as a whole as of 2008, 19% of
coral reefs have been lost and about 35% are seriously under
local threats, leaving about 46% that are mainly under threat
from CO2, despite over 660 marine reserves that include
coral reefs (Spalding et al. 2001).
Prior to the 1970s, coral communities generally
responded to acute (event-driven) disturbances with resilience. But the massive reef-building scleractinians were
selected for survival over fecundity (Sect. 12.2.2), so by
the mid-1970s, coral communities started demonstrating
positive-feedback responses in a negative direction to
chronic (trend-driven) disturbances (Chap. 11). Stress from
changes in ocean temperature and chemistry possibly costs
corals lower fecundity and diminished recruitment
(Chap. 11; Sect. 12.2.2). This is driving coral communities
towards the norm of the 140 million years before the present
Neogene (the more recent 23.8 million years), the norm in
which scleractinian reef-building corals were diverse, but
reef-building was minimal. We may not lose a diverse
array of scleractinian corals (Sect. 12.4.1), but we are likely
to experience substantial reef deterioration (Sect. 12.4.2)
unless we can reduce CO2 emissions to the natural state.

References
Alldredge AL, King JM (1977) Distribution, abundance, and substrate
preferences of demersal zooplankton at Lizard Island Lagoon, Great
Barrier Reef. Mar Biol 41:317–333
Alldredge AL, King JM (1980) Effects of moonlight on the vertical
migration patterns of demersal zooplankton. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol
44:133–156
Anonymous (2000) What price coral? The Economist, November 4, pp
87–89
Anonymous (2011) Survey: Haiti’s coral reefs most overfished in the
world; “No food fish of reproductive age” Underwatertimes.com.
March 28, 2011
Ayukai T (1995) Retention of phytoplankton and planktonic microbes
on coral reefs within the Great Barner Reef, Australia. Coral Reefs
14:141–147
Bak RPM, Nieuwland G, Meesters EH (2005) Coral reef crisis in deep
and shallow reefs: 30 years of constancy and change in reefs of
Curacao and Bonaire. Coral Reefs 24:475–479
Bayer FM (ed) (1974) Prostaglandins from Plexaura homomalla: ecology, utilization and conservation of a major medical marine
resource, a symposium, Stud Trop Oceanogr No 12. University of
Miami Press, Coral Gables, 165 pp
Birkeland C (1988a) Second-order ecological effects of nutrient input
into coral communities. Galaxea 7:91–100
Birkeland C (1988b) Geographic comparisons of coral-reef community
processes. Proc 6th Int Coral Reef Symp Brisbane 1:211–220
Birkeland C (1989) The influence of echinoderms on coral-reef
communities. In: Jangoux M, Lawrence JM (eds) Echinoderm studies. AA Balkema, Rotterdam, pp 1–79
Birkeland C, Lucas JS (1990) Acanthaster planci: major management
problem of coral reefs. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 257 pp

13
Birkeland C, Smalley TL (1981) Comparison of demersal plankton
from comparable substrata from a high island and an atoll. Proc
4th Int Coral Reef Symp Manila 1:437–442
Birkeland C, Nelson SG, Wilkins S, Gates P (1985) Effects of grazing
by herbivorous fishes on coral reef community metabolism. Proc
5th Int Coral Reef Congr Tahiti 4:47–51
Birkeland C, Miller MW, Piniak GA, Eakin CM, Weijerman M,
McElhany P, Dunlap M, Brainard RE (2013) Safety in numbers?
Abundance may not safeguard corals from increasing carbon dioxide. BioScience 63:967–974
Bouchet P, Bour W (1980) The Trochus fishery in New Caledonia. S
Pac Comm Fish Newsl 20:9–12
Brainard RE, Birkeland C, Eakin CM, McElhany P, Miller MW,
Patterson M, Piniak GA (2011) Status review report of 82 candidate
coral species petitioned under the U.S. Endangered Species Act. US
Dep Commer, NOAA Tech Memo, NOAA-TM-NMFS-PIFSC-27,
530 p + 1 Appendix
Brander L, van Beukering P (2013) The total economic value of
U.S. coral reefs: a review of the literature. NOAA Coral Reef
Conservation Program, Silver Spring, 28 pp
Brock RE, Brock JH (1977) A method for quantitatively assessing the
infaunal community in coral rock. Limnol Oceanogr 22:948–951
Bruckner AW (2002) Life-saving products from coral reefs. Issues Sci
Technol 18(3)
Bruggemann JH, van Oppen MJH, Breeman AM (1994a) Foraging by
the stoplight parrotfish Sparisoma viride. I. Food selection in different, socially determined habitats. Mar Ecol Progr Ser 106:41–55
Bruggemann JH, Begeman J, Bosma EM, Verburg P, Breeman AM
(1994b) Foraging by the stoplight parrotfish Sparisoma viride.
II. Intake and assimilation of food, protein and energy. Mar Ecol
Progr Ser 106:57–71
Bruno JF, Selig ER (2007) Regional decline of coral cover in the IndoPacific: timing, extent, and subregional comparisons. PLoS One 2:
e711
Bruno JF, Precht WF, Vroom PS, Aronson RB (2014) Coral reef
baselines: how much macroalgae is natural? Mar Pollut Bull 80:24–29
Carpenter RC (1986) Partitioning herbivory and its effects on coral reef
algal communities. Ecol Monogr 56:345–363
Chave KE, Smith SV, Roy KJ (1972) Carbonate production by coral
reefs. Mar Geol 12:123–140
Chesher RH (1969) Destruction of Pacific corals by the sea star
Acanthaster planci. Science 165:280–283
Cole AJ, Pratchett MS, Jones GP (2008) Diversity and functional
importance of coral-feeding fishes on tropical coral reefs. Fish
Fish 9:286–307
Colgan MW (1987) Coral reef recovery on Guam (Micronesia) after
catastrophic predation by Acanthaster planci: a study of community
development. Ecology 68:1592–1605
Connell JH (1978) Diversity in tropical rain forests and coral reefs.
Science 199:1302–1310
Costanza R, d’Arge R, de Groot R, Farber S, Grasso M, Hannon B,
Limburg K, Naeem S, O’Neill R, Paruelo J, Raskin RG, Sutton P,
van den Belt M (1997) The value of the world’s ecosystem services
and natural capital. Nature 387:253–260
Costanza R, de Groot R, Sutton P, van der Ploeg S, Anderson SJ,
Kubiszewski I, Farber S, Turner RK (2014) Changes in the global
value of ecosystem services. Glob Environ Chang 26:152–158
Courchamp F, Angulo E, Rivalan P, Hall RJ, Signoret L et al (2006)
Rarity value and species extinction: the anthropogenic Allee effect.
PLoS Biol 4:e415
Craik W, Kenchington R, Kelleher G (1990) Coral-reef management.
In: Dubinsky Z (ed) Ecosystems of the world 25: coral reefs.
Elsevier Science Publishers, New York, pp 453–467
Dana TF (1975) Development of contemporary Eastern Pacific coral
reefs. Mar Biol 33:355–374

14
De Goeij JM, De Kluijver A, Van Duyl FC, Vacelet J, Wijffels RH, De
Goeij AFPM, Cleutjens JPM, Schutte B (2009) Cell kinetics of the
marine sponge Halisarca caerulea reveal rapid cell turnover and
shedding. J Exp Biol 212:3892–3900
De’ath G, Fabricius KE, Sweatman H, Puotinen M (2012) The 27-year
decline of coral cover on the Great Barrier Reef and its causes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:17995–17999
DeMartini EE, Friedlander AM, Sandin SA, Sala E (2008) Differences
in fish-assemblage structure between fished and unfished atolls in
the northern Line Islands, central Pacific. Mar Ecol Progr Ser
365:199–215
Derr M (1992) Raiders of the reef. Audubon 94:48–56
Eldredge LG (1994) Perspectives in aquatic exotic species management
in the Pacific islands. I. Introductions of commercially significant
aquatic organisms in the Pacific islands. South Pacific Commission,
Inshore Fisheries Research Project, Technical Document 7, 127 pp
Emery AR (1968) Preliminary observations on coral reef plankton.
Limnol Oceanogr 13:293–303
Fabricius KE (2005) Effects of terrestrial runoff on the ecology of
corals and coral reefs: review and synthesis. Mar Pollut Bull
50:125–146
Fabricius KE, Dommisse M (2000) Depletion of suspended particulate
matter over coastal reef communities dominated by zooxanthellate
soft corals. Mar Ecol Progr Ser 196:157–167
Fabricius KE, Metzner J (2004) Scleractinian walls of mouths: predation on coral larvae by corals. Coral Reefs 23:245–248
Fabricius K, Okaji K, De’ath G (2010) Three lines of evidence to link
outbreaks of the crown-of-thorns seastar Acanthaster planci to the
release of larval food limitation. Coral Reefs 29:593–605
Fenner D (2014) Fishing down the largest coral reef fish species. Mar
Pollut Bull 84:9–16
Friedlander AM, DeMartini EE (2002) Contrasts in density, size, and
biomass of reef fishes between the northwestern and the main
Hawaiian islands: the effects of fishing down apex predators. Mar
Ecol Progr Ser 230:253–264
Friedlander A, Aeby G, Brown E, Clark A, Coles S, Dollar S, Hunter C,
Jokiel P, Smith J, Walsh B (2008) The state of coral reef ecosystems
of the main Hawaiian Islands. In: Waddell JE, Clarke AM (eds) The
state of coral reef ecosystems of the United States and Pacific Freely
Associated States: 2008. NOAA/National Centers for Coastal
Ocean Science, Silver Spring, pp 219–257
Fuller RW, Cardellina JH II, Kato Y, Brinen LS, Clardy J, Snader KM,
Boyd MR (1992) A pentahalogenated monoterpene from the red alga
Portieria hornemani produces a novel cytotoxicity profile against a
diverse panel of human tumor cell lines. J Med Chem 35:3007–3011
Gardner TA, Côté IM, Gill JA, Grant A, Watkinson AR (2003) Longterm region-wide declines in Caribbean corals. Science
301:958–960
Gerber R, Marshall N (1974) Reef pseudoplankton in lagoon trophic
systems. Proc 2nd Int Coral Reef Symp Brisbane 1:105–107
Gladfelter WB (1982) White-band disease in Acropora palmata:
implications for the structure and growth of shallow reefs. Bull
Mar Sci 32:639–643
Glynn PW (1973) Ecology of a Caribbean coral reef. The Porites reefflat biotope. II. Plankton community with evidence for depletion.
Mar Biol 20:297–318
Glynn PW (1990) Coral mortality and disturbances to coral reefs in the
tropical eastern Pacific. In: Glynn PW (ed) Global ecological
consequences of the 1982–83 El Niño-Southern Oscillation.
Elsevier Press, Amsterdam, pp 55–126
Goldman B, Talbot FH (1976) Aspects of the ecology of coral reef
fishes. In: Jones OA, Endean R (eds) Biology and geology of coral
reefs. III. Biology 2. Academic, New York, pp 125–254
Grigg RW, Hey R (1992) Paleoceanography of the tropical eastern
Pacific Ocean. Science 255:172–178

C. Birkeland
Grigg RW, Polovina JJ, Atkinson MJ (1984) Model of a coral reef
ecosystem. III. Resource limitation, community regulation, fisheries
yield and resource management. Coral Reefs 3:23–27
Hamner WM, Carleton JH (1979) Copepod swarms: attributes and role
in coral reef ecosystems. Limnol Oceanogr 24:1–14
Hamner WM, Jones MS, Carleton JH, Hauri IR, Williams DMB (1988)
Zooplankton, planktivorous fish, and water currents on a windward
reef face: Great Barrier Reef, Australia. Bull Mar Sci 42:459–479
Hatcher BG (1997) Organic production and decomposition. In:
Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman and Hall,
New York, pp 140–174
Heslinga GA, Perron FE, Orak O (1984) Mass culture of giant clams
(F. Tridacnidae) in Palau. Aquaculture 39:197–215
Hughes TP (1994) Catastrophes, phase shifts, and large-scale degradation of a Caribbean coral reef. Science 265:1547–1551
Hughes TP, Tanner JE (2000) Recruitment failure, life histories, and
long-term decline of Caribbean corals. Ecology 81:2250–2263
Hughes TP, Baird AH, Dinsdale EA, Moltschaniwskyj NA, Pratchett
MS, Tanner JE, Willis BL (2000) Supply-side ecology works both
ways: the link between benthic adults, fecundity, and larval recruits.
Ecology 81:2241–2249
Huntington BE, Karnauskas M, Lirman D (2011) Corals fail to recover
at a Caribbean marine reserve despite ten years of reserve designation. Coral Reefs 30:1077–1085
Jackson JBC (1997) Reefs since Columbus. Coral Reefs 16:S23–S32
Jackson JBC (2014) Status and trends of Caribbean coral reefs:
1970–2012. Executive summary. US Virgin islands II. Global
Coral Reef Monitoring Network, Washington, DC, pp 11–24
Johannes RE (1975) Pollution and degradation of coral reef
communities. In: Wood EJF, Johannes RE (eds) Tropical marine
pollution. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 13–51
Johns KA, Osborne KO, Logan M (2014) Contrasting rates of coral
recovery and reassembly in coral communities on the Great Barrier
Reef. Coral Reefs 33:553–563
Kenyon JC, Brainard RE (2006) Second recorded episode of mass coral
bleaching in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. Atoll Res Bull
543:505–523
Kinsey DW (1983) Standards of performance in coral reef primary
production and carbonate turnover. In: Barnes DJ
(ed) Perspectives on coral reefs. Brian Clouston Publisher, Manuka,
pp 209–220
Kleypas JA, Buddemeier RW, Gattuso J-P (2001) The future of coral
reefs in an age of global change. Int J Earth Sci (Geol Rundsch)
90:426–437
Klumpp DW, McKinnon AD (1992) Community structure, biomass
and productivity of epilithic algal communities on the Great Barrier
Reef: dynamics at different spatial scales. Mar Ecol Progr Ser
86:77–89
Klumpp DW, McKinnon D, Daniel P (1987) Damselfish territories:
zones of high productivity on coral reefs. Mar Ecol Progr Ser
40:41–51
Lessios HA, Robertson DR, Cubit JD (1984) Spread of Diadema mass
mortality through the Caribbean. Science 226:335–337
Mattson JS, DeFoor JA II (1985) Natural resource damages: restitution
as a mechanism to slow destruction of Florida’s natural resources. J
Land Use Environ Law 1:295–319
McArdle B (2003) Report: statistical analyses for Coral Reef Advisory
Group, American Samoa, 142 pp
Munro JL (1984) Coral reef fisheries and world fish production.
ICLARM Newsl 7(4):3–4
Murray JM, Watson GJ (2014) A critical assessment of marine aquarist
biodiversity data and commercial aquaculture: identifying gaps in
culture initiatives to inform local fisheries managers. PLoS One 9(9)
Muscatine L, Porter JW (1977) Reef corals: mutualistic symbioses
adapted to nutrient-poor environments. Bioscience 27:454–460

1

Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene

Muscatine L, McCloskey LR, Marian RW (1981) Estimating the daily
contribution of carbon from zooxanthellae to coral animal respiration. Limnol Oceanogr 26:601–611
Nadon MO, Baum JK, Williams ID, McPherson JM, Zgliczynski BJ,
Richards BL, Schroeder RE, Brainard RE (2012) Re-creating missing population baselines for Pacific reef sharks. Conserv Biol
26:493–503
Nixon SW (1982) Nutrient dynamics, primary production and fisheries
yields of lagoons. Oceanol Acta 5:357–371
Odum HT, Odum EP (1955) Trophic structure and productivity of a
windward coral reef community on Eniwetok Atoll. Ecol Monogr
25:291–320
Paulay G (1997) Diversity and distribution of reef organisms. In:
Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman and Hall,
New York, pp 298–353
Porter JW, Porter KG (1977) Quantitative sampling of demersal plankton migrating from different coral reef substrates. Limnol Oceanogr
22:553–556
Reiswig HM (1981) Partial carbon and energy budgets of the
bacteriosponge Verongia fistularis (Porifera: Demospongiae) in
Barbados. Mar Ecol 2:273–293
Rhyne AL, Tlusty MF, Kaufman L (2012a) Long-term trends of coral
imports into the United States indicate future opportunities for
ecosystem and society benefits. Conserv Lett 5:478–485
Rhyne AL, Tlusty MF, Schofield PJ, Kaufman L, Morris JA Jr,
Bruckner AW (2012b) Revealing the appetite of the marine aquarium fish trade: the volume and biodiversity of fish imported into the
United States. PLoS One 7(5):e35808
Rizzari JR, Frisch AJ, Connolly SR (2014) How robust are estimates of
coral reef shark depletion? Biol Conserv 176:39–47
Rogers CS, Muller EM (2012) Bleaching, disease and recovery in the
threatened scleractinian coral Acropora palmata in St. John, US
Virgin islands: 2003–2010. Coral Reefs 31:807–819
Ryther JH (1969) Photosynthesis and fish production in the sea. Science
166:72–76
Salm RV (1984) Man’s use of coral reefs. In: Kenchington RA, Hudson
BET (eds) Coral reef management handbook. UNESCO, Jakarta, pp
15–21
Salvat B (1992) Coral reefs – a challenging ecosystem for human
societies. Glob Environ Chang 2:12–18
Sandin SA, Smith JE, DeMartini EE, Dinsdale EA, Donner SD,
Friedlander AM, Konotchick T, Malay M, Maragos JE, Obura D,
Pantos O, Paulay G, Richie M, Rohwer F, Schroeder RE, Walsh S,
Jackson JBC, Knowlton N, Sala E (2008) Baselines and degradation of
coral reefs in the northern Line Islands. PLoS One 3(2):e1548, 11 pp
Sano M (2000) Stability of reef fish assemblages: responses to coral
recovery after catastrophic predation by Acanthaster planci. Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 198:121–130
Sargent MC, Austin TS (1949) Organic productivity of an atoll. Am
Geophys Union Trans 30:245–249
Sargent MC, Austin TS (1954) Biologic economy of coral reefs.
Oceanography (biologic). US Geol Surv Prof Pap 260-E:293–300
Schoepf V, Grottoli AG, Warner ME, Cai W-J, Melman TF, Hoadley
KD, Pettay DT, Hu X, Li Q, Xu H, Wang Y, Matsui Y, Baumann JH
(2013) Coral energy reserves and calcification in a high-CO2 world
at two temperatures. PLoS One 8(10):e75049. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0075049
Sebens KP (1997) Zooplankton capture by reef corals: corals are not
plants! Reef Encount 21:10–15
Small AM, Adey WH, Spoon D (1998) Are current estimates of coral
reef diversity too low? The view through the window of a microcosm. Atoll Res Bull 458:1–20

15
Smith SV (1978) Coral-reef area and the contributions of reefs to
processes and resources in the world’s oceans. Nature
273:225–226
South GR (1993) Seaweeds. In: Wright A, Hill L (eds) Nearshore
marine resources of the South Pacific. Forum Fisheries Agency,
Honiara, pp 683–710
Spalding MD, Ravilious C, Green EP (2001) World atlas of coral reefs.
University of California Press, Berkeley, 424 pp
Spurgeon JPG (1992) The economic valuation of coral reefs. Mar
Pollut Bull 24:529–536
Stella JS, Pratchett MS, Hutchings PA, Jones GP (2011) Coralassociated invertebrates: diversity, ecological importance and
vulnerability to disturbance. Oceanogr Mar Biol Ann Rev
49:43–104
Sudekum AE, Parrish JD, Radtke RL, Ralston S (1991) Life history and
ecology of large jacks in undisturbed, shallow, oceanic
communities. Fish Bull US 89:493–513
Thornhill DJ, Rotjan RD, Todd BD, Chilcoat GC, Iglesias-Prieto R,
Kemp DW, LaJeunesse TC, Reynolds JM, Schmidt GW,
Shannon T, Warner ME, Fitt WK (2011) A connection between
colony biomass and death in Caribbean reef-building corals. PLoS
One 6(12):e29535. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0029535
Tissot BN, Hallacher LE (2003) Effects of aquarium collectors on coral
reef fishes in Kona, Hawai’i. Conserv Biol 17:1759–1768
Tissot BN, Best BA, Borneman EH, Bruckner AW, Cooper CH,
D’Agnes H, Fitzgerald TP, Leland A, Lieberman S, Mathews AA
(2010) How US ocean policy and market power can reform the coral
reef wildlife trade. Mar Policy 34:1385–1388
Tomascik T, van Woesik R, Mah AJ (1996) Rapid coral colonization of
a recent lava flow following a volcanic eruption, Banda Islands,
Indonesia. Coral Reefs 15:169–175
Trebilco R, Bauma JK, Salomon AK, Dulvy NK (2013) Ecosystem
ecology: size-based constraints on the pyramids of life. Trends Ecol
Evol 28:423–431
Tribollet A, Golubic S (2005) Cross-shelf differences in the pattern and
pace of bioerosion of experimental carbonate substrates exposed for
3 years on the northern Great Barrier Reef, Australia. Coral Reefs
24:422–434
Tribollet A, Langdon C, Golubic S, Atkinson M (2006) Endolithic
microflora are major primary producers in dead carbonate substrates
of Hawaiian coral reefs. J Phycol 42:292–303
Wabnitz C, Taylor M, Green E, Razak T (2003) From ocean to aquarium: the global trade in marine ornamental species. UNEP –
WCMC, Cambridge, 66 pp
Ward-Paige CA, Mora C, Lotze HK, Pattengill-Semmens C,
McClenachan L, Arias-Castro E, Myers RA (2010) Large-scale
absence of sharks on reefs in the greater Caribbean: a footprint of
human pressures. PLoS One 5(8):e11968. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0011968
Wells S, Hanna N (1992) The Greenpeace book of coral reefs. Sterling
Publishing Co., New York, 160 pp
Wilkinson C (2008) Status of coral reefs of the world: 2008. Global
Coral Reef monitoring Network and Reef and Rainforest Research
Centre, Townsville, 298 pp
Wilkinson C, Souter D (eds) (2008) Status of Caribbean coral reefs after
bleaching and hurricanes in 2005. Global Coral Reef Monitoring
Network and Reef Rainforest Research Centre, Townsville, 152 pp
Williams D McB, Hatcher AI (1983) Structure of fish communities on
outer slopes of inshore, mid-shelf and outer shelf reefs of the Great
Barrier Reef. Mar Ecol Progr Ser 10:239–250
Wing SR, Wing ES (2001) Prehistoric fisheries in the Caribbean. Coral
Reefs 20:1–8

2

Changing Influences Between Life
and Limestones in Earth History
Pamela Hallock

Extinction is forever.
(Anonymous)

Abstract

Coral reefs are among the most beautiful, diverse and fascinating ecosystems in the modern
oceans. For anyone intrigued by reefs, their geologic history is a never-ending mystery
series, complete with paradoxes to unravel and mass “murders” to solve given only partial
texts and enigmatic clues. Limestones not only record much of the history of life on Earth,
they are a major reason why life occurs on Earth! Moreover, they “go missing” at
catastrophic events that, on several occasions, caused extinctions of more than half of all
multicellular species. The production and preservation of reef limestones is intimately
connected to the Earth’s biogeochemical cycles, especially of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and
phosphorus. Continental collisions, changes in sea-floor spreading rates, massive meteor
impacts, and glacial-interglacial cycles with resulting changes in sea level, are all subplots
in the history of reefs. The evolution of photosynthesis that triggered the first global
“pollution” event, the escalation of predation as indicated by increasing prevalence of
shells, and the ubiquitous and repeated development of mutualistic symbioses, provide
analogies to modern environmental challenges. The Earth’s biogeochemical cycles, which
have evolved over more than 4,000 million years, have been profoundly disrupted by
human activities. Carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, for example, has increased more
over the past 200 years than it did between glacial advances and retreats. Within this
century, atmospheric CO2 concentrations will rise to levels comparable to those 40–50
million years ago. The records preserved in limestones can provide scientists and policy
makers with insights into likely consequences of human activities for the future not only of
reefs, but of the diversity of ecosystems on Earth.
Keywords

Carbonate  Tectonics  Calcification  Biogeochemical  Carbon cycle

2.1

P. Hallock (*)
College of Marine Science, University of South Florida, 830 1st Street
South, St. Petersburg, FL 33701, USA
e-mail: pmuller@usf.edu

Reefs, Limestones, and Human History

Limestones and coral reefs have been used by human
populations for most of human history. Not surprisingly,
the features that made them useful are characteristics inherent to the environments in which reef creatures lived and the
minerals from which they made their shells and skeletons.
Reef ecosystems provided food to coastal populations, and
where there were uplifted reefs near the shorelines, those

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_2

17

18

P. Hallock

humans utilized caves and springs for shelter and fresh
water. Ancient limestones, moreover, are not restricted to
coastlines. As limestones are everywhere prone to dissolution, cave formation, and freshwater springs, evidence of
early human habitation can be found in limestone caves
nearly everywhere they occur on land. Another characteristic of limestone, which early humans probably discovered
when they lived in caves, is that it is softer than most other
rocks and can be readily carved. In their caves they made
holes for storage or hanging items; they also made
implements, building material, decorative items and statues.
With the Industrial Revolution, limestones gained much
additional economic value because many ancient underground reef provinces are major oil and gas reservoirs;
those shallower are often important aquifers. Those same
characteristics noted above, solubility and relative softness
compared with many other kinds of rocks, are again key
features. The porous to cavernous nature of many limestones
make them exceptional hydrocarbon reservoirs. And their
relative softness made drilling very feasible using early
technology. As a result, the literature on ancient reefs and
lesser carbonate buildups is vast. A few of the multitude of
useful compilations include Milliman (1974), Wilson
(1975), Bathurst (1976), Toomey (1981), Scholle
et al. (1983), Fagerstrom (1987), Crevello et al. (1989), Riding (1991), James and Clarke (1997), Camoin and Davies
(1998), Wood (1999), Stanley (2001), Kiessling
et al. (2002), Pomar and Hallock (2008), and Swart
et al. (2009). This chapter cannot provide the details available in these books. Instead it summarizes the significance of
biogenic reefs and limestones within the context of environmental conditions through Earth history.

2.2

Biogenic Sediments and Reefs

Coral, oyster, and other biogenic reefs are produced by the
combination of biological, chemical, physical and geological
processes. Ideally, a biogenic reef is a significant, rigid skeletal framework that influences deposition of sediments in its
vicinity and that is topographically higher than surrounding
sediments. For example, a coral reef is a rigid skeletal structure in which stony corals are major framework constituents.
Another term for a limestone structure or buildup produced by
biological activity is bioherm. Less rigid accumulations of
biologically produced sediments are often referred to as reef
mounds (James 1997; Schlager 2003).
Calcareous shells and skeletons produced by a wide variety of protists, algae and animals become biogenic
sediments upon the death of those organisms. The metabolic
activities of some kinds of bacteria and microalgae also
contribute to the biogeochemical precipitation of calcareous
minerals, producing microbolites, stromatolites, and ooids in

the benthos, and lime muds (whitings) in seawater overlying
shallow banks and shelves. While biogenic carbonate
sediments can occur with siliciclastic sediments, carbonates
are most prevalent in marine environments that are separated
by distance or physical barrier from substantial influx of
sediments from land.
Nearly 50 % of the modern ocean floor is covered by
pelagic carbonate ooze, which includes minute calcareous
plates produced by coccolithophorids (microalgae) and
shells of planktic foraminifers (protists), both of which live
primarily in the surface waters of the open ocean (Kennett
1982; Seibold and Berger 2010). Shells and skeletons of
benthic organisms, as well as microbially produced particles,
also are important sediment constituents, especially on continental shelves, in some coastal areas, and on oceanic banks
and shoals. Although the area over which pelagic carbonates
accumulate is many times greater than the total area of
neritic accumulation, Morse and Mackenzie (1990)
estimated that ~16 % of annual global carbonate production
in modern oceans occurs on reefs, shelves and banks. Moreover, they estimated that more than 80 % of the pelagic
production dissolves in the water column or on the sea
floor, while only about 40 % of neritic production is lost to
dissolution. Thus, neritic carbonates account for roughly a
third of the annual carbonate sedimentation globally.
Whether biogenic constituents make up most of the bottom sediments or whether they are only minor contributors
depends upon several factors. One factor is the rate at which
sediments from land enter the marine environment via runoff
from rivers and streams, thereby diluting the biogenic contribution. Another factor is the rate at which shells and
skeletons are produced by biotic communities living in the
marine environment. A third factor is the rate at which
sediments, both terrigenous and biogenic, are removed
from that environment by transport or dissolution. The biotic
community not only produces sediments, it also affects rates
of dissolution, physical breakdown and transport of
sediments.
Lees (1975) recognized three classes of shallow-water
carbonate sediments, based upon their major constituents.
He called the simplest group “foramol” sediments after two
of the most important constituents: benthic foraminifers and
molluscs, especially fragments of snail and bivalve shells.
Lees noted that foramol sediments are characteristic of temperate shelves, but sometimes dominate in tropical areas
where reefs do not occur. Other common constituents of
foramol sediments are fragments of coralline red algae, sea
urchin spines and plates, bryozoans, barnacles, and worm
tubes. James (1997) recommended using the term
“heterozoan” to describe such assemblages because
constituents other than foraminifers and mollusks commonly
dominate. Lees’ (1975) second category is called
“chloralgal” for its dominant constituent, the remains of

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

calcareous green algae such as Halimeda; foramol
constituents are secondary components. Chloralgal
sediments are prevalent in expansive shallows like Florida
Bay and the Bahama Banks, and in mesophotic (¼low light)
settings including the lagoon behind the Ribbon Reefs of the
northern Australian Great Barrier Reef. Lees’ (1975) third
sediment category is “chlorozoan”, which is the typical
sediment around coral reefs. Coral, along with coralline
and calcareous algal remains, are the characteristic
constituents, with the shells of larger benthic foraminifers,
as well as molluscan and urchin shells or fragments, as
secondary components. Larger benthic foraminifers, which
depend on algal symbionts in a relationship very similar to
that of corals and their zooxanthellae, may locally dominate
sand-sized sediments. Bryozoan, barnacle, and worm shell
debris are typically scarce in chlorozoan sediments because
these organisms thrive in waters with richer food supplies
than do corals. James (1997) combined the chlorozoan and
chloralgal assemblages into the “photozoan” assemblage to
reflect the dependence of both associations on
photosynthesis.
Whether biogenic sediments accumulate in place or are
transported elsewhere for deposition depends upon bottom
topography, the strengths of waves and currents, and the
ability of the benthic community to reduce sediment transport. Fagerstrom (1987) proposed “guild” terminology to
characterize benthic organisms by their geological roles in
reef communities (Table 2.1). He used the term “bafflers”
for organisms that project upwards from the sediment,
slowing water motion and providing quieter places for
sediments to settle. Organisms that live in or directly on
the sediment, holding or encrusting it in place, can be considered “binders”. Microalgae and bacteria grow and
develop mats directly upon sediments, accumulating where
wave and current motion is limited or intermittent. Bacterial
filaments provide strength to these mats, which can resist as
much as ten times more wave or current energy than is
required to move similar unbound sediments (Grant and
Gust 1987). Stromatolites are biogenic structures consisting
of layered accumulations of microbolites, which include
trapped or secreted sediment in algal or bacterial mats
(Grotzinger and Knoll 1999; Reid et al. 2000). Ancient
stromatolites produced the first bioherms in the fossil record.
The best known modern stromatolites occur in Shark’s Bay
and elsewhere in West Australia (Logan et al. 1974; Reid
et al. 2003), as well as several localities on the Bahama
Banks (Dill et al. 1986; Reid et al. 1995) and elsewhere.
A variety of elongate, upward-projecting plants and
animals can baffle water motion and trap sediments. On
modern shallow shelves, seagrass beds effectively stabilize
sediment over vast areas (Agawin and Duarte 2002).
Seagrass blades slow water flow, allowing suspended
sediments to settle out. Sediments are then held in place by

19

extensive seagrass root and rhizome systems, as well as by
the holdfasts of algae living within the seagrass bed.
Sediment-dwelling macroalgae are also effective bafflers
and binders, as are sponges, soft corals, sea whips and sea
fans. In fossil reefs, a variety of less familiar organisms
performed similar roles (Fagerstrom 1987; Wood 1999;
Keissling et al. 2002).
The ultimate bafflers are the biogenic framework
constructors, which in modern tropical shallow-water
environments are primarily stony corals. These organisms
grow upward or outward in branching, massive or platy
morphologies, secreting substantial quantities of calcium
carbonate, while trapping even greater quantities of sediment within and in the lee of the reef framework. Encrusting
coralline algae bind the reef framework and enclose
sediments in massive, wave-resistant structures recognized
as coral reefs.
The three-dimensional topography of the reef provides
abundant habitats for the diverse array of organisms that
dwell within the reef structure. Some of these organisms
are encrusters, including coralline algae, many kinds of
sponges and some kinds of sessile foraminifers and
mollusks. Many produce shells or skeletons that contribute
to reef sediments. Thousands of species are wholly soft
bodied and have little direct influence on the reef structure.
All contribute to the diversity and energy flow within the
community.
A variety of organisms also contribute to the breakdown
of the reef structure by boring into it or scraping away at it as
they graze. Such organisms are known collectively as
“bioeroders” (Neumann 1966) or “destroyers” (Fagerstrom
1987). Bioeroding organisms are a diverse and important
component of the reef community (Chap. 4). Organisms that
bore or etch their way into the reef include bacteria, fungi,
several varieties of sponges, worms, clams, and urchins.
Organisms that scrape away limestone as they graze algae
include urchins, chitons, snails and fish. Many reef fish feed
by biting off bits of coral or coralline algae, subsequently
defecating sand. In a healthy, actively accreting reef,
bioeroders contribute to the diversity of microhabitats within
the massive reef structure. However, if reef growth slows in
response to natural or anthropogenic environmental stresses,
the rates of destruction can exceed rates of accretion (Glynn
1988; Hallock 2001).

2.3

Basic Carbonate Chemistry

The major chemical constituent of calcareous sediments and
limestones is calcium carbonate (CaCO3). Organisms
secrete CaCO3 typically either as calcite or aragonite
(Morse and Mackenzie 1990; Hallock 2011). The obvious
difference between these minerals is their crystal structure;

XXXX**
XXXX
XX
*******

XXXX
XXXX
XXXX**
*******

XXXX**

*******

Binders
XXXXXXXX
XXXXXX
XXXX
XXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXX**

XXXX**
XXXX

Encrusters
XXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXX

XXXX**

XXXX**

Framework builders
XXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXX

XXXX**
*******

XXXX**
XXXX**
XXXX

Bafflers
XXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXX
XXXXXX
XXXXXXXXX
XXXX
XXXX
XXXXXXXXX
XXXX

By bioerosion

XXXX**
X*******
XX

XXXX
XXXX
XXXXXXXXX
XXX
XXXX**
XXXX**
XXXX

XXXXXXXX**

Sediment producers
XXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXX

XXXX
XXXX
XXXXXXXXXX

XXXX
XXXXXX
XXXXXX

XXXXXXXXX

XXXXXXXXX

XXXX

Bioeroders

XXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXX

XXXX
XXXX

XXXX

XXXX
XXXXXXXXX

Dwellers

XXXX indicates relative importance in modern shallow-water reefs, XXXX** indicates that the group was more important in fossil buildups, and ****** indicates primarily important in fossil
reefs

Stony corals
Coralline red algae
Calcareous green algae
Seagrass
Cyanobacteria
Non-calcareous algae
Octocorals
Sponges
Foraminifers
Echinoids
Crinoids
Bivalves
Gastropods
Other mollusks
Bryozoans
Brachiopods
Barnacles
Annelids
Fish

Table 2.1 Important roles (guilds) taxa play in carbonate buildups

20
P. Hallock

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

21

Table 2.2 Characteristics of the principle calcium carbonate minerals
Mineral name
Chemical
composition
Crystal system

Aragonite
CaCO3

Calcite
CaCO3

Mg-Calcite
(Ca, Mg)(CO3)2

Orthorhombic

Rhombohedral

Habit
Fracture
Hardness
Solubility

Columnar or fibrous
Subconcoidal
3.5–4
~1.5 more soluble than
calcite
Stronger than calcite per
unit Ca2+
For branching
morphologies, muscle
attachments
Warm, supersaturated
seawater with high Mg:
Ca ratio
Metastable, soluble

Coarsely crystalline to massive
Concoidal
3
Least soluble, most stable form

Randomly substituted MgCO3 in a
disordered calcite lattice
Coarsely crystalline
Disordered
3 or less
At 25 C, <8.5 mol% MgCO3 is less soluble
than aragonite
At 25 C, >8.5 mol% MgCO3 is more
soluble than aragonite
Does not require genetic capability to
exclude Mg; advantageous where strength is
less important
Thermodynamically controlled; chemistry
varies with environmental conditions

Other
Biological
advantages
Environmental
advantages
Disadvantages
under specific
conditions

More brittle than aragonite
Requires less energy to precipitate and
maintain under lower saturation states
Most stable at lower carbonate saturation
states–cooler waters, higher pressure, low
Mg:Ca ratios
Excluding Mg requires energy and genetic
capability

calcite forms rhombohedral crystals while aragonite forms
orthorhombic crystals (Table 2.2). Crystal structure is biologically significant because aragonite is structurally stronger than calcite, which is important for organisms with
upright or branching morphologies. Another difference is
in the chemical stability of the minerals at temperatures
and pressures found on land and in the oceans. Aragonite
more readily precipitates in warm seawaters that are supersaturated with CaCO3, but it is less stable in cooler seawaters
and in freshwater.
In warm environments, calcite precipitation tends to be
inhibited by Mg2+ dissolved in seawater. Thus, organisms
must either expend energy to remove Mg2+ from the
calcifying fluids or incorporate it into the calcite crystal
structure, thereby producing Mg-calcite shells or skeletons
(Hallock 2011). Mg-calcite is energetically advantageous in
terms of calcification, but the resulting calcite is structurally
weaker. The Mg2+/Ca2+ ratio in seawater, along with temperature, determines how much Mg2+ is incorporated in
Mg-calcite shells. Over time, most aragonite and
Mg-calcite either dissolve or recrystallize, so calcite
predominates in ancient limestones.
The solubility of CaCO3 is easily misunderstood if one
expects this substance to behave like other familiar solids.
For example, table salt and sugar both dissolve faster in hot
water than in cold. CaCO3 is more soluble in cold water. The
key to this intuitive discrepancy is in the reaction of carbon
dioxide with water:
CO2 þ H2 O <¼¼> H2 CO3 <¼¼> Hþ þ HCO3 
<¼¼> 2Hþ þ CO3 2

ð2:1Þ

Solubility, structural limitations

That is, carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) combine to
form carbonic acid (H2CO3), which can then dissociate to
hydrogen ions (H+) and bicarbonate (HCO3) or carbonate
(CO32) ions. The two-headed arrows indicate that the reaction can go either direction depending upon environmental
conditions. The dissolved inorganic carbon concentration of
a sample of seawater is the sum of the carbon in these four
states. In surface seawaters, CO2 is only a small fraction of
the total carbon, often less than 1 %, while HCO3 typically
dominates (Morse and Mackenzie 1990).
How much CO2 can be dissolved in water and which state
predominates depends primarily upon temperature, pressure,
and concentrations of other dissolved materials (Morse and
Mackenzie 1990). Cold water can hold far more CO2 in
solution than warm water; an example is a cold carbonated
beverage, which loses CO2 as it warms. Similarly, water
under pressure can hold more CO2 in solution. Addition of
dissolved salts (i.e., increasing salinity) decreases the ability
of water to dissolve CO2. Surface waters of the ocean can
hold less CO2 in solution than deeper waters, and tropical
waters hold less than temperate or polar waters.
Carbon dioxide and water react with CaCO3 in the following way:
CO2 þ H2 O þ CaCO3 <¼¼> Ca2þ þ 2HCO3 

ð2:2Þ

The more CO2 that is dissolved in water, the more readily the
water can dissolve CaCO3. Conversely, any process that
removes CO2 from solution promotes the precipitation of
CaCO3. Since calcium ion (Ca2+) and bicarbonate ion
(HCO3) are both abundant in seawater, modern tropical
ocean-surface waters are most conducive to the precipitation

22

P. Hallock

of CaCO3, while deeper and colder ocean waters are more
apt to dissolve CaCO3.

2.4

Limestones and Earth History

Limestones and dolostones are a major reason that life exists
on Earth. Since limestones are CaCO3 and dolostones are
Ca,Mg(CO3)2, they store immense quantities of CO2 in the
Earth’s crustal rocks. Without limestones, the concentration
of CO2 in the Earth’s atmosphere would be about 100 times
higher, similar to that of Venus, and the surface of the Earth
would be nearly as hot as that of Venus (425  C) (Condie
1989).
Carbon dioxide is referred to as a greenhouse gas because
it absorbs heat energy. Most of the energy reaching a planet’s
surface from the Sun is visible light. The planet’s surface
absorbs that radiation, is warmed by it, and reradiates heat
(infrared radiation) back into space. Carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere acts as an insulating blanket by trapping part of
the infrared radiation the planet would otherwise lose into
space.
Venus and Earth are quite similar planets. A major factor
in their histories, which culminated in life on Earth but not
on Venus, is distance from the Sun. This determines the
intensity of solar radiation falling on the planet’s surface.
Based on distance from the sun and without considering
atmospheric effects, the average surface temperature of primordial Venus is estimated as 60  C and of primordial Earth
as 30  C. Volcanic eruptions released water vapor, hydrogen sulfide, methane, ammonia, carbon dioxide, and other
gases from these planets’ interiors, producing atmospheres.
Approximately 10 % of the gaseous volcanic emission was
CO2. So both planets had insulating atmospheres and likely
were somewhat warmer than estimates based only on
distance.
Carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere during
weathering of rocks (Berner 2006). Rainwater, in which
carbon dioxide is dissolved, falls on rock (represented here
by basalt – CaSiO3), slowly weathering it away to dissolved
silica (H4SiO4), calcium ions, and bicarbonate ions:
3H2 O þ 2CO2 þ CaSiO3 ¼¼> H4 SiO4 þ Ca2þ þ 2HCO3 
ð2:3Þ
In lakes or oceans, dissolved silica precipitates out to form
opal (SiO2. nH2O):
H4 SiO4 þ ðn  2ÞH2 O <¼¼> SiO2 : nH2 O

ð2:4Þ

while Ca2+ and HCO3 react to form CaCO3 (Eq. 2.2 read
right to left). Through geologic time, the opal crystallizes to

quartz and the CaCO3 accumulations become limestone,
dolostone or marble.
The solubility of CO2 is strongly temperature dependent,
as is the weathering reaction (Eq. 2.3), which further
explains why Earth supports life while Venus does not. On
primitive Venus, an average surface temperature in excess of
60  C inhibited dissolution of CO2. Weathering of crustal
rocks was minimal and CO2 rapidly accumulated in the
atmosphere. Today the atmosphere of Venus is 95 % CO2
and life is precluded by a runaway greenhouse effect (e.g.,
Rosenquist and Chassefiere 1995). In contrast, with a primordial atmosphere, daytime temperatures on much of the
Earth’s surface probably supported liquid water at
temperatures of 0–25 o C, which was optimal for CO2 dissolution and weathering of basalt. As a result, CO2 was
removed from Earth’s atmosphere and accumulated in
crustal rocks. Today only about 0.04 % of the Earth’s atmosphere is CO2 and the average surface temperature of
approximately 14  C (Axelrod 1992) readily supports life.

2.5

The Atmosphere and the Evolution
of Life

During the first 1,000 Myr of Earth’s history, most precipitation of CaCO3 likely occurred spontaneously (abiotically)
when concentrations of Ca2+ and HCO3 supersaturated
warm waters. The evolution of life on Earth profoundly
altered this relationship (Fig. 2.1). Microbes evolved the
ability to utilize energy from chemical bonds or sunlight to
produce organic matter (abbreviated below as CH2O) from
CO2 (Canfield and Raiswell 1999; Riding 2000), using either
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) or water (H2O) as the hydrogen donor:
H2 S þ CO2 <¼¼> CH2 O þ S2

ð2:5Þ

H2 O þ CO2 <¼¼> CH2 O þ O2

ð2:6Þ

If diffusion and mixing processes in seawater are limited
relative to the rate of photosynthesis, removal of CO2 from
solution by photosynthesis can promote CaCO3 precipitation
(see Eq. 2.2). For example, on a warm, shallow, subtidal flat
where cyanobacterial mats cover the bottom, CaCO3 crystals
may form in the water or within the mats (Pentecost 1991;
Reid et al. 2003). The result can be the formation of
stromatolites. By this mechanism, tremendous volumes of
limestone were deposited in shallow shelf seas from about
2,800 to 600 million years ago (Ma) (Grotzinger 1989;
Riding 2000). During this time, photosynthesis forever
changed the Earth’s atmosphere by removing CO2 and producing free oxygen, resulting in oxygenated oceans and
atmosphere essential for the evolution and survival of

PALEOGENE

PLIOCENE
MIOCENE
PALEO- EOCENE OLIGOCENE
CENE

Calcite Seas

MASS EXTINCTION ?

0
Proliferation
of branching
corals-Pacific

CORALCORALLINE ALGAL
REEFS
MAXIMUM CORAL
REEF DEVELOPMENT

Caribbean coral
extinctions
25

CORALLINE ALGAE
AND LARGER FORAMINIFERA
WITH SCLERACTINIAN CORALS

MASS EXTINCTION

CRETACEOUS

MESOZOIC

RUDIST BIOHERMS
100
CORAL-RUDISTS BIOHERMS
SECOND ORDER EXTINCTION
CORAL-ALGALSPONGE BIOHERMS

150

200

DEVONIAN
SILURIAN

ORDOVICIAN

PALEOZOIC

CARBONIFEROUS

PERMIAN

Aragonite Seas

TRIASSIC

SECOND ORDER EXTINCTION

Calcite Seas

50

RUDISTS IN DECLINE

JURASSIC

Aragonite

Fig. 2.1 The geological time
scale illustrating major reefrelated events. The arrows along
the right side of the figure note
scale changes, with the scale
greatly expanded over the past
100 million years, especially the
past 25 million years

23
HOLOCENE
PLEISTOCENE

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

C E N O Z O I NEOGENE
C

2

First corals with algal symbionts
First scleratinian corals

SPONGE-ALGAL
BIOHERMS

MASS EXTINCTION

250

SPONGE-ALGAL BIOHERMS
FUSULINIDS ABUNDANT
ALGAL BIOHERMS

300

STROMATOLITES & MUDMOUNDS
350

MASS EXTINCTION
STROMOTOPOROIDRED ALGALTABULATE CORAL
BIOHERMS

400

SECOND ORDER EXTINCTION
STROMATOPOROID - RED ALGALTABULATE CORAL BIOHERMS

450

DEVELOPING CALCAREOUS FAUNAS
500

CAMBRIAN

STROMATOLITES

MASS EXTINCTION
ARCHAEOCYATHID-ALGAL
CYANOBACTERIAL -BIOHERMS

550

NEO
MESO
PALEO

PROTEROZOIC

FIRST APPEARANCE OF SHELLED FOSSILS
EDIACARIAN - DIVERSE METAZOAN FAUNAS
CRYOGENIAN - “SNOWBALL EARTH”

STROMATOLITES
“AGE OF THE MICROBES”

600

EUCARYOTES DIVERSIFY

1000

EARLIEST EUCARYOTES

1500

BANDED IRON FORMATION
INDICATES INCR. OXYGEN

2000

ARCHAEN

2500

multicellular life forms (Lovelock 2000; Och and ShieldsZhou 2012).
During the ~4,600 Myr lifetime of the Sun, its luminosity
has increased roughly 40 % as a part of the natural aging
process of a star (Gilliland 1989). If the process of carbon
dioxide removal from the Earth’s atmosphere was purely

FIRST APPEARANCE OF STROMATOLITES

ORIGIN OF THE EARTH

3500
4500

geochemical, the rate of removal would have declined as
solar radiation intensified, and the Earth would have become
warmer. But since the evolution of photosynthesis, life
forms have influenced the concentrations of CO2 and O2 in
the atmosphere. As solar radiation has intensified, rates of
photosynthesis have likely increased (Lovelock 2000). The

24

long-term increase in rates of photosynthesis can partly
account for the overall decline in CO2 concentrations
through geologic history of the Earth (Berner 2006).
However, the decline in CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere has been neither uniform nor continuous. Global
tectonic activity, which has not been constant through geologic time, is a major influence on input and withdrawal of
CO2 in the atmosphere (Eyles 1993). Over Earth history,
volcanic rates have generally declined as the Earth’s interior
has progressively cooled (Drake 2000). Over the time scales
of large-scale plate tectonic processes (10s–100s of Myr),
volcanic rates have varied, slowing as large continental
masses collided and speeding up as they rifted apart. For
example, during the Cretaceous Period (the Age of the
Dinosaurs), 150–65 Ma, the rates of oceanic rifting and
subduction were substantially faster than modern rates.
Atmospheric CO2 concentrations, which were as much as
five to ten times higher than present, produced greenhouse
conditions in which high latitudes enjoyed temperate
climates and polar regions were ice free (Mackenzie and
Anderssen 2013). Thus, during intervals such as the Cretaceous, the long-term decline in atmospheric CO2
concentrations temporarily reversed.
A critical driver of CO2 decline has been the successive
evolution of groups of photosynthetic protists and plants
with new and more efficient pigments and enzyme systems.
Proliferation of new organisms likely contributed to secondorder declines in atmospheric CO2 concentrations that triggered global cooling and culminated in major episodes of
high-latitude glaciation. Prior to the Neoproterozoic, which
began roughly 1,000 Ma (Fig. 2.1), bacteria were the major
photosynthesizers. The evolution of the nucleated cell from
the symbiosis of three or four different kinds of bacteria
provided the evolutionary breakthrough that later made multicellular life possible (Margulis 1993). The evolution of
green and red algae and of the primitive phytoplankton
known as acritarchs ~1,200 Ma increased the efficiency of
photosynthesis and therefore rates of CO2 extraction. A
major glacial event occurred in the Cryogenian Period of
the Late Proterozoic, starting about 850 and ending approximately 635 Ma (Pierrehumbert et al. 2011). Global cooling
associated with this extensive glacial episode slowed rates of
extraction of atmospheric CO2 by the biotic community.
The proliferation of multicellular life following the
Cryogenian has been attributed to suitable atmospheric oxygen concentrations (Och and Shields-Zhou 2012). Shelled
organisms first appeared ~570 Ma (Conway Morris 1993).
Atmospheric oxygen concentrations also supported primitive land colonizers such as lichens and cyanobacteria (Yuan
et al. 2005). The resulting organic acids and primitive soils
increased rates of rock weathering, thereby increasing rates
of CO2 removal from the atmosphere. Diversification and
proliferation of marine life were occurring by the Ordovician

P. Hallock

Period, which culminated in another major glacial episode
458–428 Ma (Frakes and Francis 1988).
The evolution and diversification of land plants more than
350 Ma resulted in worldwide accumulation of vast
quantities of coals in the Carboniferous Period (Fig. 2.1).
Burial of these coals removed tremendous quantities of CO2
from the atmosphere, contributing to Late Carboniferous
glaciation. The evolution of advanced land plants with complex root systems also increased intensity of rock weathering
and development of soils (Mackenzie and Anderssen 2013).
In the Mesozoic, many new taxa evolved with the potential to influence the distribution of CO2 and HCO3 in the
atmosphere, oceans, and sediments (Beerling and Berner
2005). During the middle Triassic to early Jurassic, several
new groups of biogenic-sediment producers evolved and
diversified, profoundly changing oceanic sedimentation
and sequestration of organic matter. Planktic foraminifers
and coccolithophorids, which represented new plankton
lineages, began producing calcite shells and plates in the
surface waters of the open ocean, so that their calcareous
sediments today cover half the ocean floor (Kennett 1982).
On shallow shelves, scleractinian corals and a variety of
larger foraminifers developed symbioses with microalgae,
greatly increasing their potential for carbonate production
(Stanley 2003). High rates of CO2 emission associated with
rapid rates of seafloor spreading (i.e., volcanism) during the
Cretaceous more than compensated for carbonate production
by these new groups of organisms. And along with the new
calcareous organisms, the proliferation of flowering plants
on land and of extremely fast-growing diatoms in aquatic
environments during the late Cretaceous and early Paleogene likely played a role in the global cooling that has
occurred over the past 50 million years, culminating in the
glacial advances and retreats of the Pleistocene over the past
2–3 Myr (Pagani et al. 2009).
Atmospheric CO2 concentrations also vary on much
shorter time scales. Concentrations were about
180–200 ppm during glacial advances and about 280 ppm
during interglacials (Delmas 1992). These differences, their
causes, and their significance is at the heart of modern
studies of global climate change. Seasonal vegetation has
such a strong influence on modern atmospheric CO2
concentrations that differences between spring and autumn
are routinely recorded at the Mauna Loa Observatory in
Hawaii (Yajnik and Swathi 2012).

2.6

CO2 and Time Scales

One of the key paradoxes of carbonates is that how rock
weathering and limestone accumulation influence atmospheric CO2 concentrations depends upon the time scale
being considered (Kinsey and Hopley 1991). On the scale

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

25

Fig. 2.2 Simplified
representation of the global
carbon cycle over time. 1 Rates
have slowed through Earth
history. 2 Rates controlled by
plate tectonics. 3 Rates change
with sea-level fluctuations. 4 All
of these processes influence rates.
5 Biological-scale processes

of Earth history, limestones are clearly important reservoirs
of CO2. This process can be summarized by the simplified
expression:
CO2 þ CaSiO3 ¼¼> SiO2 þ CaCO3

ð2:7Þ

Yet on time scales relevant to humans, Vescei and Berger
(2004) and others have argued that production of limestones
is a net producer of CO2, based on the relationship shown in
Eq. 2.2 (right to left), i.e., for each CaCO3 precipitated from
seawater, one HCO3 is converted to CO2.
The key to understanding this paradox is recognizing that
carbon exists in a variety of forms (Fig. 2.2). The ultimate
source of carbon is from within the Earth. Volcanic activity
delivers carbon to the atmosphere, where it primarily occurs
as CO2, or to the ocean, where it primarily occurs as HCO3.
Organic carbon, produced mostly by photosynthesis
(Eq. 2.6), occurs in short-term forms in living organisms,
wood, soils, peat, water and sediments. Long-term storage of
organic carbon occurs in hydrocarbon deposits and carbonrich rocks such as coal and oil shales. Carbon in CaCO3
sediments is recycled back into dissolved form when aragonitic lime muds from carbonate platforms such as the
Bahama Banks are carried by currents into the deep ocean.
Aragonite in limestone is also recycled during glacial
advances when sea level can fall 100 m or more so that
reef limestones are exposed to the air where they are
recrystallized or eroded. CaCO3 can be stored as limestones
and dolostones within the Earth for millions to thousands of
millions of years, until plate tectonic activity uplifts the
rocks and exposes them to erosion, or until they are melted
or metamorphosed by volcanic activity.

Figure 2.2 is a simplified representation of the CO2 cycle,
which is characterized by processes operating on four major
time scales:
1. On the scale of Earth history and the evolution of life
(109 years–billions of years), CO2 concentrations have
been declining in the atmosphere to compensate for
increasing solar output. Carbon has been stored in the
Earth’s crust as limestone and carbon-rich materials such
as coal, oil shale, oil and gas.
2. On tectonic time scales (106–108 years–millions to
hundreds of millions of years), atmospheric CO2 has varied
in response to changes in rates of volcanic activity, which
are determined by rates of formation and subduction of the
Earth’s crust. Limestones and other carbon-rich rocks can
be melted or metamorphosed by volcanic activity,
recycling stored CO2 back to the atmosphere-ocean pool.
3. On glacial/interglacial time scales (104–105 years–tens to
hundreds of thousands of years), CO2 in carbon-rich
sediments is recycled when shallow-marine sediments
are alternately deposited and eroded in response to sealevel rise and fall. During interglacial times when reefs
are most actively accreting, the global oceanic HCO3
pool is more rapidly converted to CO2 and CaCO3, so
atmospheric CO2 concentrations rise somewhat. During
glacial events, when sea level is low and reef limestones
are actively eroded by CO2 dissolved in freshwater, atmospheric CO2 decreases and oceanic HCO3 increases.
4. Organisms typically act on biological time scales, which
range from nannoseconds for enzymatic processes up to
hundreds of years (<103 years) for long-lived plants or
fungi.

26

P. Hallock

Humans, however, have perturbed long-term carbon
cycles by extracting fossil fuels, which accumulated over
hundreds of millions of years. Burning of fossil
hydrocarbons has released huge quantities of CO2 into the
atmosphere. This process has shifted carbon from long-term
storage in the Earth’s crustal rocks to CO2 in the atmosphere
and oceans. At the same time, humans have tilled organicrich soils, drained wetlands, and burned forests, thereby
releasing carbon from shorter-term storage in soils and vegetation to CO2 in the atmosphere. Deforestation, oxidation of
organic matter in soils and wetlands, and widespread use of
herbicides has also reduced rates of CO2 removal from the
atmosphere to short-term storage. Meanwhile, the decline in
populations of reef-building corals has reduced calcification
rates by these organisms. By disrupting both long and shortterm carbon storage, human activities over the past 100 years
have increased CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere more
than reef growth influenced CO2 in the past 15,000 years.
Within the twenty-first century atmospheric CO2
concentrations are predicted to rise to concentrations comparable to those that occurred during the Eocene, 40–50 Ma,
when the polar regions were nearly ice free (Feely
et al. 2009).

2.7

Evolution and Carbonate Mineralogy

A geochemical paradox of declining concentrations of atmospheric CO2 through time is that CaCO3 has become increasingly easier for organisms to precipitate. Proterozoic oceans,
responding to a more CO2-rich atmosphere, were able to
hold in solution comparably high concentrations of Ca2+
and HCO3, even in shallow water. Shallow-water CaCO3
precipitation was probably a “daylight” activity, where photosynthesis within dense mats of cyanobacteria rapidly
removed CO2, creating local supersaturation of seawater
with respect to CaCO3. At night and possibly seasonally,
seawater equilibrated with the atmosphere and became less
supersaturated when photosynthetic rates slowed or stopped.
Approximately 570 Ma, a critical point was reached in
the atmospheric-oceanic chemical system; shells evolved in
several different groups of organisms. This event indicates
that a geochemical threshold was reached; quite possibly
atmospheric CO2 concentrations dropped sufficiently so
that low-latitude, shallow-water systems were consistently
saturated with CaCO3. Energetically, the protective and
supportive advantages of a mineralized shell or skeleton
finally exceeded the costs of shell precipitation and maintenance. Biomineralized organisms have since flourished in
marine environments, secreting predominantly CaCO3 or
calcium phosphate shells or skeletons.
The succession of carbonate minerals through the geologic record, both biogenic and inorganic, also indicates

geochemical influence (Sandberg 1983; Stanley and Hardie
1998; Hallock 2011). Although some of the earliest animals
secreted calcium phosphate shells, calcite rapidly became
the dominant shell material. Aragonite also appeared in
shells in the early Paleozoic, though aragonitic algae did
not produce significant bioherms until the Carboniferous.
Aragonitic scleractinian corals did not evolve and construct
reefs until the Triassic, only about 230 Ma (Stanley 2003).
This trend reversed as aragonite production declined and
calcite production increased during the Cretaceous Period,
when atmospheric CO2 concentrations rose as rates of volcanic activity increased at mid-ocean ridges and subduction
zones. At the same time, rates of removal of CO2 from the
atmosphere by terrestrial weathering were relatively low
because tectonic highlands were limited in extent (Eyles
1993). Aragonite-producing corals did not fully regain a
dominant position until about 40 Ma, with the beginning of
global cooling that led to the Neogene world of waxing and
waning continental glaciers (Pomar and Hallock 2008).
Another critical factor controlling carbonate mineralogy
is the Mg/Ca ratio in seawater, which is largely influenced
by ion exchange at ocean-ridge systems (Hardie 1996). The
alteration of new basalt at the seafloor removes Mg2+ from
seawater and releases Ca2+; the rate of this exchange is
dependent upon the rate of ocean crust formation. Thus,
times of rapid seafloor spreading result not only in elevated
concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere and HCO3 in
seawater, but also higher Ca2+ concentrations in seawater.
Such conditions are energetically more favorable for
organisms that secrete calcite than those that produce aragonite. Conversely, when seafloor spreading rates slow, rates
of Mg2+ removal from, and Ca2+ release into, seawater
decline. The result is higher Mg/Ca ratios in seawater,
which favors aragonite or Mg-calcite precipitation. Thus,
tectonically-forced changes in seawater chemistry have
influenced evolution and reef-building capacity of calcareous biotas, as well as the composition of carbonate cements
(Stanley and Hardie 1998).
A second implication of the reduction of CO2 in the
atmosphere, and therefore the partial pressure of CO2 in
surface waters of the ocean, is the possibility that shortage
of CO2 can limit photosynthesis (Pomar and Hallock 2008).
In shallow, warm, brightly illuminated waters, HCO3 is
abundant and dissolved CO2 is scarce. By using energy
from photosynthesis to actively uptake Ca2+ ions from seawater, cells can use the calcification process to convert
bicarbonate ions (HCO3) to CO2 needed for photosynthesis
(Cohen and McConnaughey 2003). Calcareous algae, which
may have been the first multicellular organisms to utilize
calcification this way, first appeared in the Cambrian. The
Mesozoic diversifications of modern calcifying algae,
including coccolithophorids in the plankton and melobesian
green and coralline red algae in the benthos, along with the

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

27

Fig. 2.3 Calcification
mechanisms and when they first
were important in construction of
biogenic reefs

proliferation of algal symbiosis in foraminifers, corals, and
some bivalves, provide further evidence of biotic response to
declining CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere (Pomar and
Hallock 2008).
Webb (2001) subdivided biomineralization into
biologically-induced precipitation that is the by-product of
metabolic
activity,
and
biologically-controlled
skeletogenesis that is enzymatically controlled. The first
mechanism, which includes geochemical precipitation of
CaCO3 in response to CO2 uptake by photosynthesis, was
particularly effective in the Proterozoic under relatively high
atmospheric pressures of CO2. The second mechanism,
enzymatically controlled biomineralization, appeared in the
Cambrian, probably when CO2 concentrations declined sufficiently that the expenditure of energy for shell construction
and maintenance became less than loss to predation without
skeletal protection, at least in warm, shallow water
(Fig. 2.3).
Precipitation of CaCO3 induced by sulfate-reducing
microbes is a type of biologically-induced calcification
whose role in carbonate buildups has become increasingly
recognized in recent years. Schlager (2000) referred to such
carbonate textures in mud mounds at platform margin and
upper slope depths as automicrite, in which microbial activity and decaying organic matter were key components
(Monty 1995; Schlager 2000), and with marine cements as
important secondary components. Pomar and Hallock
(2008) suggested that automicritic boundstones represent a
particular type of carbonate facies that predominated at
times in Earth history when metazoan consumers were
absent (e.g., Pre-Phanerozoic) or reduced in abundance
(e.g., following mass extinction events). With few
consumers, excess primary production in overlying waters
allows organic matter to accumulate on the seafloor where it
can be metabolized by microbial activity. For every two
organic carbon atoms consumed during sulfate reduction,
one of those carbons can be incorporated as CaCO3
(Baumgartner et al. 2006), providing tremendous potential

for calcium carbonate precipitation where sufficient organic
carbon substrate meets sufficient rates of exchange of seawater. Shelf edge and upper slope locations provide potential for organic accumulation, oxygen-minimum conditions,
and water movement associated with internal waves (Pomar
et al. 2012) or contour currents that provide necessary seawater exchange.
Enzymatically-controlled biomineralization mechanisms
include (a) biomineralization by heterotrophic protists and
metazoans, in which the energy source is ingested food;
(b) biomineralization by mixotrophic protists and
metazoans, in which photosynthetically derived energy significantly
enhances
calcification
rates;
and
(c) biomineralization by photosynthetic protists (red and
green algae, also coccolithophorids), in which photosynthesis provides energy for calcification and, at the same time,
calcification can provide CO2 for photosynthesis (Cohen and
McConnaughey 2003; Pomar and Hallock 2008). The potential for calcification to provide CO2 for photosynthesis
became particularly advantageous when reduced atmospheric CO2 concentrations began to limit aquatic photosynthesis in warm, shallow seas.
The strategies whereby photosynthesis provides energy
for enzymatically-controlled biomineralization arose independently in several lineages of Foraminifera, Porifera,
Cnideria, and Mollusca, as well as in at least three divisions
of algae. This mechanism has profound and almost paradoxical implications for atmospheric CO2 concentrations. The
very process that makes CO2 instantaneously available for
photosynthesis can be responsible for the long-term removal
and burial of CO2 as CaCO3.
Global cooling, on the other hand, reduces the rate of CO2
burial by calcification. If organisms draw too much CO2 out
of the atmosphere, onset of glaciation lowers sea levels and
reduces the habitats of warm-water calcifying organisms, as
well as that of terrestrial plants. Lowered sea level also
prevents burial of some limestones, instead exposing them
to erosion and returning the HCO3 to the hydrosphere.

28

P. Hallock

Paradoxically, as atmospheric CO2 concentrations decline,
aragonite, which is more rapidly recycled by freshwater
weathering during glacial advances, becomes easier to precipitate in warm waters.

2.8

What Is Required to Accumulate CaCO3

Although calcium carbonate sediments have been produced
and limestones have been accumulating for more than
3,500 Myr of Earth history (e.g., Grotzinger 1989), major
accumulations of limestone represent deposition during relatively small proportions of geologic time (Schlager 1981).
Times and places for substantial sedimentary carbonate
accumulation require an array of appropriate environmental
conditions, as well as appropriate suites of carbonateproducing biotas. The classes of carbonate sediments (Lees
1975; James 1997), combined with the guilds of Fagerstrom
(1987), can be merged into the concept of “carbonate
factories” (Schlager 2000), including the tropical shallowwater factory, dominated by photoautotrophic, bioticallycontrolled skeletal production and abiotic precipitates; the
cool-water factory, dominated by heterotrophic skeletal production; and the mud-mound factory, dominated by
biotically-induced production (predominantly microbial)
and abiotic precipitates that formed at or near the sea floor.
Two additional factories involve production of carbonates
within the water column: the neritic carbonate factory (whitings), which are biotically-induced by photosynthetic
microbes and microalgae in highly supersaturated waters
(Robbins and Blackwelder 1992), and the pelagic carbonate
factory of biotically-controlled skeletal production, either
directly associated with photosynthesis (coccolithophorids)
or by planktic foraminifers, many of which host algal
symbionts.
A major limiting environmental factor is that shallow,
euphotic shelf areas suitable for prolific production and
accumulation of reefal carbonates represent less than 2 %
of either the Earth’s surface or the ocean volume. Furthermore, preservation of CaCO3 is as important as production
for accumulation and persistence in the rock record. Several
factors influence both production and preservation potential
within the limited available environments. One very important condition is the persistence or repeated submergence of
substantial areas of shallow shelf at mid to low latitudes over
sufficient time intervals so that limestones can accumulate,
i.e., the presence of accommodation space (Pomar 2001). A
second condition is relatively low input of terrigenous
sediments and inorganic nutrients, especially nitrogen and
phosphorus (Hallock 2001, 2011). A third condition is the
presence of biota that can precipitate or enhance the precipitation of CaCO3.

The persistence or repeated submergence of substantial
areas of shallow shelf at mid to low latitudes is controlled by
plate tectonics and climate, which together control sea level.
Rates of sea-floor spreading influence the average depth of
the ocean. When sea-floor spreading rates are high, the
average depth of the ocean basins is shallower, pushing
water higher onto the continental shelves (Kennett 1982).
The relative proportions of continents that are colliding or
overlying rifting centers also influences global and local sea
level. For example, all of the major continents came together
in the late Paleozoic to form the supercontinent of Pangea
(Fig. 2.4). This can be compared to India colliding with Asia
to form the Himalayas, but on a much larger scale. As the
continents merged, spreading rates slowed, sea level relative
to the continents receded, and there were few shallow-shelf
areas; most that occurred were inundated by terrigenous
sediments eroded from the highlands. Through the latest
Paleozoic and into the early Mesozoic, Pangea remained as
one supercontinent. Heat from the Earth’s interior
accumulated beneath Pangea, thermally uplifting and rifting
it apart. The supercontinent at this stage was somewhat
analogous to Africa today, which has very narrow continental shelves and where eroding highlands plunge into deep rift
valleys. As the continents rifted apart and moved away from
one another during the Cretaceous (Fig. 2.5), they slowly
subsided. Australia today is probably the closest analogue
for continents in the Cretaceous, with generally low relief,
passive margins on three sides, and a broad, shallow sea to
the north between the continent and tectonically active
Indonesia and New Guinea. In the Cretaceous, higher
elevations were primarily in island arcs analogous to the
Marianas Islands or Japan.
Sea-floor spreading rates and climate interact through a
variety of feedback mechanisms to further influence sea
level (Worsley et al. 1986). As the continents ground
together to form Pangea, sea-floor spreading and overall
volcanic rates slowed, further lowering sea level. Reduced
volcanism resulted in reduced emissions of volcanic gases,
including CO2. As a result, the Earth’s climate was cooler.
Conversely, as continents moved apart, sea-floor spreading
rates increased, volcanic rates increased, and CO2 emissions
increased, triggering global warming in the Jurassic and
Cretaceous. Relative sea level influences global climate
because it alters the reflectivity (albedo) of the Earth; land
is more reflective than water, while ice is more reflective
than land. The higher the sea level, the more solar energy the
Earth can capture and so the warmer the climate. Globally
warm climates, known as greenhouse conditions, promote
even higher sea level, because polar ice is minimal to nonexistent. Finally, without polar ice, deep waters in the oceans
are much warmer, so thermal expansion of the water further
raises sea level.

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

29

a

b

"Paleogeographic map by C.R.Scotese, PALEOMAP Project"

Fig. 2.4 Plate reconstructions for (a) the Permian Period, illustrating the supercontinent Pangea that formed during the late Paleozoic and (b) the
Late Jurassic Period (Middle Mesozoic), illustrating the opening of the North Atlantic (From Scotese 2002)

The differential heating of the equator relative to the
poles drives atmospheric and oceanic circulation. Plate tectonics control the positions and elevations of land masses
relative to the oceans and so further influences atmospheric

and ocean circulation by providing passageways and barriers
(Eyles 1993). For example, separation of Antarctica and
Australia in the late Eocene and the opening of the Drake
Passage between Antarctica and South America in the

30

P. Hallock

a

b

"Paleogeographic map by C.R.Scotese, PALEOMAP Project"

Fig. 2.5 Plate reconstructions for (a) the Late Cretaceous, after the
breakup of Pangea, when circumtropical circulation was well developed and (b) the middle Eocene, illustrating somewhat restricted

circumtropical circulation and hints of future south circumpolar circulation (From Scotese 2002)

Oligocene (Figs. 2.5 and 2.6), enabled the development of
the circumpolar current in the Southern Ocean (Flower
1999). This caused the climatic isolation of Antarctica and
polar cooling. Closure of the Panamanian Seaway over the
past few Myr restricted and ultimately terminated flow of the

Caribbean Current into the Pacific, diverting the current
northward to accelerate the Gulf Stream (Lutz 2010). Delivery of warmer water to high northern latitudes increased
snowfall, contributing to glaciation (Raymo 1994).

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

31

a

b

"Paleogeographic map by C.R.Scotese, PALEOMAP Project"

Fig. 2.6 Plate reconstructions for (a) the middle Miocene, when the
Central American Seaway was still open but circumtropical circulation
diminished as India and the Middle East collided with Asia, while south

circumpolar circulation was complete and (b) the Pleistocene – the last
glacial maximum, when sea level was about 130 m lower than at
present (From Scotese 2002)

Global climate is strongly influenced by CO2
concentrations in the atmosphere (Pearson and Palmer
2000), and therein lies yet another paradox of limestones

and coral reefs. Times of global warming (Fig. 2.1) were
times of widespread limestone deposition, but not of coralreef development (Stanley and Hardie 1998; Hallock 2011).

32

P. Hallock

For example, paleo-isotopic evidence indicates that tropical
sea-surface temperatures during the Cretaceous and early
Paleogene were at least 28–32  C (Pearson et al. 2001),
while seawater in the polar regions and deep seas was
10–15  C warmer than today (Flower 1999). Yet coral
reefs did not widely flourish until the Oligocene Epoch,
with the onset of global cooling under declining atmospheric
CO2 concentrations.

2.9

History of Biogenic Reefs Through Time

The Geologic Time Scale (Fig. 2.1) has five major divisions
called Eons, each of which is characterized by the appearance of major groups of organisms that proliferated and
profoundly influenced the subsequent Eon. The earliest history of the Earth is referred to as the Hadean Eon, which
lasted ~600 Myr during which time the newly formed planet
was cooling. The Archean Eon, ~1,500 Myr long, was the
time when prokaryotic microbial life appeared, proliferated
and diversified, leaving the earliest evidence for
stromatolites, for photosynthesis, and ultimately, for the
first free oxygen (Dobretsov et al. 2008).
The Proterozoic Eon was truly the “Age of the Microbes”,
but it was also a time of profound environmental change.
Many microbes were driven to extinction or “underground”.
Some adapted by developing symbioses with other microbes
(producing nucleated, eukaryotic cells) that allowed them to
survive the Earth’s first “pollution” event – the Great
Oxygenation Event (Holland 2006) of shallow aquatic
systems, which occurred between ~2,400 and 2,000 Ma
(Paleoproterozoic). The first evidence for eukaryotic
organisms has been found in some of the youngest rocks
that are considered Paleoproterozoic. Oxygen is toxic to all
cells to some degree, which is why eukaryotic cells have
anti-oxidant defense mechanisms. Once cyanobacteria
developed photosynthesis, using sunlight to fix water and
carbon dioxide into organic matter, their proliferation was
assured. At the same time, anaerobic bacteria became
restricted to anaerobic environments, were forced to adapt,
or perished.
Evidence for very early oxygenation of shallow aquatic
environments is found in banded iron deposits, which occur
on the ancient cores of all the continents and have been
utilized as iron ores by human populations for thousands of
years (Cloud 1973). Iron (Fe) comes in two forms, reduced
Fe2+ and oxidized Fe3+. Igneous rocks are rich in Fe2+,
which is quite soluble in water. However, if there is free
oxygen in the atmosphere or dissolved in water, the Fe2+
oxidizes to Fe3+, which is very insoluble. The most likely
way that immense quantities of iron could accumulate with
alternating layers of chert was when the atmosphere still
lacked oxygen. As water weathered rocks on land, Fe2+

readily dissolved, along with H4SiO4. The Fe2+ laden rivers
and streams flowed into lakes, lagoons or shallow-shelf
areas, where cyanobacteria were actively photosynthesizing
and oxygenating the waters. The iron oxidized, producing
iron oxides that accumulated as sediments.
Calcium is also very abundant in volcanic rocks, and is
readily dissolved out of those rocks by CO2-rich rainwater,
resulting in fresh waters laden with Ca2+ and HCO3 flowing
into shallow waters where active photosynthesis induced
precipitation of CaCO3, resulting in stromatolites or
whiting-type muds. Mesoproterozoic age stromatolitic
limestones also occurred nearly worldwide, sometimes
alternating with shales that alternate green and red because
they were deposited under either anoxic (green shales) or
oxygenated (red shales) conditions.
Eukaryotic protists that emerged in the Mesoproterozoic
included the red and green algae. Other eukaryotic
innovations, including evidence for sexual reproduction
and multicellularity, first appeared in the Mesoproterozoic,
fully developing in the final Era of the Proterozoic. The
Neoproterozoic Oxygenation Event (Och and Shields-Zhou
2012), during which multicellular organisms began to proliferate, partly coincided with extensive glaciation during
what is known as the Cryogenian Period. The final period
of the Neoproterozoic, the Ediacaran, is known for its diversity of novel fossils of soft-bodied organisms that represent
most known animal phyla, as well as several enigmatic ones
(Knoll et al. 2006). Stromatolites and other microbolites
remained the dominant reef structures through this final
Era before the emergence of shelled metazoans that heralded
the Phanerozoic Eon (Grotzinger and Knoll 1999).
Whether Proterozoic or Phanerozoic, microbes have been
producing microbolites and stromatolites for more than
3,400 Myr; shell-forming animals for just 570 Myr
(Fig. 2.1). Factors that have controlled the formation of
biogenic reefs through time include climate, ocean chemistry and circulation, availability of habitat, and existence of
reef-forming biotas. The history of reef development and
reef-building biotas has not been continuous. Instead, it has
been characterized by long periods of persistence of simple
mud-mound or reef-mound communities, followed by
episodes of development of complex baffler and
framework-building communities, then termination of the
complex communities by major extinction events. The compendium edited by Kiessling et al. (2002) provides a comprehensive view of distributions, biotas, and dynamics of
Phanerozoic reefs; the summary below provides only a brief
glimpse of reef history.
Kiessling (2001) defined four basic reef types: (a) true
reefs constructed largely by a framework of skeletal remains
of reef-building organisms; (b) reef mounds, where the
remains of skeletal reef-building organisms and mud matrix
are about equally important; (c) mud mounds, which have

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

only minor skeletal components; and (d) biostromes, which
have abundant skeletal components but minimal depositional relief. These categories, as well as other ways that
reefs have been classified, are more convenient than mutually exclusive. Even within individual reef structures, there
may be a colonizing stage by a binder community, a diversification stage by a baffling and binding community, and a
climax stage of framework builders, binders, dwellers, and
destroyers (Fagerstrom 1987).
From 3,400 to 540 Ma, prior to the appearance of shelled
animals, whether stromatolitic buildups developed was controlled primarily by suitability of physical and chemical
environments. Stomatolitic limestones and dolostones
accumulated where seawater was warm enough and shallow
enough for photosynthesis by cyanobacteria to promote
CaCO3 precipitation over sufficient area and time to be
preserved, or where organic matter accumulated on the sea
floor under conditions that sustained carbonate precipitation
in conjunction with sulfate reduction or other microbial
processes. With the evolution of the Foraminifera, as well
as multicellular life such as worms and trilobites, that
bulldozed through the algal mats, eating and disrupting
them, stromatolite preservation potential declined (Conway
Morris 1993; Bernhard et al. 2013). Kiessling (2001) noted
that microbial activity has become less prominent in reefs
over time, though stromatolites remain “uncommonly common” even in Holocene sediments (Reid et al. 1995, 2003).

2.9.1

Paleozoic Era: Time of Ancient
Animal Life

The first biomineralized animal communities to act as significant bafflers appeared in the lower Cambrian Period,
from about 550 Ma (Wood 1999). The archaeocyathids or
“ancient cups” are thought to have been calcified sponges;
their erect skeletons trapped calcareous muds, which may
have been chemically precipitated in response to photosynthesis in cyanobacterial mats or in the plankton. Calcified
cyanobacterial/algal mats and encrusters formed major
components of the archaeocyathid reef mounds. Trilobites
and sponges were among the inhabitants. “Reef tracts” produced by these communities were extensive in Siberia,
southern Australia, and Antarctica, which lay in low
latitudes at that time (Copper 1994). By the Middle Cambrian these primitive sponges were mostly extinct, so microbial processes again largely produced the reef mounds that
have been preserved (Rowland and Shapiro 2002).
The second major diversification of calcified algae and
animals capable of producing, trapping and binding large
volumes of calcareous sediments began in the Ordovician
Period (~500 Ma). Sponges and the earliest corals played
major baffler roles, cyanobacteria persisted as binders, while

33

trilobites and primitive snails grazed the algae or fed upon
microbe- and algae-rich muds (Webby 2002). By the Middle
Ordovician, a greater diversity of calcified animals had
evolved. These organisms were more prolific sediment
producers, more effective sediment bafflers, and included
taxa with the potential to construct framework. Important
contributors included bryozoans; stromatoporoids (calcareous sponges); and Solenopora, which have long been considered calcareous red algae, though Riding (2004) argued
that they were chaetetid sponges. The early reef mounds
provided a multitude of niches for trilobites, brachiopods,
snails, cephalopods (including ancestors of the chambered
Nautilus), other animals that fossilized, and probably many
soft-bodied organisms that left little or no fossil record.
By the Late Ordovician, tabulate and rugose (horn) corals
had become important components of the reef community
(Webby 2002). A typical succession (e.g., James 1983; Copper 2002) consisted of a baffler-colonizer community of
stalked crinoids and bryozoans that trapped muds and
began to accumulate a structure. Soon this habitat was
invaded by sponges, solitary horn corals, small tabulate
corals, and massive stromatoporoids, which together
constructed larger skeletal structures and trapped calcareous
muds and sands. Algae, smaller corals, bryozoa,
brachiopods, clams, snails, trilobites and other arthropods
found shelter or food within the reef. Encrusting
stromatoporoids bound the skeletal elements together, and
typically overgrew and eventually dominated the whole
structure. In this climax phase, which may have been very
wave resistant like a modern coralline algal ridge, the diversity of species was low.
Interesting comparisons can be made between the Middle
Paleozoic (Ordovician to Devonian) bioherms and modern
coral reefs. The shells and skeletons were predominantly
constructed of calcite, whereas modern corals and calcareous algae secrete aragonite skeletons (Stanley and Hardie
1998). Individual structures in the Paleozoic were often
similar in size to small patch reefs, connected by expanses
of calcareous sands or muds, so regional accumulations of
limestone were comparable in scale to modern reef tracts
(Webby 2002). However, there was no strong evidence for
algal symbiosis in the calcifying animals and calcareous
algae were of limited importance. Thus, primary calcification mechanisms responsible for precipitation of most of the
early to middle Paleozoic limestones were likely
biologically-enhanced geochemical precipitation, with
microbes continuing to play major roles, and biomineralization by animals. Extensive Devonian reef complexes along
the northern margin of the Canning Basin, Western
Australia, as well as others found in Alberta, Canada,
Belgium and Germany, are comparable in size to, or even
larger than, modern western Atlantic reef systems like the
Florida Keys reef tract (Stanley 1992; Webb 2002).

34

In the Late Devonian (~360 Ma) a major extinction event
eliminated most of the reef-building coral-stromotoporoid
communities. Subsequently, carbonate production was predominantly microbial, including automicrites in deeperwater mounds and stromatolites and calcimicrobolites in
shallower water. Corals and stromatoporoids continued
their presence in some Canadian reef mounds. Early Carboniferous buildups scattered around the world were mud
mounds containing mostly automicrites and cements, sometimes associated with crinoids and bryozoans. Rugose
corals, chaetitids, and brachiopods were among the metazoan taxa that diversified the mud mounds as carbonateproducing metazoan communities recovered (Webb 2002).
Late Carboniferous biotas contain many unusual and
taxonomically problematic groups that mostly represent
binder and baffler communities. Wahlman (2002)
recognized several types of buildups along a spectrum,
depending upon whether major components were algal,
sponge or bryozoan, and whether environmental controls
were temperature, water depth, light penetration, etc. A
prominent feature was the prevalence of aragonite-producing phylloid algae and problematic aragonite-producers
identified as Paleoaplysina, that may have been codiacean
algae or possibly hydrozoans. The evolution and diversification of large, structurally complex fusulinid foraminifers
represent the strongest evidence for algal symbiosis in
important calcareous-sediment producing taxa in the Paleozoic. These two groups, the phylloid algae and the
fusulinids, may represent the first major proliferation of
organisms calcifying to enhance photosynthesis. On a global
scale, the continents were colliding to form Pangea. Glaciation was occurring; reduced atmospheric CO2 concentrations
(Sandberg 1983) and higher Mg/Ca ratios in seawater
reflected reduced seafloor spreading rates (Stanley and
Hardie 1998). Both factors were conducive to aragonite
precipitation and to calcification to enhance photosynthesis
(McConnaughey and Whelan 1997; Pomar and Hallock
2008). Moreover, interglacial sea-level rise provided accommodation space for carbonate buildups, while subaerial dissolution and cementation during sea-level regression
promoted lithification of carbonate sediments, increasing
their preservation potential.
The Permian, which was the last period of the Paleozoic,
was characterized by tectonic and volcanic activity as the
assembly of Pangea came to its climax (Fig. 2.4). Numerous
shallow seas and basins developed and were destroyed during this period (Weidlich 2002). A combination of the variety of regional environmental conditions during deposition,
and the economic resources that resulted, have contributed
to the diversity of biotas and interpretations of Permian reefs
and limestones.
Among the most studied buildups are those of the Permian
Basin in west Texas and southeastern New Mexico, USA

P. Hallock

(Weidlich 2002). The long-lasting but discontinuous accumulation of the Capitan reef complex has revealed that
macrofauna were not essential to the buildup. According to
Weidlich (2002), the most important constituents of the
Capitan Reef limestones include micro-framework produced
by diverse assemblages of low-growing algae and microbes.
These rocks are also notable for extensive geochemically
precipitated cements, to the extent that more than threequarters of the limestone can be micro-framework of
low-growing producers and carbonate cements that
precipitated in seawater, especially under hypersaline
conditions. A diverse community of bafflers and binders
included sponges, bryozoans, crinoids, and brachiopods that
trapped and bound muds and coarser sediments produced by
the community (Wood 1999). An immensely diverse sediment-producing dweller group, such as foraminifers (including fusulinids), snails, clams, small corals, brachiopods,
cephalopods, and arthropods, thrived in these buildups.
Further demonstrating the diversity of Permian carbonate
factories, the succession of buildups in the Permian Basin
are quite different from three other carbonate factories that
Weidlich (2002) described from the Middle and Late
Permian elsewhere. The Tethyan carbonate factories, preserved in limestones deposited on the shelves, basins and
terrains to the east of Pangea, were characterized by a diversity of reef types and macro-reef builders with high
percentages of carbonate mud. Other oceanic (island-arc)
terrains lacked macro-reef builders, instead were
characterized by calcimicrobes and carbonate muds. The
fourth carbonate factory, with abundant bryozoans,
brachiopods and crinoids, was a cool-water facies.

2.9.2

The End-Permian Mass Extinction

The Permian-Triassic boundary (PTB) was characterized by
the most extreme mass extinctions of the Phanerozoic.
Barash (2012) reviewed the extinctions, geochemical
signals, and discussed the series of events that likely
contributed to the severity and timing. Estimates of extinction of 96 % of marine invertebrates and 70 % of terrestrial
vertebrates are common in the literature. The first major
extinction event occurred in the mid to late Permian
(260 Mya), primarily affecting marine benthic organisms.
Subsequently, the events of the PTB at 251–252 Mya also
impacted the plankton, with near complete collapse of
marine ecosystems.
The assembly of Pangea, which ended in the mid/late
Permian, resulted in a land mass that stretched pole to
pole. The Panthalassa Superocean covered roughly
two-thirds of the Earth’s surface. The Tethyan Sea was
bordered on the west by Pangea and was partly separated
from Panthalassa by smaller land masses to the east.

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

The PTB events apparently involved successive environmental changes that became increasingly inhospitable to
protists and metazoans (Barash 2012). Extensive, explosive
volcanism spewed ash, aerosols, and gases such as CO2 and
H2S, chlorine and fluorine into the atmosphere in multiple
locations. The eruptions that produced the Siberian Traps
represent one of the largest volcanic outpourings in Earth
history, certainly in the Phanerozoic. Moreover, the magma
passed through and burned vast coal beds, releasing much
more CO2. And the eruptions occurred in exactly the time
interval, 250–252 Mya, as the PTB mass extinctions. Global
warming likely was interrupted by episodes of “volcanic
winters”, when ash and aerosols reduced light reaching the
Earth’s surface, thereby reducing photosynthesis and primary productivity. Conversely, when atmospheric
conditions allowed sufficient sunlight to reach the sea surface, volcanic ash likely fertilized high rates of primary
productivity by cyanobacteria. Warming of deeper ocean
waters, combined with excess sinking of organic matter,
promoted superanoxia, which ultimately spread to shelf
environments. Further global warming likely resulted from
the release of methane from gas hydrates in marine
sediments. Sulfur and halogen-rich volcanic aerosols eroded
the stratospheric ozone, further impacting organisms, while
allowing high-energy, short wavelength (ultraviolet) solar
radiation to reach the Earth’s surface and further contribute
to global warming. Certainly all of these factors would have
devasted marine and terrestrial protists and metazoans.
Moreover, Barash (2012) further discusses multiple meteor
impacts that have been documented within the same time
interval, proposing that they further contributed to the collapse of eukaryotic organisms and communities.

2.9.3

Mesozoic Era: Time of Intermediate
Animal Life

The PTB was followed by a prolonged episode (at least
6–8 Myr) in which bioherms produced by metazoan
communities are absent in the rock record (Flügel 2002).
The few, small, Early Triassic buildups that have been
recorded were produced by microbial processes, especially
associated with low oxygen conditions. When substantial
carbonate buildups reappeared in the Middle Triassic,
microbial contributions continued to be primary or at least
secondary components.
Because rates of sea-floor spreading continued to be low,
Mg/Ca ratios in seawater were conducive to “Aragonite
Seas” (Fig. 2.1) from the late Paleozoic through the Triassic
Period (Stanley and Hardie 1998). In the Middle Triassic,
sponge-algal communities gradually resumed production of
reef mounds and included among their subsidiary fauna the
first scleractinian corals, which produced aragonite skeletons

35

(Stanley 2003). According to Flügel (2002), coralline
sponges were the major baffler and frame-building
organisms in many Triassic reefs; among the very diverse
sponge biota were Mg-calcite and aragonite producing taxa.
By the late Triassic, the scleractinian corals had diversified
and new forms restricted to shallow, brightly illuminated
waters very likely hosted zooxanthellae (Stanley 2003).
Corals and coralline sponges produced framework, while
other sponges, as well as bryozoans, bivalves and serpulid
worms, were more minor constructors. Calcareous green
algae (producing aragonite) and coralline red algae
(Mg-calcite) contributed significantly to Middle and Late
Triassic reefs (Flügel 2002). Associated fossilized taxa
were a diverse group of ammonites, brachiopods, bivalves,
snails, echinoderms, foraminifers, and worms.
The story of Triassic reef development at first glance
looks like a progression from microbial to sponge-algal to
coral-sponge (metazoan-dominated) reefs. In reality, the
global-environmental instability that peaked with the PTB
continued, with relatively short pulses of reef blooms,
setbacks, and episodes of diversification (Flügel 2002). Yet
the importance of photosynthesis in reef construction was
evident, both in the significant contributions of calcified
algae and the emergence of zooxanthellate corals.
The end-Triassic mass extinction abruptly terminated
reef-building assemblages. Estimates of the percentages of
surviving taxa differ among published reports. For example,
Wells (1957) estimated that ten scleractinian genera survived into the Jurassic, while Flügel (2002) suggested as
few as 3 of 77 Triassic coral genera survived into the Jurassic, with only slightly higher survival in key reef-associated
sponge genera. More recently, Lathuiliere and Marchal
(2009) reported at least 20 surviving genera. Moreover, the
causes of the extinction event are not well constrained,
though ocean acidification associated with emplacement of
the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province is a primary suspect
(Martindale et al. 2012). As discussed earlier for the PTB,
massive volcanic events can produce a cascade of detrimental environmental conditions. The lack of preservation
potential associated with ocean acidification also can
amplify the apparent abruptness of an extinction event.
Following extinctions at the end of the Triassic, Jurassic
reef-building communities slowly reestablished, requiring
about 8 Myr to produce significant buildups. The breakup
of Pangea and associated acceleration of sea-floor spreading
rates resulted in generally rising sea level, increasing atmospheric CO2, and declining Mg/Ca ratios in seawater. Several evolutionary events, as well as environmental trends,
emerged in the Jurassic that fully developed in the Cretaceous Period, with profound influence on global carbonate
production and accumulation, and upon global carbon
cycles. The appearance of calcareous nanoplankton including coccolithophorids in the Early Jurassic, and of the

36

planktic foraminifers in the Middle Jurassic, provided the
potential for carbonate production throughout the surface
oceans and accumulation of pelagic carbonates in deep-sea
settings (depending upon ocean chemistry). On the shallow
shelves, large bivalve species proliferated as carbonate
producers, and trapping carbonate muds produced by the
neritic whiting factory. By the Cretaceous, bivalves
dominated shelves and platforms, especially in tropical
seas (Höfling and Scott 2002; Johnson et al. 2002).
Leinfelder et al. (2002) grouped Jurassic reefs into three
basic types: coral, siliceous sponge, and pure microbolite,
with coral-microbolite intergrades among the most prominent. These authors also noted that buildups produced
largely by bivalves also were relatively common. The
breakup of Pangea provided extensive “trailing-margin”
continental shelves where mixed terrigenous and carbonate
sedimentation was prevalent. Nutrients carried into the shelf
environments by terrestrial runoff likely promoted plankton
densities and accompanying whitings that favored filterfeeding sponge and bivalve assemblages over zooxanthellate
corals (Leinfelder et al. 2002). Pomar and Hallock (2008)
also noted that microbolite buildups were associated with
excess organic matter, low oxygen, and sulfate reduction in
outer shelf/slope settings.
The 80 Myr Cretaceous Period is characterized by widespread carbonate depositional systems, including reefs,
platforms and pelagic carbonates. The term “Cretace” refers
to chalk (pelagic-carbonate) terrains that are widespread in
northern Europe (Harbaugh 1974). Two global “crises”
resulted in extinctions and association changes that
influenced both benthic and planktic biotas, one crisis in
the mid-Early Cretaceous and the other in the early-Late
Cretaceous (Höfling and Scott 2002).
The most important metazoans in Cretaceous buildups
were the rudistid bivalves. There is little evidence that
rudists had algal symbionts; the prevalence of carbonate
muds in most rudist buildups indicates that water transparency may have been poor. Skelton et al. (1992) interpreted
rudists as having been super bafflers, trapping huge
quantities of mud and actually growing upward supported
in mud. Characteristically, rudist thickets and buildups have
relatively few species and few associated organisms.
Banktop habitats occupied by rudist taxa may have been
somewhat analogous to those of modern seagrass beds;
rudist thickets trapped sediments carried in by the currents
as well as sediments produced in situ by the breakdown and
bioerosion of the rudists themselves. Because exceptional
high-latitude warming occurred in the Cretaceous, the low
latitude banktop habitats were consistently very warm and
often hypersaline. The more biologically complex bivalves
may have been better able to survive these extremes than
zooxanthellate corals (Johnson et al. 2002), whose symbiotic

P. Hallock

relationship is particularly sensitive to temperatures above
30  C (Wooldridge 2013).
Geochemical conditions also favored rudists over corals
(Stanley and Hardie 1998; Pomar and Hallock 2008). The
rudists secreted outer shells of calcite, with an inner layer
and muscle insertion sites of aragonite (Skelton 1976).
Proportions of aragonite to calcite varied in different
lineages of rudists; some secreted shells were as much as
60 % aragonite, though many were less than 30 %
(Kauffman and Johnson 1988; Skelton and Gili 2012).
Whatever the proportions, the predominance of rudists
over wholly aragonitic corals represented a decline in aragonite production associated with photosynthesis. Rapid
sea-floor spreading enhanced removal of Mg2+ from seawater at mid-ocean ridges, thereby promoting calcite precipitation (Stanley and Hardie 1998). Volcanic emissions
associated with rapid spreading rates also elevated CO2 in
the Cretaceous atmosphere, making aragonite more soluble
and therefore less energetically advantageous to produce
(Hallock 2011). As noted by Pomar and Hallock (2008),
tropical environmental conditions during the Cretaceous
favored biologically controlled metazoan calcification combined with neritic production of biologically-induced whiting-type calcitic muds. Photosynthetically-enhanced
calcification by scleractinian corals with zooxanthellae was
largely restricted to higher latitude and mesophotic (lowlight, deeper) shelf margins.

2.9.4

Cretaceous Boundary Extinctions

A major biotic crisis ended the Cretaceous Period. While this
mass extinction event is best known for the demise of the
dinosaurs, rudist bivalves also became extinct (Johnson
et al. 2002), as did most shallow-water, tropical carbonateproducing protists and animals (MacLeod and Keller 1996).
Few calcareous tropical species survived the terminal Cretaceous extinction event.
During the Cretaceous many scleractinian corals
occupied deeper shelf and upper slope environments, perhaps to escape warm, saline waters or direct competition
with rudists (Johnson et al. 2002). As a result, at least nine
genera (Rosen 1998) and possibly 26 genera (Fig. 13.9)
survived the extinction. The terminal Cretaceous event was
similar to those of the early Cambrian, late Ordovician, late
Devonian, and late Permian in that reefs generally vanished
a million years or more before the final extinction events
(Copper 1994). Thus, episodes of environmental perturbation or climatic deterioration that caused collapse of reef
ecosystems preceded the terminal extinction events, which
geologists have used to define significant boundaries in
geologic time.

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

Two major competing explanations for mass extinctions,
including the Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-P) boundary
extinctions, are bolide (meteor or comet) impacts and extensive volcanic episodes (Alvarez 2003). Because bolide
impacts are instantaneous events, while extensive volcanism
can take place over 100,000 to a million years or more,
scientists with evidence for more gradual events at the Cretaceous/Paleogene boundary have tended to favor volcanism
as the cause (Officer and Drake 1985). There is now conclusive evidence, including the Chixculub crater on the Yucatan
Peninsula in Mexico, for a massive bolide impact at the K-P
boundary (Alvarez 2003). However, there is also ample
evidence for copious and rapid eruptive volcanic activity
over a wide area in India prior to the K-P boundary
(Bhattacharji et al. 1996). Most importantly, the mechanisms
are not mutually exclusive as a cause of mass extinctions. On
the contrary, if a bolide impact occurred during a period of
environmental deterioration resulting from volcanism,
already stressed ecosystems would more likely have been
pushed to collapse.
Either bolide impact or massive, long-term eruption of
flood basalts would have catastrophically impacted shallowwater, photosynthetic, carbonate-producing reef organisms.
Either process would have profoundly influenced ocean
chemistry in ways detrimental to CaCO3 production. The
energy of a meteor passing through the atmosphere would
have oxidized nitrogen in the atmosphere, resulting in global
acid rain that would have acidified shallow oceanic waters,
dissolving CaCO3. Volcanism emits large quantities of
hydrogen sulfide (H2S), which would have oxidized to sulfur
dioxide (SO2) and hydrated to sulfuric acid (H2SO4),
resulting in global acid rain. Furthermore, the earthquake
caused by a 10 km diameter bolide hitting the Earth could
have eliminated all nutrient-depleted shallow-water
environments worldwide, just by stirring the oceans
(Hallock 1987). Deeper oceanic waters, where there is insufficient light for photosynthesis, are substantially richer in
inorganic dissolved nitrogenous and phosphatic compounds
that are needed by plants to photosynthesize, than most
photic surface waters. These nutrient-rich waters represent
approximately 98 % of the total ocean volume (Hallock
et al. 1991). Such a tremendous shock would have generated
tsunamis and internal waves, rapidly mixing deeper waters
into shallow waters and stimulating red-tide-like blooms of a
few, fast-growing species of phytoplankton (disaster species
– Fischer and Arthur 1977; Copper 1994).
Whatever occurred, among the lessons to be learned from
end-Cretaceous and other major extinction events are that
the most prolific carbonate-producing protists and
metazoans are particularly sensitive to environmental
perturbations because they thrive within relatively narrow
environmental limits. Waters in which they proliferate must
be warm but not too warm, clear and well illuminated but

37

with not too much biologically damaging ultraviolet radiation, nutrient-depleted, and highly supersaturated with
respect to Ca2+ and HCO3. Most reef-building organisms
live at low latitudes on shelves and banks in the shallowest
100 m (330 ft), and thrive at depths less than 20 m (66 ft), in
an ocean that averages 3,800 m (12,500 ft) in depth (Kennett
1982). Waters suitable for shallow-water reef development
make up less than 1 % of the ocean volume under optimum
conditions; suitable benthic habitat is far less. Thus, regional
or global events that eliminate habitat for reef-building and
reef-dwelling plants and animals can eliminate huge numbers of species and are recorded in the rock record as mass
extinction events (Hallock 1987). Because reef species are
often highly specialized to their environment, many
specializations are lost in these events, while less
specialized, more opportunistic species typically survive.

2.9.5

Cenozoic: Time of Recent Animal Life

Paleocene and Eocene shallow-water limestones tend to be
dominated by the fossil remains of bryozoans, coralline
algae, sponges, and foraminifers (Hallock et al. 1991; Copper 1994). High atmospheric CO2 concentrations and greenhouse climate, which reached an apex during the Cretaceous,
continued for another 20 Myr into the Cenozoic (Berner
2004). Diversification of coral assemblages occurred much
earlier than extensive reef construction (Frost 1977). Pochon
et al. (2006) postulated that Symbiodinium zooxanthellae in
corals originated in Early Eocene, with subsequent episodes
of divergence during times of global cooling. Nearly all the
major circumtropical frame-building genera of scleractinian
corals had evolved by the latest Eocene (Veron 2000). Thus,
the Eocene, like the Cretaceous, was a time of diverse coral
assemblages and widespread occurrences of carbonate-producing biotas with limited coral-reef construction. Frost
(1977) suggested that the capacity to construct massive
wave-resistant reef structures developed long before such
structures were widely produced, suggesting geochemical
control, as further discussed by Pomar and Hallock (2008).
Consistent with high atmospheric CO2 concentrations
and low Mg/Ca ratios in seawater (Stanley and Hardie
1998), prolific calcification by calcitic larger foraminifers
and coralline red algae (e.g., Plaziat and Perrin 1992) recovered faster than comparable aragonite production by corals
and calcareous green algae. The best known larger
foraminiferal limestones are the Eocene Nummulitic
Limestones of Egypt, from which the Pyramids were built.
Shallow-water limestones of Eocene age that are rich in
fossils of larger foraminifers are widespread in mid to low
latitudes (Beavington-Penney and Racey 2004). Larger
foraminiferal fossils can be found in Oregon, southern
England and other localities as high as 51 N latitude

38

(Adams et al. 1991; Perrin 2002). Their complex shells, by
analogy with modern larger foraminifers, appear to have
been highly adapted to house algal symbionts. Shallowwater limestones dominated by coralline-red algal nodules
were also common (Bryan 1991). Paleocene-Eocene
limestones dominated by coralline algae or larger
foraminifers are common hydrocarbon reservoirs where
deeper in the subsurface and major aquifers where they are
nearer the surface.
High-latitude cooling began in the middle Eocene, with
widespread Antarctic glaciation at the Eocene-Oligocene
boundary, which DeConto and Pollard (2003) attributed to
declining atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Reefal buildups
were similar to those of the earlier Eocene both in relative
scarcity and composition (Perrin 2002). As the Atlantic
Basin expanded, the Caribbean province became more
isolated from the Tethyan/Indo-Pacific realm. Based on
morphologies, coral families were traditionally assumed to
have arisen in the Indo-Pacific. However, Fukami
et al. (2004), based on molecular genetics, showed that
several Atlantic coral taxa are genetically distinct and represent endemic taxa. Those authors suggested that the divergence occurred near the Eocene-Oligocene boundary.
Coral communities flourished circumtropically beginning
in the late Oligocene. By the early Miocene, reefs and reefassociated biotas worldwide had expanded their latitudinal
distributions by more than 10 north and south (Adams
et al. 1991), reaching their acme in the mid Miocene (Perrin
2002). The expansion in reef-building capacity
corresponded to increasing Mg/Ca ratios in seawater
(Stanley and Hardie 1998) and falling atmospheric CO2
concentrations (Pearson and Palmer 2000), both of which
promoted aragonite precipitation in warm, tropical waters.
Paradoxically, many coral and larger foraminiferal species were lost from Caribbean faunas at the end of the
Oligocene, and many more became extinct during the Miocene (Edinger and Risk 1994). There were also extinctions
of Indo-Pacific corals, but far fewer (Veron 2000). Closure
of the Tethys Seaway further isolated the Atlantic/Caribbean
reef biotas (Pomar and Hallock 2008). Progressive blockage
of the Central American Seaway (Fig. 2.6) probably
accounted for environmental changes that resulted in many
Caribbean extinctions (Edinger and Risk 1994). Throughout
the Paleogene, flow through the Central American seaway
was bi-directional (Nisancioglu et al. 2003). Because the
Atlantic has higher evaporation rates compared with rainfall
rates than the Pacific, sea level in the Pacific is slightly
higher than in the Atlantic. As a consequence, when the
Central America seaway was open, water had to flow from
the eastern Pacific into the Caribbean (Haug et al. 2001).
However, the easterly trade winds forced surface waters to
flow westward from the Caribbean to the eastern Pacific. As
long as the Central American passageway was wide and

P. Hallock

deep, two-way flow was accommodated by westward surface flow and eastward subsurface flow, probably at depths
in excess of 50–100 m (Maier-Reimer et al. 1990). However,
as the Isthmus emerged, flow was constricted and surface
flow likely reversed during calm weather. As a consequence,
nutrient-laden eastern tropical Pacific waters were more
frequently and consistently introduced into Caribbean surface waters.
Edinger and Risk (1994) observed that shelf-edge and
slope-dwelling coral genera were nearly eliminated in the
Atlantic in the early Miocene. The corals that survived were
mostly banktop species capable of tolerating higher nutrients
and higher sedimentation rates, as well as higher bioerosion
rates (e.g., Hallock 1988). Larger foraminifers revealed the
same trends. Slope-dwelling taxa were nearly eliminated,
while shallower-dwelling taxa of bank tops and restricted
environments thrived (Hallock and Peebles 1993). Other
banktop biota, including octocorals and calcareous algae,
became more important components of the Caribbean benthos than on comparable Pacific reefs.
Since the middle Miocene, there has been progressive
high-latitude cooling, compression of tropical habitats, and
increasing temperature gradients between high and low
latitudes (Lear et al. 2003). Pochon et al. (2006) noted that
the majority of extant Symbiodinium lineages have
diversified since Middle Miocene. Some global cooling
likely benefited the coral-Symbiodinium symbiosis, which
is sensitive to high light under elevated temperatures
(Wooldrige 2013). Pomar and Hallock (2008) further
postulated that Neogene cooling supported the co-evolution
of zooxanthellate corals and coralline algae into shallow,
high-energy waters, where their carbonate production potential is highest.

2.10

Pleistocene and Holocene Reefs

Northern hemisphere climatic deterioration accelerated
~2.6 Ma with the onset of the Pleistocene Epoch (Fig. 2.1).
The climatic fluctuations strongly influenced tropical reefassociated biotas in a variety of ways. Some taxa became
extinct. Others, like the fast-growing Acropora and
Montipora, diversified and now account for ~25 % of modern Indo-Pacific coral species (Veron 2000). Successive
isolation and mixing of populations, which typically
accompanies fluctuations in sea level, have long been
recognized as mechanisms promoting evolutionary
diversifications (Hallam 1985). Veron (2000) further proposed the process of reticulate evolution whereby
populations were separated by changes in sea level and
surface currents, and when reconnected, allopatric speciation had occurred, but some closely related taxa then
hybridized, increasing the genetic diversity of resultant

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

reconnected taxa. Pleistocene glacial advances and retreats
induced such successive isolation and mixing events, which
likely contributed to the very high extant species diversities
of Acropora and Montipora.
A fascinating paradox of limestones and climate is that
active reef building and coral evolution occurred during the
Pleistocene, despite high-latitude climatic deterioration that
resulted in as many as 21 glacial advances and retreats
(Delmas 1992). Sea-level fluctuations of as much as 140 m
(450 ft), caused by repeated accumulation and melting of
Northern Hemisphere and Antarctic continental glaciers,
accompanied cyclic reduction and expansion in the areas
of warm, tropical seas. The solution to this paradox may be
that tropical climatic, geochemical, and topographic
conditions during interglacials were nearly optimal for
reef-building. Atmospheric CO2 concentrations were relatively low (though not as low as during glacial advances) and
subtropical/tropical sea surface temperatures were nearly
ideal. Both factors promoted aragonite calcification by
corals and calcareous green algae, which in turn enhanced
their rates of photosynthesis and biological productivity.
Times of rising sea level are also favorable for reef
building, providing space for accumulation of substantial
thicknesses of reef limestone, which have high probability
of preservation in the rock record. Except for active tectonic
areas, most shallow shelves on trailing continental margins
subside at rates of a few centimeters per 1,000 years
(Schlager 1981). In contrast, the most actively accreting
portion of a reef system can grow upward at rates of at
least 4 m/1,000 years, and under exceptional conditions as
much as 20 m/1,000 years (Hubbard, this volume). But reefs
most rapidly accrete when growing in water depths of less
than 20 m, where there is plenty of sunlight for photosynthesis. The only circumstances in which reefs can accrete
upward at high rates for more than about 5,000 years, and
produce more than 20–30 m thicknesses of limestone, are if
the shelf rapidly subsides or sea-level rises. Thus, during
times of interglacial sea-level rise, the margins of continental shelves, limestone banks, and volcanic islands provided
ideal locations for thick sequences of reef-associated
limestones to accumulate (Pomar 2001).

2.11

39

100 ppm of HCO3 from the bicarbonate pool in the oceans
to CO2 in the atmosphere. Erosion of young, predominantly
aragonitic-coral limestones and sediments occurs when sea
level falls, sequestering CO2 from the atmosphere to HCO3
in the oceans. On human time scales, reefs are relatively
minor players in the CO2 story. Fossil fuels, like ancient
limestones, represent long-term storage of CO2 in the Earth’s
crust. Human activities, especially the burning of fossil fuels,
have added more CO2 to the atmosphere in 100 years than
reef building did in 15,000 years.
The major lesson to be learned from the history of reefs is
that they are constructed by complex and specialized
biological communities. Because these systems are highly
adapted to a limited range of environmental conditions, they
are extremely sensitive to local, regional and global environmental perturbations. Environmental crises, culminating in
global mass-extinction events, have repeatedly caused the
demise of whole communities of reef-building organisms
and the myriad of organisms that depended upon reef
structures for habitat. Subsequent recovery of reef-building
communities required millions of years.
Some individuals argue that humans are simply part of
nature; that exploding human populations are naturally
generating the present episode of mass extinction from
which the Earth will recover in 10 or 20 million years. But
from a human perspective there is a difference between a
mass extinction event caused by a meteor impact and the
ongoing one being caused by human activities. Human intelligence has reduced biological limitations on both the
growth rate of human populations and the environmental
damage that any individual human can cause. Is it too
much to hope that human intelligence can be utilized to
bring an end to the current human-generated mass-extinction
event before the most specialized and diverse biological
communities, like coral reefs and rain forests, are lost to
future human generations? A few human cultures, notably
Micronesian inhabitants of atolls and coral pinnacles, are
known to have developed sustainable societies in resourcelimited habitats. Can “modern” humans develop a sustainable global society based on recognition of globally-limited
resources? Or do humans simply represent another of the
“disaster” species that proliferate globally at mass-extinction
events; in this case, the Anthropocene Mass Extinction?

Conclusions

The history of reefs is like a fascinating and ongoing novel,
full of paradoxes and unexpected feedback mechanisms. One
of the most difficult concepts to understand is that limestones
are both storehouses and sources of CO2, depending upon the
times scale being considered. Through geologic time,
limestones have stored CO2 and are therefore responsible
for a livable planet. Yet on the shorter time scales of glacial
cycles, interglacial reef building may move as much as

References
Adams CG, Lee DE, Rosen BR (1991) Conflicting isotopic and biotic
evidence for tropical sea-surface temperatures during the Tertiary.
Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 77:289–313
Agawin NSR, Duarte GM (2002) Evidence of direct particle trapping
by a tropical seagrass meadow. Estuaries 25:1205–1209
Alvarez W (2003) Comparing the evidence relevant to impact and flood
basalt at times of major mass extinctions. Astrobiology 3:153–161

40
Axelrod DI (1992) What is an equable climate. Palaeogeogr
Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 91:1–12
Barash MS (2012) Mass extinction of ocean organisms at the
Paleozoic-Mesozoic boundary: effects and causes. Oceanology
52:238–248
Bathurst RGC (1976) Carbonate sediments and their diagenesis.
Elsevier, Amsterdam, p 658
Baumgartner LK, Reid RP, Dupraz C, Decho AW, Buckley DH, Spear
JR, Przekop KM, Visscher PT (2006) Sulfate reducing bacteria in
microbial mats: changing paradigms, new discoveries. Sediment
Geol 185:131–145
Beavington-Penney SJ, Racey A (2004) Ecology of extant nummulitids
and other larger benthic foraminifera: applications in palaeoenvironmental analysis. Earth-Sci Rev 67:219–265
Beerling DJ, Berner RA (2005) Feedbacks and the coevolution of
plants and atmospheric CO2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
102:1302–1305
Berner RA (2004) The Phanerozoic carbon cycle: CO2 and O2. Oxford
University Press, New York, p 150
Berner RA (2006) Inclusion of the weathering of volcanic rocks in the
GEOCARBSULF model. Am J Sci 306:295–302
Bernhard JM, Edgcomb VP, Visscher PT, McIntyre-Wressnig A, Summons RE, Bouxsein ML, Louis L, Jeglinski M (2013) Insights into
foraminiferal influences on microfabrics of microbialites at
Highborne Cay, Bahamas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
110:9830–9834
Bhattacharji S, Chatterjee N, Wampler JM, Nayak PN, Deshmukh SS
(1996) Indian intraplate and continental margin rifting, lithospheric
extension, and mantle upwelling in Deccan flood basalt volcanism
near the K/T boundary: evidence from mafic dike swarms. J Geol
104:379–398
Bryan JR (1991) A Paleocene coral-algal-sponge reef from southwestern Alabama and the ecology of early Tertiary reefs. Lethaia
24:423–438
Camoin GF, Davies PJ (eds) (1998) Reefs and carbonate platforms in
the Pacific and Indian Oceans. International Association of
Sedimentologists, London, Blackwell Science, London, Spec Publ
25, 336 pp
Canfield DE, Raiswell R (1999) The evolution of the sulfur cycle. Am J
Sci 299:697–723
Cloud P (1973) Paleoecological significance of banded-iron formation.
Econ Geol 68:1135–1143
Cohen AL, McConnaughey TA (2003) Geochemical perspectives on
coral mineralization. Rev Mineral Geochem 54:151–187
Condie KC (1989) Origin of the Earth’s crust. Palaeogeogr
Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 75:57–81
Conway Morris S (1993) The fossil record and the early evolution of
the Metazoa. Nature 361:219–225
Copper P (1994) Ancient reef ecosystem expansion and collapse. Coral
Reefs 13:3–11
Copper P (2002) Silurian and Devonian reefs: 80 million years of
global greenhouse betwee two ice ages. In: Kiessling W, Flügel E,
Golonka J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns, Spec Publ 72. SEPM
(Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp 181–238
Crevello PD, Wilson JL, Sarg JF, Read JF (eds) (1989) Controls on
carbonate platform and Basin Development. Society of Economic
Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Tulsa, Oklahoma, Spec Publ
44, 405 pp
DeConto RM, Pollard D (2003) Rapid Cenozoic glaciation of
Antarctica induced by declining atmospheric CO2. Nature
421:245–249
Delmas RJ (1992) Environmental information form ice cores. Rev
Geophys 30:1–21
Dill RF, Shinn EA, Jones AT et al (1986) Giant subtidal stromatolites
forming in normal salinity waters. Nature 324:55–58

P. Hallock
Dobretsov N, Kochanov N, Rozanov A, Zavarzin G (eds) (2008)
Biosphere origin and evolution. Springer, New York, 427 pp
Drake MJ (2000) Accretion and primary differentiation of the Earth: a
personal journey. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 64:2363–2369
Edinger EN, Risk MJ (1994) Oligocene-Miocene extinction and geographic restriction of Caribbean corals – roles of turbidity, temperature and nutrients. Palaios 9:576–598
Eyles N (1993) Earth’s glacial record and its tectonic setting. Earth-Sci
Rev 35:1–248
Fagerstrom JA (1987) The evolution of reef communities. Wiley,
New York, 600 pp
Feely RA, Doney SC, Cooley SR (2009) Ocean acidification: present
conditions and future changes in a high-CO2 world. Oceanography
2:39–47
Fischer AG, Arthur MA (1977) Secular variations in the pelagic realm.
In: Cook HE, Enos P (eds) Deep-water carbonate environments,
Spec Publ 25. SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp
19–50
Flower BP (1999) Paleoclimatology – warming without high CO2?
Nature 399:313–314
Flügel E (2002) Triassic reef patterns. In: Kiessling W, Flügel E,
Golonka J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns, Spec Publ 72. SEPM
(Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp 391–463
Frakes LA, Francis JE (1988) A guide to Phanerozoic cold polar
climates from high-latitude ice-rafting in the Cretaceous. Nature
333:547–548
Frost SH (1977) Cenozoic reef systems of Caribbean – prospects for
paleoecologic synthesis. In: Frost SH, Weiss MP, Saunders JB (eds)
Reefs and related carbonates – ecology and sedimentology. Am
Assoc Petrol Geol, Tulsa, OK, Stud Geol 4:93–110
Fukami H, Budd AF, Paulay G, Sole-Cava A, Chen CLA, Iwao K,
Knowlton N (2004) Conventional taxonomy obscures deep divergence between Pacific and Atlantic corals. Nature 427:832–835
Gilliland RL (1989) Solar evolution. Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol
Palaeoecol 75:35–55
Glynn PW (1988) El Niño warming, coral mortality and reef framework destruction by echinoid bioerosion in the eastern Pacific.
Galaxea 7:129–160
Grant J, Gust G (1987) Prediction of coastal sediment stability from
photopigment content of mats of purple sulfur bacteria. Nature
330:244–246
Grotzinger JP (1989) Facies and evolution of Precambrian carbonate
depositional systems: emergence of the modern platform archetype.
In: Crevello PD, Wilson JL, Sarg JF, Read JF (eds) Controls on
carbonate platform and basin development, Spec Publ 44. Society
of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Tulsa, pp 79–106
Grotzinger JP, Knoll AH (1999) Stromatolites in Precambrian
carbonates: evolutionary mileposts or environmental dipsticks?
Ann Rev Earth Planet Sci 27:313–358
Hallam A (1985) Jurassic molluscan migration and evolution in relation
to sea level changes. In: Friedman GM (ed) Sedimentary and evolutionary cycles. Springer, Berlin, pp 4–5
Hallock P (1987) Fluctuations in the trophic resource continuum: a
factor in global diversity cycles? Paleoceanography 2:457–471
Hallock P (1988) The role of nutrient availability in bioerosion:
consequences to carbonate buildups. Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol
Palaeoecol 62:275–291
Hallock P (2001) Coral reefs, carbonate sedimentation, nutrients, and
global change. In: Stanley GD Jr (ed) The history and sedimentology of ancient reef ecosystems. Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publishers, New York, pp 387–427
Hallock P (2011) Modern coral reefs under global change: new
opportunities to understand carbonate depositional hiatuses. In:
Stanley GD Jr (ed) Corals and reefs: crises, collapse and change.
The Paleontological Society Papers 17:121–130

2

Changing Influences Between Life and Limestones in Earth History

Hallock P, Peebles MW (1993) Foraminifera with chlorophyte
endosymbionts: habitats of six species in the Florida Keys. Mar
Micropaleontol 20:277–292
Hallock P, Premoli Silva I, Boersma A (1991) Similarities between
planktonic and larger foraminiferal evolutionary trends through
Paleogene paleoceanographic changes. Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol
Palaeoecol 83:49–64
Harbaugh JW (1974) Stratigraphy and the geologic time scale. Brown
Publishers, Dubuque, 136 pp
Hardie LA (1996) Secular variation in seawater chemistry: an explanation for the coupled secular variation in the mineralogies of marine
limestones and potash evaporites over the past 600 my. Geology
24:279–283
Haug GH, Tiedemann R, Zahn R, Ravelo AC (2001) Role of Panama
uplift on oceanic freshwater balance. Geology 29:207–210
Höfling R, Scott RW (2002) Early and mid-Cretaceous buildups. In:
Kiessling W, Flügel E, Golonka J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns,
Spec Publ 72. SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp
521–548
Holland HD (2006) The oxygenation of the atmosphere and oceans.
Phil Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 361:903–915
James NP (1983) Reefs. In: Scholle PA, Bebout DG, Moore CH (eds)
Carbonate depositional environments. Am Assoc Petrol Geol,
Tulsa, Memoir 33:345–462
James NP (1997) The cool-water carbonate depositional realm. In:
James NP, Clarke JAD (eds) Cool-water carbonates, Spec. Publ.
No. 56. SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp 1–20
James NP, Clarke JAD (eds) (1997) Cool-water carbonates. SEPM
(Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, Spec. Publ.
No. 56, 440 pp
Johnson CC, Sanders D, Kauffman EG, Hay WW (2002) Patterns and
processes influencing upper Cretaceous reefs. In: Kiessling W,
Flügel E, Golonka J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns. SEPM (Society
for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp 549–585, Spec Publ 72
Kauffman EG, Johnson CC (1988) The morphological and ecological
evolution of middle and upper Cretaceous reef building rudistids.
Palaios 3:194–126
Kennett JP (1982) Marine geology. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
813 pp
Kiessling W (2001) Phanerozoic reef trends based on the Paleoreef
Database. In: Stanley GD Jr (ed) The history and sedimentology of
ancient reef ecosystems. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers,
New York, pp 41–88
Kiessling W, Flügel E, Golonka J (eds) (2002) Phanerozoic reef
patterns. SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, Spec
Publ 72:775 pp
Kinsey DW, Hopley D (1991) The significance of coral reefs as global
carbon sinks–response to Greenhouse. Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol
Palaeoecol 89:363–377
Knoll AH, Javaux EJ, Hewitt D, Cohen P (2006) Eukaryotic organisms
in Proterozoic oceans. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci
361:1023–1038
Lathuiliére B, Marchal D (2009) Extinction, survival and recovery of
corals from the Triassic to Middle Jurassic time. Terra Nova
21:57–66
Lees A (1975) Possible influence of salinity and temperature on modern
shelf carbonate sedimentation. Mar Geol 19:159–198
Leinfelder RR, Schmid DU, Nose M, Werner W (2002) Jurassic
reef patterns–the expression of a changing globe. In: Kiessling W,
Flügel E, Golonka J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns, Spec
Publ 72. SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp
465–520
Logan BW, Read JF, Hagan GM et al (1974) Evolution and diagenesis
of Quaternary carbonate sequences, Shark Bay, Western Australia.
Am Assoc Petrol Geol Mem 22:358 pp
Lovelock JE (2000) The ages of Gaia: a biography of our living earth.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, p 267

41
Lutz BP (2010) Low-latitude northern hemisphere oceanographic and
climatic responses to early shoaling of the Central American Seaway. Stratigraphy 7:151–176
Mackenzie FT, Anderssen AJ (2013) The marine carbon system and
ocean acidification during Phanerozoic Time. Geochem Pers 2:227
pp
MacLeod N, Keller G (1996) Cretaceous-tertiary mass extinctions:
biotic and environmental changes. W. W. Norton and Company,
New York, 575 pp
Maier-Reimer E, Mikalojewicz U, Crowley T (1990) Ocean GCM
sensitivity experiment with an open Central American isthmus.
Paleoceanography 5:349–366
Margulis L (1993) Symbiosis and cell evolution, 2nd edn. Freeman,
New York, 419 pp
Martindale RC, Berelson WM, Corsetti FA, Bottjer DJ, West AJ (2012)
Constraining carbonate chemistry at a potential ocean acidification
event (the Triassic-Jurassic boundary) using the presence of corals
and coral reefs in the fossil record. Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol
Palaeoecol 350:114–123
McConnaughey TA, Whelan JF (1997) Calcification generates protons
for nutrient and bicarbonate uptake. Earth-Sci Rev 42:95–117
Milliman JD (1974) Marine carbonates. Springer, Berlin, 375 pp
Monty CLV (1995) The rise and nature of carbonate mud-mounds: an
introductory actualistic approach. Int Assoc Sedimentol Spec Publ
23:11–48
Morse JW, Mackenzie FT (1990) Geochemistry of sedimentary
carbonates. Elsevier, New York, 707 pp
Neumann AC (1966) Observations on coastal erosion in Bermuda and
measurements of the boring rates of the sponge Cliona lampa.
Limnol Oceanogr 11:92–108
Nisancioglu KH, Raymo ME, Stone PH (2003) Reorganization of
Miocene deep-water circulation in response to the shoaling of the
Central American Seaway. Paleoceanography 18: art. #1006
Och LM, Shields-Zhou GA (2012) The Neoproterozoic oxygenation
event: environmental perturbations and biogeochemical cycling.
Earth-Sci Rev 110:26–57
Officer CB, Drake CL (1985) Terminal cretaceous environmental
events. Science 227:1161–1167
Pagani M, Caldeira K, Berner R, Beerling DJ (2009) The role of
terrestrial plants in limiting atmospheric CO2 decline over the past
24 million years. Nature 460:85–94
Pearson PN, Palmer MR (2000) Atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations over the past 60 million years. Nature 406:695–699
Pearson PN, Ditchfield PW, Singano J, Harcourt-Brown KG, Nicholas
CJ, Olsson RK, Shackleton NJ, Hall MA (2001) Warm tropical sea
surface temperatures in the late Cretaceous and Eocene epochs.
Nature 413:481–487
Pentecost A (1991) Calcification processes in algae and cyanobacteria.
In: Riding R (ed) Calcareous algae and stromatolites. Springer,
New York, pp 3–20
Perrin C (2002) Tertiary: the emergence of modern reef ecosystems. In:
Kiessling W, Flügel E, Golonka J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns,
Spec Publ 72. SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp
587–621
Pierrehumbert RT, Abbot DS, Voigt A, Koll D (2011) Climate of the
neoproterozoic. Ann Rev Earth Planet Sci 39:417–460
Plaziat JC, Perrin C (1992) Multikilometer sized reefs built by
foraminiferans (Solenomeris) from the early Eocene of the
Pyrenean domain (S France, N Spain): paleoecologic relations
with coral reefs. Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol
96:195–232
Pochon X, Montoya-Burgos JI, Stadelmann B, Pawlowski J (2006)
Molecular phylogeny, evolutionary rates, and divergence timing
of the symbiotic dinoflagellate genus Symbiodinium. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 38:20–30
Pomar L (2001) Types of carbonate platforms: a genetic approach.
Basin Res 13:313–334

42
Pomar L, Hallock P (2008) Carbonate factories: a conundrum in sedimentary geology. Earth-Sci Rev 87:134–169
Pomar L, Morsilli M, Hallock P, Bádenas B (2012) Internal waves, an
under-explored source of turbulence events in the sedimentary
record. Earth-Sci Rev 111:56–81
Raymo ME (1994) The initiation of northern hemisphere glaciation.
Ann Rev Earth Planet Sci 22:353–383
Reid RP, Macintyre IG, Browne KM, Steneck RS, Miller T (1995)
Modern marine stromatolites in the Exuma-Cays, Bahamas –
uncommonly common. Facies 33:1–17
Reid RP, Visscher PT, Decho AW, Stolz JF, Bebout BM, Dupraz C,
Macintyre IG, Paerl HW, Pinckney JL, Prufert-Bebout L, Steppe
TF, Des Marais DJ (2000) The role of microbes in accretion,
lamination and early lithification of modern marine stromatolites.
Nature 406:989–992
Reid RP, James NP, Macintyre IG, Dupraz CP, Burne RV (2003) Shark
Bay stromatolites: microfabrics and reinterpretation of origins.
Facies 49:299–324
Riding R (ed) (1991) Calcareous algae and stromatolites. Springer,
New York, 571 pp
Riding R (2000) Microbial carbonates: the geological record of
calcified bacterial-algal mats and biofilms. Sedimentology 47
(Suppl 1):179–214
Riding R (2004) Solenopora is a chaetetid sponge, not an alga.
Palaeontology 47:117–122
Robbins LL, Blackwelder PL (1992) Biochemical and ultrastructural
evidence for the origin of whitings – a biologically induced calcium
carbonate precipitation mechanism. Geology 20:464–468
Rosen BR (1998) Corals, reefs, algal symbiosis and global change: the
Lazarus factor. In: Culver SJ, Rawson PF (eds) Biotic response to
global change: the last 145 million years. Chapman & Hall, London,
pp 164–180
Rosenquist J, Chassefiere E (1995) Inorganic-chemistry of O2 in a
dense primitive atmosphere. Planet Space Sci 43:3–10
Rowland SM, Shapiro RS (2002) Reef patterns and environmental
influences in the Cambrian and earliest Ordovician. In:
Kiessling W, Flügel E, Golonka J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns,
Spec Publ 72. SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp
95–128
Sandberg P (1983) An oscillating trend in Phanerozoic non-skeletal
carbonate mineralogy. Nature 305:19–22
Schlager W (1981) The paradox of drowned reefs and carbonate
platforms. Geol Soc Am Bull Part 1 92:197–211
Schlager W (2000) Sedimentation rates and growth potential of tropical, cool water and mud mound carbonate factories. Geol Soc Lond
Spec Publ 178:217–227
Schlager W (2003) Benthic carbonate factories of the Phanerozoic. Int J
Earth Sci 92:445–464
Scholle PA, Bebout DG, Moore CH (eds) (1983) Carbonate depositional environments. American Association of Petroleum
Geologists, Tulsa, Memoir 33, 708 pp
Scotese CR (2002) http://www.scotese.com (PALEOMAP website)
Seibold E, Berger WH (2010) The sea floor: an introduction to marine
geology, 3rd edn. Springer, Berlin/New York/Heidelberg, 288 pp
Skelton PW (1976) Functional morphology of the Hippuritidae. Lethaia
9:83–100
Skelton PW, Gili E (2012) Rudists and carbonate platforms in the
Aptian: a case study on biotic interactions with ocean chemistry
and climate. Sedimentology 59(SI):81–117
Skelton PW, Gili E, Masse J-P (1992) Rudists as successful sedimentdwellers, not reef-builders, on Cretaceous carbonate platforms:

P. Hallock
Fifth North Am Paleontol Conv Abstracts and Program, Paleontological Society Spec Publ 6:271
Stanley GD Jr (1992) Tropical reef ecosystems and their evolution.
Encycl Earth Syst Sci 4:375–388
Stanley GD Jr (ed) (2001) The history and sedimentology of ancient
reef ecosystems. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,
458 pp
Stanley GD Jr (2003) The evolution of modern corals and their early
history. Earth-Sci Rev 60:195–225
Stanley SM, Hardie LA (1998) Secular oscillations in the carbonate
mineralogy of reef-building and sediment-producing organisms
driven by tectonically forced shifts in seawater chemistry.
Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 144:3–19
Swart PK, Eberli GP, McKenzie J (eds) (2009) Perspective in carbonate
geology: a tribute to the career of Robert Nathan Ginsburg, IAS
Special Publication 41
Toomey DF (ed) (1981) European fossil reef models. SEPM (Society
for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, Spec Publ 30, 546 pp
Vescei A, Berger WH (2004) Increase of atmospheric CO2 during
deglaciation: constraints on the coral reef hypothesis from patterns
of deposition. Global Biogeochem Cycles 18(1):GB1035
Veron JEN (2000) Corals of the world, vol 1. Australian Institute of
Marine Science, Townsville, 463 pp
Wahlman GP (2002) Upper Carboniferous–Lower Permian
(Bashkirian-Kungarian) mounds and reefs. In: Kiessling W,
Flügel E, Golonka J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns, Spec Publ
72. SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp 271–338
Webb GE (2001) Biologically induced carbonate precipitation in reefs
through time. In: Stanley GD Jr (ed) The history and sedimentology
of ancient reef ecosystems. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers,
New York, pp 159–204
Webb GE (2002) Latest Devonian and early Carboniferous reefs:
depressed reef building after the middle Paleozoic collapse. In:
Kiessling W, Flügel E, Golonka J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns,
Spec Publ 72. SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp
239–269
Webby BD (2002) Patterns of Ordovician reef development. In:
Kiessling W, Flügel E, Golonka J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns,
Spec Publ 72. SEPM (Society for Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp
129–179
Weidlich O (2002) Middle and late Permian reefs – distributional
patters and reservoir potential. In: Kiessling W, Flügel E, Golonka
J (eds) Phanerozoic reef patterns, Spec Publ 72. SEPM (Society for
Sedimentary Geology), Tulsa, pp 339–390
Wells JW (1957) Coral reefs. In: Hedgpeth JW (ed) Treatise on marine
ecology and paleoecology, vol 1, Ecology, memoir 67. The Geological Society of America, New York, pp 609–631
Wood R (1999) Reef evolution. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
426 pp
Wooldridge SA (2013) Breakdown of the coral-algae symbiosis:
towards formalising a linkage between warm-water bleaching
thresholds and the growth rate of the intracellular zooxanthellae.
Biogeosciences 10:1647–1658
Worsley TR, Nance RD, Moody JB (1986) Tectonic cycles and the
history of the earth’s biogeochemical and paleoceanographic
record. Paleoceanography 3:233–263
Yajnik KS, Swathi PS (2012) Inter-decadal trends in the annual cycles
of atmospheric CO2 at Mauna Loa. Curr Sci 102:774–782
Yuan XL, Xiao SH, Taylor TN (2005) Lichen-like symbiosis 600 million years ago. Science 308:1017–1020

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter
of Scale
Dennis K. Hubbard

Nature is what nature is. . ... science is what we think nature is on a given day.
(A. Conrad Neumann)

Abstract

The geological distribution and developmental history of coral reefs have been largely
controlled by physical factors such as plate tectonics, sea-level changes, wave energy,
salinity, light, temperature, nutrients, sediment, and antecedent topography. Although the
geological and biological patterns have generally been consistent over the past 12,000
years, sub-millennial intervals of variation remind us that long-term patterns provide only
part of the picture. Looking forward, changes in seawater temperature, storm intensity,
aragonite saturation state and pH may bring a major shift in the balance between carbonate
production, destruction and export. While rising sea level alone will probably not significantly change reef communities or over-top low reef islands, even small increases of water
depth will have disproportionate effects on the wave energy passing over the reef crest.
Moreover, the impacts of increasing storminess will rival declining coral cover as a major
control over the carbonate budget of coral reefs in the coming century. Understanding what
is to come will require a perspective that is impossible from any single discipline.
Keywords

Carbonate budget  Development  Holocene  Accretion  Zonation

3.1

Introduction

By the 1990s, the decline of “reef health” was already a focal
point in both the popular and scientific literature. Outbreaks
of the crown-of-thorns seastar Acanthaster planci had
devastated large sections of the northern Great Barrier
Reef (Endean 1973; Moran 1986). In the Caribbean,
overfishing (McClanahan and Shafir 1990), followed by the
sudden and still largely unexplained population crash of the
long-spined sea urchin Diadema antillarum (Lessios
et al. 1984) resulted in a shift from reefs dominated by corals

D.K. Hubbard (*)
Department of Geology, Oberlin College, 52 West Lorain Street,
Oberlin, OH 44074, USA
e-mail: dennis.hubbard@oberlin.edu

to those on which macroalgae were the principal component
(Hughes 1994; Jackson et al. 2014). In the years immediately
following its original description (Gladfelter 1982), White
Band Disease (WBD) had been largely ignored. However,
the subsequent decimation of the Acropora palmata community throughout the Caribbean and western Atlantic by WBD
(Aronson and Precht 2001b) put it at the center of the debate
on community stability and its relationship to reef development. Harvell et al. (1999) described a host of new diseases
and the list continues to grow. A scientific focus on increasing coral bleaching and disease triggered U.S. congressional
hearings in 1992 and a greater popular awareness of the
declining state of the world’s coral reefs.
None of these issues have gone away since “Life and
Death in Coral Reefs” first appeared in 1997. Overall reef
decline continues (Gardner et al. 2003; Hughes et al. 2003;

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_3

43

44

Carpenter et al. 2008; Burke et al. 2011; De’ath et al. 2012).
In the Caribbean, White Band Disease has been joined by
others that have attacked the genus Orbicella in particular
(Bruckner and Hill 2009). While the region is home to only
8 % of the world’s coral reefs, it has been the focus of over
half of the world’s disease reports (Harvell et al. 2004).
Looking ahead, we anticipate increased pressure by combined bleaching and disease (Miller et al. 2009), lower pH
(Zeebe and Wolf-Gladrow 2001; Hoegh-Guldberg et al.
2007), accelerating sea-level rise (Church and White 2011)
and increasing storm intensity (Webster et al. 2005).
Reef decline is nothing new, not historically and certainly
not geologically. Caribbean coral diversity has been declining for at least the past 30 million years in response to a
gradual restriction of what was once a great circumequatorial Tethys Sea some 200 million years ago (Frost
1977). The final door was slammed shut on Atlantic-Pacific
larval exchange with the formation of the Isthmus of Panama
over the past few million years (Murdock et al. 1997;
Vermeij 1978, 1993). More recently, Homo sapiens has
exerted ever-greater control on reef development as population has increased and, with it, human exploitation of critical
habitats and resources in tropical coastal areas. Changes in
tropical wetness over the past 12,000 years (Hodell
et al. 1991; Thompson et al. 1995; Gasse 2000) have
facilitated an agrarian society and the more intense resource
utilization that accompanies it. Jackson (1997) proposed that
the reefs we all consider “pristine” in our recent discussions
had already suffered significant decline long before
ecologists started looking carefully at coral reefs, and certainly before serious monitoring efforts began.
In the 1980s the emphasis was more on site-specific and
seemingly isolated decline related to nearby centers of human
exploitation. Gradients of increased impact in the direction of
cities, coastal development projects or other intensive anthropogenic activities drove research toward understanding the
links between stress and coral decline on the scale of single
reefs. Management strategies were largely focused on
identifying problems that could be tied to a specific cause
and then mediating that perceived source of stress by legal
regulation. Inherent in this strategy was the pragmatic concept
of establishing thresholds below which development could
continue with “acceptable” levels of local decline.
More recent changes in how we think about reef decline
have been driven by a growing awareness of the interconnectedness of global systems. It has become increasingly
apparent that changes on “our” reef may be as much a result
of distant forces as those we can measure locally. As our
focus shifts more toward global controls, factors like intensification of atmospheric instability due to rising global
temperatures, faster sea-level rise, and the potential for
facilitating pathogenic stressors have expanded. As a result,
our management perspective has broadened to include

D.K. Hubbard

factors that are not specific to a single reef or even a single
region. With this redirection has come a heightened awareness that we need to think about coral reefs at a variety of
spatial and temporal scales: from genetic shifts at the cellular
level to the response to pollution at the organism level and
vertical accretion across entire reefs – all in light of recent
climatic shifts occurring at local, regional and even global
scales. Equally important is temporal scale – from the duration of individual studies where processes can be observed
and measured up through time spans greater than the lives of
individual researchers or even the disciplines of ecology or
geology.

3.2

The Importance of Perspective

This chapter considers the processes that control the “look”
of modern coral reefs and their fossil forebears. The scale on
which these processes occur is discussed along with the
varying perspectives of researchers from different
disciplines. Biologists have the advantage of being able to
directly observe and measure changes in both processes and
the organisms that they control. The accuracy of their
characterizations is limited only by their originality and the
sensitivity of the methods and instruments that they use.
However, this ability to directly observe comes at a price.
The intensity and resulting costs associated with such
detailed measurements make it difficult to conduct studies
over larger areas. As a result, “typical” areas are often
described as proxies for much larger pieces of real estate.
Also, the lifetime of individual researchers and the short
attention span of funding agencies severely limit the temporal perspective of even the best site-specific investigations.
Mapping provides a detailed snapshot of what a reef looks
like, the myriad interactions on that landscape and the processes that mediate either change or stability. Monitoring
records provide a short “newsreel” of change over a funding
cycle or, at best, the career of an individual researcher. Most
recently the “headlines” have focused on decline. What is
missing is the context of the longer-term record within
which these brief events have occurred. To illustrate this
one need only consider that the duration of a National
Science Foundation Long-Term Ecological Monitoring program is typically a few decades at best.
In contrast, geologists must deal with a fickle record that
has been ravaged by taphonomy (the selective and taxonomically biased preservation of different organisms in different physical settings), diagenesis (the chemical changes
that obliterate or obscure details after burial) and erosion
(the wholesale removal of entire, and often extensive
intervals of time). What is left are the tattered remains of a
full-length motion picture with pieces of film marred by
countless splices, seemingly endless scratches that obscure

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

fine detail, and even changes in the starring actors midway
through the film. Evolutionary changes make comparison
with modern scleractinians difficult at best, and the blurring
of the record by unknown physical and chemical forces since
original deposition only make things worse. The perspective
of great space and time offers countless advantages over
shorter-term studies. What is often missing, however, are
the details that characterize modern biological investigation.
The challenge is to take the best of both and combine that
into an integrated view that gives us our best chance of
accurately separating natural from anthropogenic change.
What can we take from modern biological studies to help
us understand the distant past and the vagaries of reef evolution? What can we learn from the longer but poorer geologic
record that might help us to put the recent decline revealed
by monitoring studies into a longer-term natural context?
While fraught with peril, this integrated approach should be
the holy grail of management. However difficult the task,
effectively integrating and comparing geological and
biological data is what presently stands between effective
management strategy and the misdirection of already limited
environmental capital to things that are either beyond our
control or “aren’t really broken”.
The initial version of this chapter that appeared in 1997
focused primarily on scale as a way to explain how
biologists and geologists see reefs differently. While that is
still a central theme, challenges related to climate change
have added different dimensions that cannot be explained by
simple scaling. Even biologists are thinking more about
larger-scale carbonate cycling as carbonate producers are
being lost, ocean chemistry has made it more difficult to
maintain a skeleton and changing nutrient regimes are fundamentally changing the balance between carbonate
producers and organisms that destroy substrate. However,
this view still remains fundamentally biological in nature.
It is becoming increasingly obvious that physical factors
are playing an expanding role that cannot be adequately
addressed by even the best short-term study that focuses
solely on biotic interactions. The contributions of diversity
to the complex structure that we call a reef come full circle
when we recognize that this heterogeneity, in turn, controls
the organisms that it can support. Bioerosion is flattening
reefs, changing both their physical and biological structures.
The fate of bioeroded sediment within the system is changing
drastically as larger storms appear to be more commonplace.
Thus, the shift toward greater physical control may suggest
that our different perspectives of “change” are more than just
looking at the same suite of biologically dominated processes
through different lenses. The fate of low-lying islands will be
defined as much by physical factors like sediment transport,
the increasing loss of protection by lagging reefs and the
greater loss of detritus as storms become more violent as it
will be by declining abundance and diversity.

45

This chapter is divided into three parts. The first outlines
the dominant factors controlling the location and character
of coral reefs today and, by extension, in the geologic record.
Having established these basic controls, we will turn briefly
to how corals have built the massive structures beneath
them. Finally, we attempt to integrate all this information
into a consideration of reefs under the influence of global
change. For obvious reasons, the latter will carry an admittedly geologic bias, in large part due to the training of the
author. However, it is also somewhat purposeful inasmuch
as the biological perspective has historically dominated the
discussion of reef decline. The greatest possibility for a new
contribution to the dialog would, therefore, perhaps lie outside that area.

3.3

Processes That Control Reef
Development

The following pages discuss the factors that are generally
thought to be critical in determining where reefs occur
today and what they look like. To facilitate the presentation, these have been broken down into three groups, based
on the scale at which they are most important. However,
some can operate at different scales and boundaries often
overlap. Macro-scale processes are those that exert control
either globally or over very large distances (i.e., thousands
of kilometers) and over longer periods of time. Primary
among these are worldwide changes in sea level and largescale movements of the Earth’s crust. Meso-scale processes
are generally physical-oceanographic in nature and operate
within individual oceans or basins (e.g., latitudinal changes
in mean water temperature, variations in wave energy
across an ocean basin) and over historical time scales.
Micro-scale processes are those that affect organisms at
the spatial scale of individual reefs and over a time scale
from individual studies to the career of a researcher. Purposefully absent from this discussion, although no less
important, are even shorter-term (e.g., minutes to days),
organism-level processes that are detailed in other chapters
within this volume. The miniscule attention span of
politicians is below the threshold of this discussion.

3.3.1

Macro-scale Controls

3.3.1.1 Tectonics
Our earliest reef studies focused on the role of major crustal
shifts in preserving fossil reefs. Workers in the Italian Alps
and elsewhere during the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries (e.g., Darwin 1842, 1913; Mojsisovics 1879)
concluded that great upheavals of the Earth’s surface must
have been responsible for fossil reefs that occurred so far

46

D.K. Hubbard

Fig. 3.1 Two theories on the origin of fringing reefs, barrier reefs and
atolls. Darwin felt that the spatial patterns he observed from the
H.M.S. Beagle reflected an evolutionary sequence. As a volcano
subsides, the reef accretes vertically to stay near sea level and the
fringing reef (a) evolves into a barrier reef (b) and, eventually,
an atoll (c). In contrast, Daly (right) envisioned changing sea level

as the sole determinant of reef character. During a lowstand, waves
plane off a platform (d, e). During the ensuing sea-level rise, reefs form
near the edge of the new shelf. Whether a barrier reef (f) or an atoll (g)
will form depends on the extent of the island’s removal. Deep cores
through Eniwetak and Bikini Atolls eventually vindicated Darwin’s
hypothesis

above sea level. It was already known that, while modern
shallow-water corals do not generally exist at depths greater
than 100 m, many fossil reefs attained a thickness of hundreds
or even thousands of meters. It was correctly posited that this
reflected the upward building of the reef by organisms within
the photic zone as the foundation beneath them sank gradually
– the process of subsidence (Darwin 1842).
Throughout the 1800s, the geological community debated
over how subsidence related to reef development. In 1832,
Charles Lyell suggested that modern atolls might be thin
calcareous crusts atop submerged crater rims with upward
coral growth offsetting subsidence:

Lyell, he envisioned a volcanic island slowly sinking, but
did not tie reef building to the crater rim; atolls formed only
after full submergence of the volcanic cone, but fringing and
barrier reefs formed as soon as volcanic processes abated to
the point where reef building could begin.
In Darwin’s model, fringing reefs initially built on the
volcano slope – close to shore, owing to the steep flanks of
the underlying cone (Fig. 3.1a). As the volcano sank, the reef
close to shore built vertically into the growing accommodation space. As the island progressively disappeared and the
reef built vertically, the expanse of water between the reef
and shore grew wider and deeper; the reef would thus evolve
into a barrier reef separated from the island by a broad
lagoon (Fig. 3.1b) and eventually an atoll with no central island at all (Fig. 3.1c).
As evidence, Darwin cited a gradual shift in island/reef
morphology from high volcanic peaks fringed by reefs at one
end of an archipelago to barrier reefs and lower islands in the
central reaches and finally to atolls at the other end. These
ideas were published in “The Structure and Distribution of
Coral Reefs” in 1842, 17 years before his better-known “The
Origin of Species”. Darwin’s proposal that systematic spatial
change was a proxy for temporal progression was a brilliant
one but, without an underlying mechanism to drive the
phenomenon, his ideas were not widely accepted until deep
cores through Enewetak and Bikini atolls more than a

. . . we might imagine, that if Java and Sumatra were submerged,
they would give rise to a somewhat similar shape in the bottom
of the sea; for the volcanos of those islands observe a linear
direction, and are often separated from each other by intervals,
corresponding to the atolls of the Maldivas; and, they might
leave an unfathomable ocean in the intermediate spaces. p. 286

Lyell’s early discussion of the continuum of process
through geological time had a profound influence on a
young Charles Darwin. Based on observations in Pacific
and Indian Ocean atolls, Darwin (1842) similarly argued
that the worldwide distribution of reefs could be explained
by underlying geologic processes. He proposed that fringing
reefs, barrier reefs, and atolls represented an evolutionary
continuum from the former to the latter (Fig. 3.1). Like

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

century hence revealed the sunken volcanoes underpinning
those reefs and Darwin’s theory (Ladd and Schlanger 1960).
The relatively recent recognition of plate tectonics has
provided a unifying theory to help explain the large-scale
distribution of reefs on a global scale. The constant motion
of giant fragments of oceanic and continental crust creates
dynamic zones of seafloor spreading and crustal collision.
Although the rates of movement that are involved will never
affect transoceanic airfares, predictable patterns of uplift,
subsidence, or stability have emerged as important, longterm controls of reef development. While his ideas about
subsidence as a universal control of reef type were flawed,
the works of Darwin and his contemporaries still provide
many of the fundamental truths about reefs that are at the
foundation of reef science today.

3.3.1.2 Sea Level
Periodic changes in the spatial relationship between Earth
and the Sun have resulted in predictable and recurring
changes in global climate (Milankovitch 1930) and, therefore, sea-level rise and fall. Changes in Earth’s tilt and
wobble, the shape of its orbit and the proximity of the planet
to the sun during northern summer and winter all affect
changes in the global heat budget. In warmer times, the
ocean expands, freshwater is added from melting terrestrial
glaciers, and sea level rises. During cooler periods, water
contracts, continental glaciers grow larger and sea level falls.
Climate-driven fluctuations in sea level have occurred
throughout geological time, but appear to have become
more pronounced after the breakup of the single supercontinent, Pangaea, 250–200 million years ago. The 40,000
and ca. 100,000-year glacial cycles predicted by
Milankovitch have now been confirmed by isotopic data
(e.g., Emiliani 1966) and have increased in their importance
since the onset of icehouse conditions in the midPleistocene.
With each waxing and waning of sea level, reefs that
lived near the upper limit of each cycle have been alternately
flooded and exposed. The result is a series of reefs, each built
upon the remains of its predecessor, much like ancient cities
stacked one upon another as favorable trade conditions
remained constant each time territory was abandoned and
then resettled. Present-day reefs, which have formed over
the past 10,000–12,000 years, are simply the latest
participants in this cycle of colonization and abandonment
and sit atop their Pleistocene forebears.
In 1915, Reginald Daly proposed an alternative to
Darwin’s subsidence theory. It involved the formation of a
wave-cut bench during each drop in sea level, followed by a
subsequent sea-level rise and reef colonization on top of the
resulting terrace (Fig. 3.1d–g). This idea was born from his
observations that the depths of lagoons he examined tended
to be similar. He argued that this reflected wave-cut

47

platforms at similar depths from site to site, and proposed
that the only plausible mechanism to explain this was a
worldwide drop in sea level. The main blow to Daly’s
ideas came when Davis (1923) pointed out the lack of cliffed
shorelines that should be commonplace behind the barrier
reefs of Pacific islands were Daly’s hypothesis correct.
Without these logical remnants of the wave-planation process, the sea-level hypothesis of Daly became untenable.
As is often the case in great debates, the truth lay in the
middle and involves both sea level and tectonics, although
not in the precise ways envisioned by either Daly or Darwin.
The rise and fall of sea level sets a global tempo for
highstand reef exposure during lows and reoccupation during highs. Equally important, however, are the interactions
with local tectonic motions that exert a complex control over
the long-term development of reef communities as well as
the character and history of the structures that they build. By
identifying the patterns common to depositional sequences
from many different ocean basins, seismic stratigraphy has
been used to construct records of worldwide sea-level
change through time (Vail et al. 1977; Haq et al. 1987).
The commonality of these patterns from site to site argues
for a global control (i.e., glacial eustasy). However, careful
analyses of variations from this pattern at some sites have
allowed us to understand the superimposed effects of local
tectonics on global changes in sea level. The term relative
sea-level change refers to variations in sea level at any one
locality resulting from the combined effect of glacio-eustatic
sea-level rise and fall (that related to changing climate) and
local or regional tectonic motions.

3.3.1.3 Reef Accretion Under the Influence
of Relative Sea-Level Change
Each time sea level rises over the edge of a tropical carbonate platform, reefs will usually form. The site of colonization
will be dictated by factors discussed later in this chapter, but
is often atop the previous generation of reefs. The fate of the
reef will depend on the rate of relative sea-level rise compared to the rate of calcium carbonate production on the reef
(Fig. 3.2). Under conditions of near balance, the carbonate
produced in the reef just offsets sea-level rise, and reef
accretion is vertical. In areas where sea level is rising slowly
compared to the rate of carbonate production, the excess
material will cause the reef to expand laterally. In the Caribbean, sea level has gradually slowed since ca. 7,000
calibrated years before present and the forereef is steep.
This has resulted in seaward progradation (e.g., Buck Island
in the U.S. Virgin Islands: Fig. 3.3). In many Indo-Pacific
sites and along the Great Barrier Reef, sea level reached its
maximum 6–8,000 years ago and little or no accommodation
space was created after that. These reefs have been sites of
ever-widening reef flats. When carbonate production cannot
keep pace with rising sea level, the reef will either i) retreat

48

Fig. 3.2 Sea-level rise vs. reef accretion. The simplified sea-level
curve represents a 100-m change in sea level over ca. 30,000 years.
When sea level is rising slowly relative to the reef’s ability to produce
carbonate () the reef will prograde as it builds upward. A near balance
between the accommodation space created by rising sea level and
carbonate being produced by the reef (¼) will result in vertical accretion. As rising sea level outpaces production (+, shown by thicker line),

D.K. Hubbard

the reef will either retreat upslope (e.g., the Dominican Republic),
backstep to higher ground (e.g., Puerto Rico) or “drown”, depending
on the severity and duration of the inequity. As sea level starts to slow
down near the top of the curve, any reefs still within the photic zone
will gradually “catch up”. A drop in sea level will expose the reef until
the ocean floods it again during the next glacio-eustatic cycle (After
Hubbard 2011)

Fig. 3.3 Cross section through
Buck Island reef. The upward
transition from massive to
branching corals and the sloping
isochrons reflect both upward and
seaward reef building (arrow) as
carbonate production exceeded
the space created by sea-level rise
(After Hubbard et al. 2005)

upslope, ii) backstep to a landward and shallower site that
is conducive to reef initiation (Blanchon 2011), or iii) drown.
Hubbard et al. (1997) documented backstepping of Holocene reefs off Puerto Rico (Fig. 3.4) and showed a similarity
of pattern and scale with Devonian examples from Australia
(Playford 1980) and Canada (Viau 1988).
In 1985, Neumann and Macintyre proposed a tripartite
classification for Holocene reefs viewed in cores or outcrop;
reefs are inclined to either “keep up,” “catch up,” or “give
up” (Fig. 3.5). “Keep-up” reefs were able to maintain their
crests at or near sea level throughout their history. As such,
the preserved corals (or other carbonate producers) exhibit

growth forms typically found in shallow water (e.g.,
branching acroporids in the Caribbean). “Catch-up” reefs
started in deeper water (ca. 10–20 m) but later caught up,
usually after the rate of sea-level rise slowed. Such reefs are
characterized by a lower (older) section dominated by
deeper-water organisms that are overlain by younger biota
formed in progressively shallower water as the reef “caught
up.” “Give-up” reefs are those that, for whatever reason,
could not keep pace with sea level and simply stopped
accreting.
A common misconception in the older literature is that
reef building rates of 10–15 mm/year are commonplace. As

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

Fig. 3.4 Backstepping in Devonian reefs of Canada (upper) and Holocene reefs off Puerto Rico (lower – plotted at the same scale) (After
Viau 1988). The Devonian reefs initially built up and out (like Buck
Island: Fig. 3.3), but suddenly backstepped landward i.e., moved right)

Fig. 3.5 Reef sequences as
indicators of sea-level rise. A
“keep-up” reef is capable of
matching the rate of sea-level rise
and will be comprised almost
exclusively of shallow-water
corals. “Catch-up” reefs generally
started in deeper water e.g.,
massive corals) and gradually
built closer to sea level
(branching corals), usually after
sea level slowed. “Give-up” reefs
can be highly variable because
their character will reflect the
conditions before they gave up as
well as those responsible for their
demise. Reefs will generally give
up if: (a) sea level is rising too
fast, or (b) something
compromises the ability of the
reefs to keep up (After Neumann
and Macintyre 1985)

49

as sea level presumably sped up. Off Puerto Rico, shelf-edge reefs
dominated by branching corals “gave up” as massive-coral reefs
formed further landward. Note the similarity in reef thickness and the
scale of backstepping in the two examples (After Hubbard et al. 1997)

50

such, “give-up” reefs would predominantly reflect sudden
jumps of sea level, e.g., the meltwater pulses of Fairbanks
(1989) or dramatic declines in water quality (Adey
et al. 1977; Schlager 1981; Blanchon 2011). However,
more recent summaries of reef-accretion (Davies and
Hopley 1983; Montaggioni 2005; Dullo 2005; Hubbard
2014) show that Holocene reefs built at rates closer to
3–4 mm/year and that rates above 10 mm/year are rare.
Thus sea-level rise exceeded the accretionary capacity of
most reefs throughout all but the latest Holocene, and
drowning was as much “business as usual” as a reflection
of extreme events as had been widely presumed.
This realization has important implications for our
models of reef-building in response to sea-level rise in the
twenty-first century. Coral reefs may soon be incapable of
keeping pace with rising sea level, due to both accelerating
sea-level rise (Grauss and Macintyre 1998; Church and
White 2011) and perhaps slower rates of calcification in
response to elevated CO2 (Kleypass et al. 1999). This is
not to say that they will soon be drowned or even that
community structure will be significantly altered owing to
greater water depth alone. However, even small increases in
water depth over the reef crest can have disproportionate
effects on wave energy passing over the reef and striking
the shoreline behind it (Ogston and Field 2010). Combined
with “flatter” reefs (Alvarez-Filip et al. 2009) that will provide less frictional attenuation of incoming waves and a
higher frequency of intense tropical storms and hurricanes
(Webster et al. 2005), this could increase beach erosion,
accelerate ground-water salinization and generally render
low-lying islands uninhabitable long before waves actually
overtop their higher elevations (Hubbard et al. 2014).

D.K. Hubbard

3.3.2

Meso-scale Controls

3.3.2.1 Temperature
Coral reefs are generally restricted to water between 18 and
36  C, with an optimal range of 26–28  C. Today, this
generally restricts coral reefs to latitudes between 20 and
25 north and south (Fig. 3.6). Exceptions do occur however.
Abundant but low-diversity coral cover exists around Easter
Island despite temperatures below 18  C and a position at
27 S (Hubbard and Garcia 2003).
Within the normal range, certain corals will grow faster
or slower, depending on temperature (Weber and White
1974; Glynn and Stewart 1973). Drastic thermal shifts can
result in reduced coral vitality (e.g. bleaching, reproductive
inhibition) or, in extreme instances, total destruction of
entire reef systems. Glynn (1984) emphasized the importance of unusually high water temperatures in the widespread mortality of corals along the western coast of
Panama. It is now generally accepted that recent episodes
of coral bleaching, where corals expel their zooxanthellae
(Chap. 5), are related to higher-than-normal maximum
temperatures over the past several decades. At the other
end of the scale, Walker et al. (1982) proposed that welldeveloped massive-coral communities in the northern
Florida Keys were limited to areas shielded from the periodic influx of cold water pushed out from Florida Bay during
the passage of major cold fronts.
It is important to note that most corals exist near their
upper thermal limits. Therefore, even a slight increase in
tropical temperatures in the future could have significant
impact on the distribution of corals in the tropics. It is also
important to realize that bleaching need not be related to an

Fig. 3.6 a Worldwide distribution of reefs. Reefs are confined to areas bathed by warm currents (>20  C). Reef locations are from Darwin (1842).
(b – inset) Latitudinal variation in species diversity along the Great Barrier Reef. Note the increase in the number of genera toward the equator

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

51

Fig. 3.7 The combined effects of
subsidence and temperature on
reef development in the Hawaiian
Archipelago. As the Pacific crust
beneath the Hawaiian islands
moves to the northwest, it cools
and subsides. South of roughly
29 N, the reefs can produce
carbonate at a rate fast enough to
offset subsidence. North of this,
however, cooler water inhibits
coral growth to the point that the
reefs can no longer keep up. As a
result, they are gradually drowned
(After Grigg 1982)

absolute threshold above which corals will succumb. Many
western Pacific corals (e.g., Indonesia) regularly experience
temperatures that would induce bleaching in the Caribbean
Sea. Conversely, scleractineans in the cold waters off Easter
Island bleached at temperatures well below what is normal
in the Caribbean (Wellington et al. 2000; Hubbard and
Garcia 2003). If there is good news in any of this, recent
studies have suggested that species within some back-reef
areas where temperatures fluctuate significantly may offer a
pool of more thermally resistant species (Oliver and Palumbi
2011).
On a geological scale, patterns of Pacific atoll development have been explained as a response to temperature
changes in conjunction with tectonic effects. Grigg (1982)
proposed that north of roughly 29 N in the Hawaiian Archipelago, lower temperatures have depressed carbonate production to the point where reefs cannot keep up with
subsidence (Fig. 3.7). South of this “Darwin Point,” barrier
reefs and atolls are maintained. To the north, reefs are in
various stages of “giving up.” Similarly, cores through the
Great Barrier Reef of Australia record a gradual shift from
subtropical seas to a more tropical climate over the past
30 million years as the Australasian plate slowly moved
toward the equator (Davies et al. 1987, 1991).

3.3.2.2 Salinity
Coral reefs are limited to areas of reasonably normal marine
salinity (3.3–3.6 %). Below these levels, carbonate buildups
are progressively dominated by vermetids, oysters,
serpulids, and blue-green algae (Teichert 1958; Heckel
1974). Coral reefs do not generally occur above this range.
Low salinity (along with high turbidity) is a primary reason
why extensive coral reefs do not occur opposite the mouths
of major rivers (e.g., the Amazon and Orinoco rivers of
northern South America empty into seas that are otherwise
suitable for reef development). On a smaller scale, the passes

through many nearshore reefs can be controlled by present or
past stream locations.

3.3.2.3 Wave Energy
The oceanographic regime in which a reef occurs is among
the most important determinants of its character. Breaking
waves generate currents that bring in large volumes of
low-nutrient ocean water and remove waste products from
the system. Benthic zonation within a single reef is to a large
extent determined by the relative abilities of various
organisms to either survive turbulent conditions or to take
advantage of the vigorous water motion caused by passing
waves. In shallow water, Acropora palmata grows quickly,
and can grow rapidly above the traction carpet of sediment
that is mobilized each time storm waves strike the reef crest.
In deeper water, fragile platy corals are not negatively
impacted because of the greatly attenuated surge at depth.
Regional variations in wave climate have been shown to
exert a primary control on the character of the shallow-water
reef crest and the zonation along the front of Caribbean reefs
(Adey and Burke 1977; Geister 1977; Fig. 3.8). In addition,
storms can play an important role in determining reef character. In the Caribbean, three primary hurricane tracks
emerge from data compiled by Neumann et al. (1981) over
the past century, and reef type is quite sensitive to this
pattern (Hubbard 2011, 2014). Reefs along the most exposed
Windward Islands are dominated by a high return frequency
of storms that break up branching corals plus a high
prevailing wave energy level that discourages grazing even
in calmer times (Fig. 3.9). This encourages the formation of
thick algal crusts and ridges in shallow water. In the Pacific,
the location of Guam in the western monsoon trough
correlates highly with the “topographically dull” reefs offshore and the architectural preponderance of “square cement
bunkers with small windows and large shutters” on land
(C. Birkeland, pers. commun.). Weaker but still frequent

52

D.K. Hubbard

Fig. 3.8 Diagram summarizing the effects of wave energy and water
clarity on the zonation of Caribbean reefs (After Adey and Burke
1977). With increasing wave energy, the boundaries between the
A. palmata, the A. cervicornis, and the head-coral zones are progressively deepened. This is closely tied to magnitude of the wave-induced
velocity that increases with larger waves (boundaries from Grauss et al.

1984). Turbidity and nutrient levels, which are often tied to one another
(Hallock 1988), can also affect coral zonation. Increased sediment and
nutrients in the water drive corals into ever-shallower water, seeking
light. The shallowest zones (e.g., algal ridges, Millepora) are less
affected by sediment as they occur in such shallow water that light
attenuation is not a factor.

Fig. 3.9 Wave energy as a control of Caribbean reef type. Major storm
tracks are shown by the solid and dashed arrows. Prevailing wave
energy is shown graphically by the rose diagrams at individual sites
and is based on synoptic wave observations for the region (U.S. Naval
Weather Service Command 1979). The importance of ambient wave
energy and major storm (e.g., L/H ¼ Low ambient wave conditions/
High hurricane frequency) and the resulting reef types are shown in the
insets. Where both ambient wave energy and hurricane frequency are

high, the reef crest is characterized by algal ridges (e.g., Windward
Islands). Where day-to-day wave energy is still moderately high but
hurricane frequency and intensity is somewhat less, well-zoned reefs
occur (e.g., St. Croix). Areas that are generally less energetic except for
the passage of major storms (e.g., the Bahamas) are typically broad,
wave-swept pavements (Walter Adey’s “false reefs”). (After Hubbard
2011, 2014)

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

storms in the western Atlantic, combined with much lower
prevailing wave energy tend to encourage wave-swept
pavements with poorer development of branching
acroporids. Lower day-to-day wave energy makes it easier
for grazers to operate anywhere on the reef. Intermediate
wave energy and hurricane frequency in the northeastern
Caribbean encourage varied coral-community relationships
and some of the best-developed reef-front zonation seen in
the region. In a sense, this regional pattern follows Connell’s
Intermediate Disturbance Hypothesis, although at a scale
different from that of species diversity.

3.3.3

Micro-scale Controls

3.3.3.1 Light
The influence of light intensity and spectral character has
been generally understood since the pioneering work of
Quoy and Gaimard (1825). Darwin (1842) clearly
recognized light’s importance in controlling the maximum
depths to which he observed corals throughout the Pacific.
More recent studies have further quantified this longrecognized pattern although the general relationships remain
unchanged. In clear water, light intensity decreases exponentially with water depth and the light spectrum shifts
rapidly toward the blue end. As a result, photosynthesis
and CaCO3 production drop off with depth.
In addition to changes in growth rate, reduced light at
greater depths can cause polymorphic corals to change their
shape from domes in shallow water to plate-like
morphologies at greater depths. The latter is more efficient
for light gathering as it places all the photoreceptors (in this
case, symbiotic organisms within the coral tissue) along
upward horizontal surfaces where light intensity is greatest
– effectively a self-orienting “photocell”). Some of the best
understood corals in this respect belong to the Orbicella
complex from the Caribbean. (This was formerly called the
Montastraea complex, but it is now known that Orbicella
and Montastraea are in different families that diverged
millions of years ago.) Coral-growth rate within most massive species drops from nearly a centimeter per year in
shallow water (0–10 m) to a millimeter or less in deeper
water (>12–15 m: Dustan 1975; Hubbard and Scaturo
1985). This is accompanied by a change in morphology
from heads to plates. Similar patterns also occur for Porites
lutea and P. lobata in the Pacific (Buddemeier et al. 1974;
Isdale 1984).
Knowlton (1993) demonstrated genetic differences
associated with the different morphotypes and, based on
this information, Orbicella annularis was subsequently
subdivided to include O. franksii and O. faveolata. It is
worth remembering, however, that the experimentally
induced changes in colony shape documented by Grauss
and Macintyre (1982) occurred on individual colonies

53

transplanted to different depths. Therefore, while genetic
character may go hand-in-hand with species-related shape
preferences at a given depth, individual colonies can still
take on the shapes of their sibling species when light availability is varied.

3.3.3.2 Nutrients
Until the latter twentieth century, abundant nutrients were
generally considered beneficial to reefs. Early references to
reefs preferring areas of upwelling or other sources of
nutrients underscore this misconception. More recently, it
has been recognized that high nutrient levels are actually
detrimental to “reef health” (Kinsey and Davies 1979). At
the organism level, it has been proposed that high phosphate
levels in the water may shut down the calcification mechanism (e.g., phosphate “poisoning” of Simkiss 1964). At the
community scale, autotrophs within the reef (primarily
zooxanthellae and algal turfs) are well suited to a steady
stream of water with low nutrient levels. Higher nutrient
levels tend to favor sponges (Wilkinson 1987) and macroalgae (Steneck 1988), which can outcompete corals and turf
for space and prevent larval settling. Macroalgae may provide lower nutrient values than turfs, thus reducing the
availability of useful biomass for grazers. Once the coral
dies, higher levels of nutrient availability can support heavy
infestation by infaunal borers (Hallock 1988), and in particular, sponges (e.g., Cliona spp.: Moore and Shedd 1977) that
will progressively destroy the remaining skeleton and can
remove any record of its existence (Chap. 4). Estep
et al. (2008) documented a strong shift in dominant
bioeroders from sponges in oligotrophic Caribbean forereef environments to molluscs (especially Lithophaga sp.)
in the more restricted Holocene reefs of the Enriquillo Valley of the western Dominican Republic.
3.3.3.3 Sediment
Despite an impressive body of literature (for reviews, see
Hubbard and Pocock 1974; Hubbard 1987), only limited
quantitative information exists on the specific responses of
reef organisms to sediment loading. Controlled experiments
have documented surprising tolerance by corals to high
doses of sediment over short periods of time (Taylor and
Saloman 1978; Rogers 1983). Nevertheless, the literature is
replete with postmortem autopsies of reefs killed by sediment. The obvious factor here is time. Although corals can
survive acute loading at high levels, even lower-level stress
can gradually wear down the reef’s defenses and result in
severe, and perhaps irreversible, degradation.
The most important effects of sediment stress include
(1) smothering, (2) abrasion and (3) shading, all of which
result in an inhibition of coral recruitment. Of the three,
smothering is the easiest to visualize. Under natural
conditions, reefs on the downwind flank of large carbonate
platforms can be buried by sediment washed off the bank as

54

it is flooded by rising sea level (Hine and Neumann 1977).
During storms or, more recently, dredging of nearby areas,
the levels of suspended sediment can increase markedly,
resulting in extensive damage to reef corals and other
sediment-sensitive biota. Such problems have been
described in Australia (Fairbridge and Teichert 1948),
Hawaii (Johannes 1975; Maragos 1972), Puerto Rico
(Kaye 1959), and the U.S. Virgin Islands (van Eepol and
Grigg 1970; Dubois and Towle 1985), among others.
During storms, physical abrasion by moving sediment
can cause substantial damage to coral tissue (Hubbard
1992). Even under less energetic conditions sediment scour
can play a role in limiting the types of corals that can thrive
along the shallow reef crest. A. palmata grows quickly after
settlement and is, therefore, less likely to be killed before it
can build above the level of natural “sandblasting”
associated with even small storms. Its success in times past
was a balance between the destructive effects of high waves
and wave-mediated removal of sediment from a coral that
cannot perform that function itself.
While more subtle in its effects than abrasion or smothering, shading is probably the most important of all the sediment-related effects. Reduced levels of light due to
suspended sediment in the water column can retard coral
growth (Hubbard and Scaturo 1985; Hubbard et al. 1986),
impact natural zonation patterns (Fig. 3.8; Morelock
Fig. 3.10 Antecedent control of
present-day reefs. The upper
panel shows a seismic line across
the southern margin of Lang Bank
on eastern St. Croix (USVI)
(After Hubbard et al. 2013). The
seismic line in the lower panel is
from the southwestern insular
shelf of Puerto Rico. The
underlying Pleistocene surface
was verified by cores. Note how
the Holocene build-ups sit atop
highs on the underlying
Pleistocene surface (Seismic data
courtesy of U.S. Geological
Survey)

D.K. Hubbard

et al. 1979; Hubbard et al. 1986), and induce wholesale
mortality if allowed to persist for an extended period of time.
All of these effects act together to exert a significant
natural control on the distribution of coral reefs (Roy and
Smith 1971; Morelock et al. 1979; Cortes and Risk 1985;
Hubbard 1986). More recently, the dominant sources of
increasing sediment loading have been related to land clearing for development and agriculture (McCulloch
et al. 2003).

3.3.3.4 Antecedent Topography
Because of the fierce competition for space and the necessity
for reefs to rid themselves of excess sediment produced by
bioerosion, topographically elevated areas offer significant
benefits to larval recruits and well-developed reefs alike.
Roberts et al. (1977) showed that breaks in slope, especially
at the platform margin, are focal points for wave and current
energy and offer enhanced transfer of nutrients, sediment
and metabolic waste. The constant input of carbonate ions
also results in enhanced cementation and the generation of
hard bottoms better suited for larval recruitment. Thus,
bio-physically mediated topography is a primary influence
on where corals can recruit and flourish.
Like ancient cities, reefs tend to be built upon the ruins of
their predecessors (Fig. 3.10). As sea level falls and rises
again, the remnants of the last generation of reefs serve as

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

areas of preferential coral recruitment. Reefs will tend to
re-establish on previous reefs because they are hard and
topographically elevated. Also, the conditions that favored
the previous reefs likely return with re-flooding of the area
by the next rise in sea level. In particular, elevation offers
significant advantages during early shelf flooding when sediment that was created by weathering during previous exposure is stirred up by waves, increasing natural turbidity
levels. Thus, reef sequences that are recognized in the fossil
record are often not single depositional units, but rather a
complex of several generations of reefs, each localized atop
the remains of an earlier one. Many present-day reefs sit
astride their Pleistocene ancestors that formed 120,000 years
earlier.
One process that creates antecedent topography is karst
dissolution. During episodes of lowered sea level, biologically produced and reactive limestone strata are dissolved by
rainwater. Carbonate ions are transported down through the
permeable strata until their concentration in the ground
water is high enough to induce re-precipitation, usually as
calcite. Thus, exposure to under-saturated rain and surface
waters induces wholesale removal of carbonate at the surface. Citing both experimental studies and field examples,
Purdy (1974) proposed limestone dissolution as a primary
mechanism for creating antecedent topography. While reefs
are forming, they are usually reinforced by aragonite and
magnesium calcite cements that form within their interstices.
The resulting mass is more resistant to dissolution than are
the muddier and un-cemented sediments of the adjacent
platform or lagoon. Thus the topography left by the reef
system can be enhanced during exposure.

3.4

Reef Building

3.4.1

What Is a Reef?

To the earliest mariners, “reefs” were anything that might
damage their keels (from the Nordic “rif”). These included
biologically produced structures, the subject of this book, as
well as piles of rocks left in shallow water by the last
glaciation or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Biologists
are more concerned with the slate of organisms and the
ecological interactions among them. In contrast, geologists
focus more on the structures that they build – hence
differences in definitions. The latter largely characterize
reefs based on their shape in cross section and their relation
to surrounding strata.
For purposes of our discussion, the following are considered to be critical factors or characteristics related to reefs.
First, the features discussed here ultimately owe their origin
to biological production. Even the cements that fill voids and
were once thought to be the product of physiochemical

55

precipitation are now understood to be universally mediated
or created by micro-organisms. Second, reefs are rigid
structures that stand topographically above their surroundings and, therefore, exert some degree of physical control
over the oceanographic processes in their vicinity. For the
geologist, topography is perhaps the most important trait that
sets “true reefs” (bioherms) aside from flat hard-bottom
communities (biostromes or “coral carpets”: cf. Dunham
1970) that do not offer the spatial heterogeneity that is so
important to the diversity on modern coral reefs.
Structural complexity is what the geologist is left with in
the fossil record and this explains our fixation on this characteristic. However, large-scale topographic expression and
more-local spatial heterogeneity are equally important to the
modern ecologist; they help determine what organisms live
on a particular piece of submarine real estate and how they
interact with their peers. A suite of sessile organisms sitting
atop a feature rising above its surroundings will function in
fundamentally different ways than a similar community on a
flat bottom. In fact, topography (or its absence) will in many
cases preclude particular communities from occurring at all
due to important differences in physical processes that are
induced by abrupt topographic change (Roberts et al. 1977).
Swimming over a modern reef, the associations with underlying structure are more obvious but still may be overlooked
as researchers focus on smaller-scale species interactions.
To the geologist, the presence or absence of this topographic
relationship lay at the very heart of what is and is not a reef.
Traditionally, geological discussions have focused on
what is responsible for creating topographic complexity
and the rigidity that maintains it in the face of wave attack.
Early workers stressed the obvious role of organisms in
providing rigidity (Lowenstam 1950; Newell 1955; Heckel
1974). As a result, in-place and interlocking framework was
traditionally seen as a prerequisite for the high-diversity
geologic assemblage of calcifying organisms considered to
be a “true reef” by most geologists. Conversely, anything not
containing a preponderance of organisms in life position did
not qualify (Fagerstrom 1987; Stanley and Fagerstrom
1988).
The popularity of this view is understandable. A paleontologist swimming across the surface of a modern reef
50 years ago saw a seemingly endless and topographically
complex seascape of upright, living corals. The ecological
literature of the day stressed the fierce competition for space
and the superiority of certain species over others in light of
their ability to occupy and defend this space. So, geologists
visiting a modern reef usually came away with impressions
that focused more on corals and calcification than biological
erosion (Chap. 4) and the physical redistribution of detritus
by waves and currents. The fish swimming across the reef
taking the occasional, gentle nibble on the bottom was
viewed as a process of perhaps academic interest but, at

56

best, of secondary importance to the “real” reef story –
calcification. Likewise, the myriad processes going on
within the upper reaches of the reef substrate were out of
sight. Thus “corals growing on the backs of other corals”
was seen as the most logical way to build a rigid and
topographically elevated structure.
However, applying this “framework model” to ancient
reefs met with little success. In contrast to the dominance
of in-place calcifying organisms envisioned in traditional
models of modern reefs, researchers often found fossil
reefs comprised of recognizable clasts “floating” in a matrix
of sediment, skeletal debris and cement. Rather than
questioning the prevailing model, researchers focused on
why ancient reefs were so different from what modern
reefs “must” look like inside. . . hence, Mike Lloyd’s quip
“The present is the key to the late Pleistocene. . . perhaps”
(email to Bill Precht shared with the author).
The introduction of the submersible rock drill by Ian
Macintyre in 1975 gave geologists a cost-effective way to
access to the interiors of modern reefs. Although some reefs
contained measurable proportions of what was interpreted as
in-place “framework” (e.g., Macintyre and Glynn 1976),
most revealed what was arguably toppled coral skeletons
mixed in with a high proportion of loose sediment and
smaller coral debris (Hubbard et al. 1990). Based on an
analysis of cores collected from a variety of reef
environments all across the Caribbean (Fig. 3.11), Hubbard
et al. (1998) proposed that the interiors of many, if not most,
modern reefs were dominated by a mix of in-place and
toppled corals set in a matrix of sediment, smaller skeletal
fragments and open voids – a fabric similar to ancient reefrelated deposits.
The importance of this is twofold. First, if so many
modern coral reefs are not dominated by in-place and
interlocking corals, then it should no longer be the primary
Fig 3.11 Core recovery
(percent) from several Caribbean
reefs. The composite profile
shows the approximate depth
from which each set of cores was
recovered (i.e., cores are not from
a single site). Note that recovery
is less than 35 % overall and the
highest is generally found in
deeper reefs that are dominated
by more resistant massive corals
that grow more slowly but are
harder to move. The majority of
the reef fabric in all cores consists
of open voids and sediment
produced by bioerosion and not
in-place and interlocking
framework (After Hubbard
et al. 1998)

D.K. Hubbard

criterion by which ancient reefs are judged. Second, while
in-place and interlocking framework is a perfectly good way
to create a rigid and topographically elevated structure, it is
not the only pathway to that end. Further, given the dominance of sediment and rubble over corals in life position, it is
difficult to build a wave-resistant structure by coral-growth
alone given the importance of physical and biological erosion that we have taken for granted.
What emerges is a picture that acknowledges the importance of bioerosion that breaks down primary structure and
marine cementation and encrustation that “glue” everything
back into a more solid reef mass. Thus, bioerosion, cementation and encrustation are elevated from bit players to
co-stars in Bob Ginsburg’s hypothetical long-running geologic play in which the plot stays the same even though the
actors change over evolutionary time.
Most of the building blocks of a modern coral reef started
as scleractinians, but they have been, to varying degrees,
toppled and then modified by multiple generations of boring,
sedimentary infill, encrustation and cementation (Schroeder
and Zankl 1974; Schroeder and Purser 1986). The ultimate
reef fabric is determined by the relative importance of (1) initial carbonate production, (2) physical and biological breakdown of this primary framework (3) the patterns of sediment
storage within or removal from the reef, and (4) the levels of
secondary cementation and encrustation.
This is not to say that reefs largely comprised of in-place
organisms do not exist. To the contrary, the massive reef
ridges of the Pacific and eastern Caribbean are dominated by
layer upon layer of undisturbed massive coralline algae.
These owe their existence to high waves that exclude
grazers. Conversely, where wave energy is low enough to
preclude extensive storm damage, in-place corals can dominate. A Holocene reef in the Enriquillo Valley of the Dominican Republic is largely comprised of in-place and well

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

57

Fig. 3.12 Photograph of in-place, massive corals in Cañada Honda,
Dominican Republic. The facies is interpreted as a moderate depth
(ca. 20 m) fore reef in a regime of higher-than-normal sedimentation
rates. Elevated sedimentation is responsible for both the limited species
diversity (mostly Siderastrea siderea, Orbicella faveolata and Agaricia

spp.) and the excellent preservation. The more bioeroded colonies
(mostly S. siderea) probably grew at rates faster than local sedimentation. Less bioeroded colonies grew at rates approximately equal to the
rate of sediment build-up. The scale arrow is 10 cm in length

zoned corals (Fig. 3.12) as are some of the protected
A. palmata reefs on the leeward side of Curacao (Pandolfi
and Jackson 2001). Nevertheless, there are countless other
examples that we all agree are “reefs” as we swim over them
but which are dominated inside by both in-place and toppled
calcifying organisms in a sediment and rubble matrix that is
volumetrically more important than corals, in place or otherwise. To use a dominance of in-place and interlocking
primary organisms as the sole yardstick against which
ancient reefs are measured is no longer appropriate.
Thus, our definition of a “true reef” must be expanded to
include topographically elevated and rigid structures, built
of organically derived materials that have to varying degrees
been broken down and redistributed over both short
distances (i.e., a toppled coral will usually remain in or
near the community where it lived) and bound into the
overall fabric by encrustation and cementation (Fig. 3.13).

Recent suggestions that coral reefs are “flattening”
(Alvarex-Filip et al. (2009) have led us to revisit the important relationship between substrate production and destruction initially considered nearly 50 years ago by Scoffin
et al. (1980) and Stearn et al. (1977). More recently, Perry
et al. (2008, 2012) have developed protocols that resemble
coral-monitoring but quantify both the organisms that create
carbonate and those that break it down.
However, even this more holistic view still minimizes
important physical processes that contribute to reef building.
Land (1979) argued that carbonate found within the reef falls
mainly into two categories: original coral skeletons and
sediment derived from their physical and biological breakdown. The total volume of carbonate initially produced by a
known distribution of organisms on the reef surface was
termed Gross Carbonate Production (Pg). The net amount
carbonate remaining within the reef (Pn) should consist of
recognizable coral (both toppled and in life position) and
sediment that has been incorporated into the reef edifice. The
difference would be a measure of the amount of material that
has been exported from the reef and permanently lost
(SEDe). Stated mathematically:

3.4.2

Corals Grow: Reefs Build

We now understand that coral growth is only one part of reef
building. Once a corals dies, it is subjected to both physical
and biological breakdown. Algae that overgrow the dead
substrate are a preferred diet of many fishes, echinoids, and
other marine grazers. In the process of scraping or biting
these algae, grazers remove bits of carbonate substrate.
Alongside the grazers, countless other organisms bore into
the reef, seeking shelter. The reader is referred to Chap. 4
which provides a more complete discussion of this important
suite of processes.

Pg  Pn ¼ SEDe :

ð3:1Þ

The most detailed carbonate budget to date is from a reef
along the north coast of St. Croix (Hubbard et al. 1990).
Using quantitative data on reef cover, coral growth rates,
cores that document long-term reef accretion, and sediment
export data, all from the same locale, they concluded that
nearly 60 % of the carbonate that was produced within the
reef was reduced to sediment by bioerosion. Nearly half of

58

D.K. Hubbard

Fig. 3.13 Reef-classification
based on the relative importance
of skeletal elements that are (a) in
growth position (in-place as
primary framework), (b)
displaced (i.e., toppled but close
to where they lived – secondary
framework) or (c) transported out
of their original reef zone or the
reef altogether –
hydromechanical build-ups. The
dashed line shows the
approximate boundary between
“reefs” and hydromechanical
buildups (After Hubbard
et al. 1998)

that was exported from the reef, primarily during storms
(Hubbard 1992); the remainder was reincorporated within
the reef interior. From this study, three important points
emerged. First, recognizable coral (41 %) was less important
in the reef than sediment (45 %) and open void space (14 %).
Second, it was difficult to demonstrate that the majority of
the remaining coral was in place while some pieces had been
demonstrably moved or toppled. Finally, a reef that contains
more loose detritus than in-place framework will probably
not be a rigid structure. Thus, the stabilization of detritus by
cementation and encrustation is an essential part of reef
building that has been widely ignored. From these
observations and measurements, they argued that in-place
and interlocking framework is not necessarily an integral
characteristic of all “true reefs” – and may exist in few. If
we reconsider reef building to be the sum of all the processes
discussed above, then the fate of all that bioeroded sediment
is critical if we are to fully understand the vertical accretion
of coral reefs in both the past and the future.
Total reef-carbonate production has been dropping dramatically due to the lower abundance of live corals. In
addition, increasing calcification will reduce the capacity
for each reef organism to create skeletal material (HoeghGuldberg et al. 2007; Doney et al. 2009). The growing
interest in bioerosion provides important information on
the destructive side of Land’s simple equation. However, it
does little to address the fate of the material produced by
these destructive processes. If sediment is reincorporated
back into the reef, then it adds to the edifice on which future
coral recruitment and growth will occur. To the extent that it
is stabilized by encrustation and cementation, it also
contributes to the rigidity of the reef. However, this is only
part of the story.
We know that carbonate production is significantly lower
than it was five decades ago. . . and it is likely to continue to

decline. The changing balance of bioerosion is more difficult
to quantify. Fewer grazing organisms may equate to lower
substrate loss and less sediment production. However,
changing nutrient dynamics may shift that side of the equation more toward infaunal bioeroders. Whatever this balance
looks like, we must also understand the fate of all that
sediment if we are going to fully characterize the reefbuilding process.

3.4.3

A New Reef-Building Model

Numerous summaries have demonstrated the strong relationship between water depth and coral-growth rate. Boscher
and Schlager (1992) developed a calcification model based
on an exponential drop in light intensity and, therefore,
photosynthesis. Using this model, they reproduced depthrelated growth patterns for M. annularis (the taxonomy has
since changed) derived from direct field measurements.
They surmised that, while reef accretion would be slower
than coral growth, it must follow a similar depth-related
pattern, an assumption that prevails in recent models of
coral reefs in the twenty-first century and beyond (DiCaprio
et al. 2010; Toomey et al. 2013).
A recent summary of Caribbean reef accretion raises the
likelihood that this fundamental assumption is flawed and that
reef building is more than a collection of biological processes.
Based on 151 reef-core intervals from 12 Caribbean sites,
Hubbard (2009) found no correlation whatsoever between
the rate of reef building and paleo-water depth. Moreover,
the coral type (branching vs massive) preserved in the reefs
had little effect on their rate of vertical accretion. Gischler
(2008) came to the same conclusion based on reef cores from
Belize and noted that reefs dominated by massive species
built faster than those dominated by branching A. palmata.

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

Ultimately, this probably reflectes differences in the durability
and transportability associated with different colony
morphologies.
Clearly, these and similar summaries indicate that a reefbuilding model tied primarily to individual depth-related
processes is critically flawed. The challenge is to figure out
what might be missing. One possibility is that light may be
affecting both photosynthetically driven calcification and the
density of algae that are consumed by grazers in similar
ways. In this scenario, carbonate production and bioerosion
would co-vary with depth, resulting in a balance between the
two over at least the depth range in which shallow reefs
occur (Hubbard 2009). However, Weinstein et al. (2014)
reported no differences in the loss from experimental
substrates to a water depth of 30 m off the south side of
St. Thomas in the US Virgin Islands. Similarly, a study from
two reefs off nearby St. John showed no depth-related
decline in bioerosion (Whitcher 2011; Whitcher
et al. 2012). If these results are widely applicable, then the
depth-related bioerosion patterns that have emerged when
greater depths are considered may not apply to the upper
photic zone inhabited by shallow-water reef corals.
Any attempt to explain the apparent lack of depth control
in shallow-water reef building must take the following into
account:

59

the constraints listed above and would blur depth-related
accretionary patterns while still maintaining reef zonation.
This infers that changes in carbonate budgeting in future
reefs could be as much about changing patterns of sediment
redistribution and export as it is about lowered carbonate
production. Regardless of what the mix of processes looks
like quantitatively, the fact that sediment transport is totally
ignored in our present models argues that we need to rethink
them – especially in the face of increased storminess in years
to come.

3.5

Having discussed the factors that control reef formation and
the ways they accrete, the discussion returns to where it
started – the changing reef seascape in recent years. Are
reefs “declining”? If so, what is driving these changes?
How do they fit into the known mechanisms of climate
modulation? How might remaining reefs respond to the
dramatic changes in sea level that have been proposed for
the coming decades? And finally, what can.... and what
should we be trying to “fix” – and how?

3.5.1
• Light, photosynthesis and coral-growth rates decrease
with water depth
• Vertical reef accretion does not decrease with water depth
(down to at least 23 m)
• Bioerosion apparently does not decrease with water depth
(down to at least 30 m)
• Depth-related reef zonation generally persists in both
outcrops and cores
• Sediment will preferentially move downslope, especially
during storms
Resolving these observations requires a closer look at the
behavior of the different types of carbonate material within
the reef. Massive corals are less resistant to breakage than
faster-growing shallow-water species and they will be less
affected by wave action due to their position further down
the forereef. If they do move, they are less likely to be
transported as easily or as far as sediment. In contrast, sand
and mud created by bioerosion will be easily transported
unless it is sequestered well within the reef. It will move
primarily during storms and the processes associated with
such events tend to move sediment landward into the lagoon
or downslope and out of the reef edifice altogether.
Given that there is more sediment than corals preserved in
most reefs, its fate cannot be ignored in the accretionary
balance. A model where detrital sediment is transported
into deeper reef zones while the larger coral blocks stay
closer to the sites from which they were toppled satisfies

Future Reefs and Homo stupidus

Reefs in Flux

It is inescapable that the world’s reefs are changing dramatically – and it seems to be for the worse. However, most of
the study sites on which we base these ideas were chosen
because they were, for example, the “best developed,” or the
“most diverse” of the reefs that could be found at the time.
Thus our starting points for earlier comparisons were to
some extent skewed. Equally important, our anthropocentric
perspective focuses on changes in our lifetime and the attendant assumption that the reef we saw on our first visit was
“normal”. A survey of the coral communities around Easter
Island found a luxuriant, albeit low-diversity, coral community all around the island – except for on the windward side
(Hubbard and Garcia 2003), where conventional wisdom
would tell us to look for the “best” reefs. The shallow
community consisted of an assemblage of abundant corals
(up to 100 % over large areas; avg. ca. 50 %). However,
video from the 1970s show that the shallow insular shelf had
been dominated by Sargassum. After the near extirpation of
macroalgae following a severe El Niño, corals dominated by
Pocillopora spp. gradually moved into the newly created
space in shallow water. So, which was the “better” or
“healthier” community, the algae that were compromised
by climate change or the corals that replaced them? And,
how does this tie into the complex story of colonization on
Easter Island? It is perhaps ironic that the rapid takeover by
coral was lamented by locals as a shift away from the
“normal” and “healthy” community dominated by algae –

60

an argument that we are not used to hearing in the reef
community.
To further complicate the picture, subsequent bleaching
associated with La Niña warming devastated the shallowwater coral community that had dominated for over a decade
(Wellington et al. 2000; Hubbard and Garcia 2003). Were
algae or coral the “normal” shallow marine community
around Easter Island? Which was “better”? What will
replace the recently killed Pocillopora? Are the patterns of
rapid change in this remote area new or just part of a longer
“boom-and-bust cycle? What role, if any, did either the low
diversity or the particular members of the community have
to do with this unusual history? And finally, because Easter
Island is farther from major land masses than just about
anywhere on Earth, is there any area that is totally outside
anthropogenic influence if we are at the heart of the
problem?
The story from Easter Island might be cast off as interesting but not relevant to the larger global situation. Nevertheless, Jackson (1997) cautioned that historical evidence
shows that many of the patterns we see as unusual today
were already occurring at the time of Columbus. Thus, the
reefs that we first studied in the 1950s were probably not
“pristine” and some of the degradation that we have more
recently documented had already begun. Rudimann (2005)
argues that the shift in humans from hunter-gatherers to
agrarians may have begun the present climate decline as
early as 8,000 years ago.
None of this presumes that recent changes in coral reefs
are not “real” or that increased human exploitation is not tied
up in the story. However, if we are going to effectively use
our limited environmental capital, then we need to take a
hard look at our personal and often anthropocentric
perspectives with respect to “good” and “healthy”. The
fundamental challenge is to separate natural from anthropogenic change and to come up with practical strategies based
on that differentiation. To apply this to the fate of reef
building in the near future, we need to make sure that we
fully understand the processes that contribute to this venture
in a wholly natural scenario.

3.5.1.1 Is the Past the Key to the Present?
Studies of Quaternary reefs provide an important longerterm look at patterns of reef development against which we
might compare recent change. Paldolfi (2002) remarked that
the Pleistocene reefs exposed in the cliffs around Curacao
“show strikingly clear and repeatable differences in coral
species abundance patterns among reef environments, similar to zonation patterns previously described for living reefs
at Curacao and elsewhere in the Caribbean prior to the
1980s.” Jackson (1992) similarly proposed that Pleistocene
reefs were more stable in the long term and that the presence
or absence of the classic reef-zonation pattern might be used

D.K. Hubbard

to distinguish between “normal” versus “unhealthy” Caribbean reefs. However, they both cautioned that, while longterm stability may be the hallmark of large-scale Pleistocene
reef development, variability and even anarchy may be the
natural picture at smaller spatial and temporal scales
(Jackson 1991; Pandolfi and Jackson 1997).
A number of recent studies have built on this theme of
long-term stability and have proposed that the events
associated with recent coral-reef decline are not the norm.
Comparing Pleistocene and modern reefs on San Salvador,
Greenstein (1999) proposed that, “the current and rapid
decline of A. cervicornis observed on Bahamian patch
reefs may be a unique perturbation that contrasts with the
long-term persistence of this coral species during Pleistocene and Holocene time.” Aronson and Precht (2001b) similarly noted a recent community change from A. cervicornis
to Agaricia tenufolia on Belize patch reefs. Cores through
the upper part of the reefs revealed no such widespread
community change between the two species over the past
few thousand years. Based in large part on these findings,
they wrote, “paleontological data suggest that the regional
Acropora kill is without precedent in the late Holocene”
(Aronson and Precht 2001a). These statements infer that
the recent geologic record is unambiguous and that shortterm changes documented by reef monitoring over the past
two to four decades are in fundamental contrast to stability
before humans came to be an important factor in the coral
reef equation.

3.5.1.2 Buck Island: A Tale of Two Analyses
One of the longer coral-reef monitoring records comes from
Buck Island Underwater National Monument in the eastern
Caribbean. Surveys were initiated in the late 1970s, before
the onset of coral diseases and other changes we have
documented in reefs. The successive surveys chronicle
decline related to disease, hurricanes and a variety of other
factors in an area administratively protected from direct
human impact – especially nutrients and over-fishing. This
was the site of the first described incidence of White Band
Disease (WBD) by Gladfelter (1982). As part of the effort to
understand reef development within the park, seven reef
cores were drilled along two of the long-term monitoring
transects. The goal was to interpret the geological history of
the reefs and to relate that to community structure within the
present-day reef system.
Figure 3.14 compares the relative abundance of corals in
the seven cores to the changing composition of the recent
reef community since 1970. The importance of Acropora
palmata in the cores over the past 6,000 years closely
matches the pre-WBD community (i.e., 1976), suggesting
that a community absent A. palmata has not been the geologic norm in this area. It was initially suggested that, “this
may indicate that ‘White Band Disease’ and similar

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

61

Fig. 3.14 Graph of coral
abundance along the northern
Buck Island monitoring transect
versus what was found in cores
from the same reef. Note the close
agreement between the
abundance of A. palmata in the
cores (i.e., the longer-term
“geological trend”) and the
monitoring transect in 1976, prior
to the onset of White Band
Disease. It might be concluded
from this figure that the dramatic
loss of A. palmata after 1976 was
an event that was
“unprecedented” over the
7,000 years represented by the
Buck Island cores

Fig. 3.15 Summary of the
Caribbean record of A. palmata
over the past 12,000 years. Two
500-year intervals of either
greatly reduced abundance or
absence of A. palmata (gray
shaded) are in apparent
contradiction to recent statements
about the “unprecedented” nature
of such events (After Hubbard
et al. 2005)

afflictions have been less important in the geologic past”
(Hubbard et al. 1994), a conclusion similar to those just
described for other sites.
However, more detailed analyses of the cores identified
two gaps in the record of A. palmata at Buck Island
(Hubbard et al. 1998, 2000, 2005). A compilation of all
radiometrically dated A. palmata samples found in the literature suggests that these gaps persist throughout the Caribbean and western Atlantic region (Hubbard 2014). The first
gap, about 5,700 years ago (Fig. 3.15), was associated with
regional abandonment of Caribbean shelf-edge reefs and an
abrupt landward shift in reef position (i.e., backstepping).

The second, about 3,000 years ago, is related to no such
event and remains largely unexplained.
Each gap spans nearly a millennium and is followed by
what appears to be full recovery of the A. palmata community.
Whatever happened at Buck Island, it appears to have
been coincident with what was happening regionally. While
a reef crest dominated by A. palmata was spatially dominant
in the overall history of the reef, it was absent for nearly a
third of the time. Thus, we need to be very careful to not
equate spatial dominance to temporal persistence.
Earlier scientific wisdom held that reefs were inherently
stable systems in which little changed from year to year.

62

D.K. Hubbard

With further study, we have come to realize that present-day
reef equilibrium can be very dynamic, and that reefs are
potentially capable of significant change over relatively
short spans of time – even when “nothing is wrong”. The
question now before us is how the changes that we are seeing
fit into the grand scheme of things over the longer haul.
The all-too-common decrease in coral cover and the
attendant rise in macroalgae on so many of the world’s
coral reefs are the cumulative result of bleaching, disease,
increased nutrients, sedimentation, and myriad other factors
related to growing human population growth and everexpanding exploitation. If we ignore these basic truths
while we try to sort out other pressing but more complex
and indirect global issues, we run the risk of exceeding an
environmental “angle of repose” before our data are good
enough to assess blame with certainty. On the other hand, we
can little afford to “fix” everything that seems broken. It is
difficult to decide which reflects greater hubris, our earlier
sense that we could manipulate our environment without
impact or our sense that we can now repair the damage
caused by this misconception.

3.5.2

So, What Do We Do?

Bruce Hatcher posited that “paleontological and sclerochronological studies of corals and reef provinces provide the
best available tools to expand the temporal horizons of
observation” (from Pandolfi 2002). However, the shift
from coral to macroalgal dominance is virtually impossible
to detect in the fossil record because such algae do not
preserve well, if at all. Also, important gaps in the fossil
record can be missed if we use a visually discernable change
in species composition as the sole way to detect them. How
many of the gaps identified for A. palmata for the last
10,000 years exist in the spatially persistent Pleistocene
records of Barbados, Curacao and other places cited as
examples of pre-anthropogenic stability in Caribbean
reefs? It may be premature to dismiss Grigg’s (2000)
concerns over the effects of temporal scale and measurement
artifacts on comparisons of long-term geological and shortterm biological data. Careful radiometric dating is the only
obvious solution, but the cost of such an effort at a scale that
will allow us to address regional or global phenomena is
daunting. Nevertheless, it may remain as the only plausible
approach to a real understanding of short-term change in
reef-community structure over longer periods of time – short
of centuries of monitoring.
Having said all this, whether or not past gaps in the
Acropora record exist or not, and who has the better understanding of community stasis is no longer the main issue.
Even if such gaps are commonplace, the stress levels that
accompanied subsequent recovery in the past were less
intense and undoubtedly different than what is occurring

today. While the resolution of such issues is of great importance to science and, once resolved, will have overwhelming
bearing on conservation policy, the answers are not available
now and will probably not be for some time to come.
In the meantime, we may be left with something no more
complex than “Pascal’s Wager” in the seventeenth century
relating to the existence of God. What we are in effect doing
today, as was Pascal centuries ago, is weighing the relative
consequences of acting on a premise that might eventually
be proven wrong. Pascal argued that if we presumed God’s
existence and were wrong, the world would simply be left
with “an excess of virtue”, certainly preferable to the “eternal
damnation” that would follow incorrectly denying God’s
existence. Applying this to the present environmental situation (Hajek 2001), a policy that moves toward sustainability
even if no crisis actually exists, still results in “infinite
utility” – we will have coral reefs to pass on to future
generations.
So, is science irrelevant to the growing environmental
debate? Absolutely not! Science has given us our present
understanding of the issues; we have done our jobs well.
There is still an important role for science as we continue to
unravel the intricacies of community structure on a variety
of scales and use that information to propose sound environmental and conservation policy, hopefully well into the
future. Our continued participation is demanded. However,
the time it will take to arrive at the level of scientific
certainty that skeptics demand is a luxury that we no longer
have. The pressing goal for now is to change public attitudes
and create a consensus toward sustainability – and fast!
Consider for a moment the body of information that was
provided to support the existence of Weapons of Mass
Destruction in Iraq. We willingly embarked on a track that
was infinitely costly in dollars, international good will and
quality of life for countless groups; this was ultimately
shown to have been based on seriously flawed information.
By comparison, consider the quality of the information that
points to elevated levels of carbon dioxide in our atmosphere, the adverse environmental and economic impacts
of an economy totally dependent on fossil fuels, the
increased degradation of coral reefs in proximity to centers
of human population, and the spent biotic systems that we
will be handing down to future generations. Yet, we refuse to
act upon this infinitely better body of information because it
is “too costly” to respond until we “know for sure”.
This paradox will be solved only by a fundamental
change in public perception and political will. While
scientists must play a role in this process, the change will
not be driven by good science alone – recent history has
painfully demonstrated this. Perhaps it really is as simple as
Pascal posited centuries ago. If we act on a presumed environmental crisis – one that is ultimately shown to be less
severe than we presently think, we will have perhaps
overspent dollars that some presume we can ill afford.

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

However, we will have a planet that is fundamentally better
off and will have acted on behalf of those least represented in
the recent debate – future generations, lost species and
increasingly degraded habitats. If, on the other hand, we
choose to deny what is ultimately proven to be a real crisis,
we will be faced with a failed life-support system and a path
that no amount of capital wealth can reverse. We need to
replace the present economic mindset that our dollars need
to be preserved until we can absolutely quantify the problem
with one that places a much higher value on environmental
capital that cannot be regained in the next rebound of the
stock market.

References
Adey WH, Burke RB (1977) Holocene bioherms of the Lesser Antilles
– geologic control of development. In: Frost SH, Weiss MP,
Saunders JB (eds) Reefs and related carbonates – ecology and
sedimentology. Amer Assoc Petr Geol Bull Spec Publ 4, Tulsa, pp
67–82
Adey WH, Macintyre IG, Stuckenrath R, Dill RF (1977) Relict barrier
reef system off St. Croix: its implications with respect to late
Cenozoic coral reef development in the western Atlantic. Proc 3rd
Int Coral Reef Symp 2:15–21
Alvarez-Filip L, Dulvy NK, Gill JA, Côté IM, Watkinson AR (2009)
Flattening of Caribbean coral reefs: region-wide declines in architectural complexity. Proc R Soc 276:3019–3025
Aronson R, Precht W (2001a) Applied paleoecology and the crisis on
Caribbean coral reefs. Palaios 16:195–196
Aronson RB, Precht WF (2001b) White-band disease and the changing
face of Caribbean coral reefs. Hydrobiologia 460:25–38
Blanchon P (2011) Back-stepping. In: Hopley D (ed) Encyclopedia of
modern coral reefs. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 77–84
Bosscher H, Schlager W (1992) Computer simulation of reef growth.
Sedimentology 39:503–512
Bruckner AW, Hill RL (2009) Ten years of change to coral
communities off Mona and Desecheo Islands, Puerto Rico, from
disease and bleaching. Dis Aquat Organ 87:19–31
Buddemeier RW, Maragos JE, Knutson DW (1974) Radiographic
studies of reef coral exoskeletons: rates and patterns of coral
growth. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 14:179–200
Burke L, Reytar K, Spalding M, Perry A (2011) Reefs at risk revisited.
World Resources Institute, Washington, DC, 112 p
Carpenter KE, Abrar M, Aeby G, Aronson RB, Banks S, Bruckner A,
Chiriboga A, Cortes J, Delbeen JC, Devantier J, Edgar GJ, Edwards
AJ, Fenner D, Guzman HM, Hoeksema BW, Hodgeson G, Johan O,
Licuanan WY, Livingstone SR, Lovell ER, Moore JA, Obura DO,
Ochavillo D, Polidoro BA, Precht WF, Quibilan MC, Robotan C,
Richards ZT, Rogers AD, Sanciangco J, Sheppard A, Sheppard C,
Smith J, Stuart S, Turak E, Veron JE, Wallace C, Weil E, Wood E
(2008) One-third of reef-building corals face elevated
extinction risks from climate change and local impacts. Science
321:560–563
Church JA, White NJ (2011) Sea-level rise from the late 19th to the
early 21st century. Surv Geophys 32:585–602
Cortes J, Risk M (1985) Are reefs under siltation stress: Cahuita, Costa
Rica. Bull Mar Sci 36:339–356
Daly RA (1915) The glacial-control theory of coral reefs. Proc Am
Acad Arts Sci 51:155–251
Darwin CR (1842) The structure and distribution of coral reefs. Smith,
Elder and Co, London, 207p

63
Darwin C (1913) Journal of researches into the natural history and
geology of the countries visited during the voyage round the
world of H.M.S. Beagle. John Murray, London, p 538
Davi WM (1923) The marginal belts of the coral seas. Proc Natl Acad
Sci 9:292–296
Davies PJ, Hopley D (1983) Growth fabrics and growth rates of Holocene reefs in the Great Barrier Reef. Bur Min Res J Austr Geol
Geophys 8:237–251
Davies PJ, Symonds PA, Feary DA, Pigram CJ (1987) Horizontal plate
motion: a key allocyclic factor in the evolution of the Great Barrier
Reef. Science 238:1697–1700
Davies PJ, Feary DA, Kershaw AP, Pigram CJ, Symonds PA, de
Deckker P (1991) The evolution of the carbonate platforms of
Northeast Australia. In: Williams MA (ed) Cainozoic in Australia:
a re-appraisal of the evidence, vol 18. Geol Soc Australia Spec Pub,
Sydney, pp 44–78
De’ath G, Fabricius KE, Sweatman H, Puotinen M (2012) The 27–year
decline of coral cover on the Great Barrier Reef and its causes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci 109:17995–17999
DiCaprio MRD, Müller RD, Gurnis M (2010) A dynamic process for
drowning carbonate reefs on the northeastern Australian margin.
Geology 38:11–14
Doney SC, Fabry JF, Feely RA, Kleypas JA (2009) Ocean acidification:
the other CO2 problem. Mar Sci 1:169–192
Dubois R, Towle EL (1985) Coral harvesting and mining management
practices. In: Clarke JT (ed) Coasts-coastal resource management
development case studies. Research Planning Institute, Columbia
SC, Coast Publ, vol 3. pp 203–283
Dullo W-C (2005) Coral growth and reef growth: a brief review. Coral
Reefs 51:33–48
Dunham RJ (1970) Stratigraphic reefs versus ecologic reefs. Am Assoc
Petr Geol Bull 54:1931–1932
Dustan P (1975) Growth and form in the reef-building coral Montastrea
annularis. Mar Biol 33:101–107
Emiliani C (1966) Isotopic paleotemperatures. Science 154:851–857
Endean R (1973) Population explosions of Acanthaster planci and
associated destruction of hermatypic corals in the Indo-West Pacific
region. In: Jones OA, Endean R (eds) Biology and geology of coral
reefs, vol 2. Academic, London, pp 389–438
Estep A, Erickson T, Hubbard DK (2008) A comparison of rates and
styles of bioerosion with varying sedimentation: holocene reefs in
the western Dominican Republic versus modern reefs off St. Croix,
USVI 11th Intl Coral Reef Symp Abstracts and Program, p 261
Fagerstrom JA (1987) The evolution of reef communities. Wiley,
New York, 600 p
Fairbanks RG (1989) A 17,000-year glacio-eustatic sea level record:
influence of glacial melting rates on the Younger Dryas event and
deep-ocean circulation. Nature 342:637–642
Fairbridge R, Teichert C (1948) The low isles of the Great Barrier
Reefs: a new analysis. Geogr J 3:67–88
Frost SH (1977) Cenozoic reef systems of Caribbean – prospects for
paleoecologic synthesis. In: Frost SH, Weiss MP, Saunders JB (eds)
Reefs and related carbonates – ecology and sedimentology, Bull
Studies in Geology No. 4. American Association of Petroleum
Geologists, Tulsa, pp 93–110
Gardner TA, Coté IM, Gill JA, Grant A, Watkinson AR (2003) Longterm region-wide declines in Caribbean corals. Science 301:958–960
Gasse F (2000) Hydrological changes in the African tropics since the
last glacial maximum. Quat Sci Rev 19:189–211
Geister J (1977) The influence of wave exposure on the ecological
zonation of Caribbean reefs. Proc 3rd Int Coral Reef Symp 1:23–29
Gischler E (2008) Accretion patterns in Holocene tropical coral reefs:
do massive coral reefs in deeper water with slowly growing corals
accrete faster than shallower branched corals with rapidly growing
corals? Int J Earth Sci 97:851–859

64
Gladfelter W (1982) White band disease in Acropora palmata:
implications for the structure and function of shallow reefs. Bull
Mar Sci 32:639–643
Glynn PW (1984) Widespread coral mortality and the 1982–1983 El
Niño warming event. Environ Conserv 11:133–146
Glynn PJ, Stewart RH (1973) Distribution of coral reefs in the Pearl
Islands (Gulf of Panama) in relation to thermal conditions. Limnol
Oceanogr 18:367–378
Grauss R, Macintyre IG (1982) Variations in growth forms of the reef
coral Montastrea annularis: a quantitative evaluation of growth
response to light distribution under computer simulation. In:
Rutzler K, Macintyre IG (eds) The Atlantic barrier reef ecosystem
at Carrier Bow Cay, Belize I: structure and communities.
Smithsonian Institution Contrib Mar Sci 12:441–464, Washington
DC
Grauss RB, Chamberlain JA, Boker A (1984) Structural modifications
of corals in relation to waves and currents. In: Frost SH, Weis MP,
Saunders JB (eds) Reefs and related carbonates – ecology and
sedimentology. Am Assoc Petr Geol Bull Stud Geol 4:135–153,
Tulsa OK
Grauss R, Macintyre I (1998) Global warming and the future of Caribbean coral reefs. Carbonates Evaporites 13:43–47
Greenstein BJ (1999) Using the fossil record to approach modern
ecological problems: a case study for coral reefs. Am Paleontol
7:2–4
Grigg RW (1982) Darwin Point: a threshold for atoll formation. Coral
Reefs 1:29–35
Grigg RW (2000) Coral reef evolution: short term instability versus
evolutionary stasis. In: Integrated coastal zone management, 2nd
edn. Univ. of Hawaii, Dept. of Oceanography, Honolulu, pp 65–68
Hajek A (2001) Pascal’s wager. In: Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. Stanford University Center for the Study of
Language and Information, Stanford CA
Hallock P (1988) The role of nutrient availability in bioerosion:
consequences to carbonate buildups. Paleogogr Paleoclimatol
Paleoecol 63:275–291
Haq BU, Hardenbol J, Vail PR (1987) Chronology of fluctuating sea
levels since the Triassic. Science 235:1156–1167
Harvell C, Kim K, Burkholder JM, Colwell RR, Epstein PR, Grimes
DJ, Hofmann EE, Lipp EK, Osterhaus ADME, Overstreet RM,
Porter JW, Smith GW, Vasta GR (1999) Emerging marine diseases
– climate links and anthropogenic factors. Science 285:1505–1510
Harvell CD, Aronson R, Baron N, Connell J et al (2004) The rising tide
of ocean diseases: unsolved problems and research priorities. Front
Ecol Environ 2:375–382
Heckel PH (1974) Carbonate buildups in the geologic record: a review.
In: Laporte LF (ed) Reefs in time and space. SEPM Spec Publ,
Tulsa OK, vol 18, pp 90–154
Hine AC, Neumann AC (1977) Shallow carbonate bank margin growth
and structure, Little Bahama Bank. Am Assoc Petr Geol Bull
61:376–406
Hodell DA, Curtis JH, Jones GA, Higuera-Gundy A,
Brenner M, Binford MW, Dorsey KT (1991) Reconstruction of
Caribbean climate change over the past 10,500 years. Nature
352:790–793
Hoegh-Guldberg O, Mumby PJ, Hooten AJ, Steneck RS, Greenfield P,
Gomex E, Harvell CD, Sale PF, Edwards AJ, Caldeira K, Eakin
CM, Iglesias-Prieto R, Muthiga N, Bredbury RH, Dubi A, Hatziolos
ME (2007) Coral reefs under rapid climate change and ocean
acidification. Science 318:1737–1742
Hubbard DK (1986) Sedimentation as a control of reef development.
Coral Reefs 5:117–125
Hubbard DK (1987) A general review of sedimentation as it relates to
environmental stress in the Virgin Islands Biosphere Reserve and
the eastern Caribbean in general. Biosphere Reserve Research
Report 20, Virgin Islands National Park, St. John USVI, 42p

D.K. Hubbard
Hubbard DK (1992) Hurricane-induced sediment transport in openshelf tropical systems – an example from St. Croix, U.S. Virgin
Islands. J Sediment Petrol 62:946–960
Hubbard DK (2009) Depth-related and species-related patterns of
Holocene reef accretion in the Caribbean and western Atlantic: a
critical assessment of existing models. In: Swart PK, Eberli G,
McKenzie J (eds) Perspectives in carbonate geology. WileyBlackwell, Oxford, pp 1–18
Hubbard DK (2011) Reefs through the looking glass. In: Stanley DG
(ed) Corals and reefs: crisis, collapse and change, vol 17, Paleontological Society papers. Paleontological Society, Boulder, pp 95–110
Hubbard DK (2014) Holocene accretion rates and styles for Caribbean
coral reefs: lessons for the past and future. In: Verwer K, Playton
TE, Harris PM (eds) Deposits, architecture and controls of carbonate margin, slope and basinal settings. SEPM Spec. Publ, vol
105, pp 264–281, Tulsa OK
Hubbard DK, Garcia M (2003) The corals and coral reefs of Easter
Island – a preliminary look. In: Loret J, Tanacredi JT (eds) Easter
Island. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, pp 53–77
Hubbard JAEB, Pocock Y (1974) Sediment rejection by recent
scleractinian corals: a key to paleoenvironmental reconstruction.
Geol Rundsch 61:598–626
Hubbard DK, Scaturo D (1985) Growth rates of seven scleractinean
corals from Cane Bay and Salt River, St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands.
Bull Mar Sci 36:325–338
Hubbard DK, Burke RB, Gill IP (1986) Styles of reef accretion along a
steep, shelf-edge reef, St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands. J Sediment
Petrol 56:848–861
Hubbard DK, Miller AI, Scaturo D (1990) Production and cycling of
calcium carbonate in a shelf-edge reef system (St. Croix,
U.S. Virgin Islands): applications to the nature of reef systems in
the fossil record. J Sediment Petrol 60:335–360
Hubbard DK, Bythell JC, Gladfelter EH (1994) Comparison of
biological and geological perspectives of coral-reef community
structure at Buck Island, U.S. Virgin Islands. In: Proceedings of
colloquium on global aspects of coral reefs; health, hazards and
history. Miami, pp 201–207
Hubbard DK, Gill IP, Burke RB, Morelock J (1997) Holocene reef
backstepping – southwestern Puerto Rico Shelf. Proc 8th Int Coral
Reef Symp 2:1779–1784
Hubbard DK, Burke RB, Gill IP (1998) Where’s the reef: the role of
framework in the Holocene. Carbonates Evaporites 13:3–9
Hubbard DK, Gill IP, Burke RB (2000) Caribbean-wide loss of
A. palmata 7,000 yr ago: sea-level change, stress, or business as
usual? Abstracts of 9th international coral reef symposium, p 57
Hubbard DK, Zankl H, Van Heerden I, Gill IP (2005) Holocene reef
development along the Northeastern St. Croix Shelf, Buck Island,
U.S. Virgin Islands. J Sediment Res 75:97–113
Hubbard DK, Gill IP, Burke RB (2013) Holocene reef building on
Eastern St. Croix, US Virgin Islands: Lang Bank revisited. Coral
Reefs. doi:10.1007/s00338-013-1041-1
Hubbard D, Gischler E, Davies P, Montaggioni L, Camoin G, Dullo
W-C, Storlazzi C, Field M, Fletcher C, Grossman E, Sheppard C,
Lescinsky H, Fenner D, McManus J, Scheffers S (2014) Island
outlook: warm and swampy. Science 345:1461–1462
Hughes Y (1994) Catastrophes, phase shifts, and large-scale degradation of a Caribbean coral reef. Science 265:1547–1531
Hughes TP, Baird AH, Bellwood DR, Card M, Connolly SR, Folke C,
Grosberg R, Hoegh-Guldberg O, Jackso JBC, Kleypas J, Lough JM,
Marshall P, Nystrom M, Palumbi SR, Pandolfi JM, Rosen B,
Roughgarden J (2003) Climate change, human impacts and the
resilience of coral reefs. Science 301:929–933
Isdale PJ (1984) Geographical patterns in coral growth rates on the
Great Barrier Reeg. In: Baker JT, Carter RM, Sammarco PW,
Stark KP (eds) Proceedings of the Great Barrier Reef Conference,
Townsvill, Australia, pp 327–330

3

Reef Biology and Geology – Not Just a Matter of Scale

Jackson JBC (1991) Adaptation and diversity of reef corals. Bioscience
41:745–482
Jackson JBC (1992) Pleistocene perspectives on coral reef community
structure. Am Zool 32:719–731
Jackson JBC (1997) Reefs since Columbus. Proc 8th Int Coral Reef
Symp 1:97–106
Johannes RE (1975) Pollution and degradation of coral reef
communities. In: Ferguson Wood EJ, Johanes RE (eds) Tropical
marine pollution, vol 12, Elsevier oceanography series. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp 13–51
Jackson J, Donovan M, Cramer K, Lam V (2014) Status and trends of
Caribbean coral reefs: 1970–2012. Global Coral Reef Monitoring
Network, IUCN, Gland Switzerland, 304 p
Kaye C (1959) Shoreline features and quaternary shoreline changes,
Puerto Rico, USGS Prof. Paper 317-B, 140 p
Kinsey DW, Davies PJ (1979) Effects of elevated nitrogen and phosphorous on coral reef growth. Limnol Oceanogr 24:935–940
Kleypas JA, Buddemeier RW, Archer D, Gattuso J-P, Langdon C,
Opdyke BN (1999) Geochemical consequences of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide on coral reefs. Science 284:118–143
Knowlton N (1993) Sibling species in the sea. Ann Rev Ecol Syst
24:189–216
Ladd HS, Schlanger SO (1960) Drilling operations on Enewetak atoll.
USGS Prof. Paper 260-Y, US Government Printing Office,
Washington DC
Land LS (1979) The fate of reef-derived sediment on the north
Jamaican island slope. Mar Geol 29:55–71
Lessios HA, Robertson DR, Cubit JD (1984) Spread of Diadema mass
mortality through the Caribbean. Science 226:335–337
Lowenstam HA (1950) Niagaran reefs of the Great Lakes area. J Geol
58:430–487
Lyell C (1832) Principles of geology, vol II. John Murray, London,
330p
Macintyre IG, Glynn PW (1976) Evolution of modern Caribbean fringing reef, Galeta Point. AAPG Bull 60:1054–1072
Maragos J (1972) A study of the ecology of Hawaiian coral reefs. PhD
dissertation, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, 280 p
McClanahan T, Shafir S (1990) Causes and consequences of sea urchin
abundance and diversity in Kenyan coral reef lagoons. Oeceologia
83:362–370
McCulloch M, Fallon S, Wyndham T, Hendy E, Lough J, Barnes D
(2003) Coral record of increased sediment flux to the inner Great
Barrier Reef since European settlement. Nature 421:727–730
Milankovitch M (1930) Mathematische Klimalehre und Astronomische
Theorie der Klimaschwankungen, Handbuch der Klimalogie Band
1 Teil A Borntrager Berlin
Miller J, Muller E, Rogers CS, Waara R, Atkinson A, Whelan KRT,
Patterson M, Witcher B (2009) Coral disease following massive
bleaching in 2005 causes 60 % decline in coral cover on reefs in the
US Virgin Islands. Coral Reefs 28:925–937
Mojsisovics EMV (1879) Die dolomit-riffe von sudTirol und Venetien.
A Holden Co., Wien, 551p
Montaggioni L (2005) History of Indo-Pacific coral reef systems since
the last glaciation: development patterns and controlling factors.
Earth Sci Rev 71:1–75
Moore CH, Shedd WW (1977) Effective rates of sponge bioerosion as a
function of carbonate production. Proc 3rd Int Coral Reef Symp
2:499–506
Moran PJ (1986) The Acanthaster phenomenon. Oceanogr Mar Biol
Ann Rev 24:379–480
Morelock J, Boulon R, Galler G (1979) Sediment stress and coral reefs.
In: Lopez JM (ed) Proceedings of the symposium on energy and
industry in the marine environment in Guayanilla Bay, University
of Puerto Rico, pp 46–58

65
Murdock TQ, Fanning AF, Weaver AJ (1997) Paleoclimatic response
of the closing of the Isthmus of Panama in a coupled oceanatmosphere model. Geophys Res Lett 24:253–256
Neumann AC, Macintyre IG (1985) Reef response to sea level rise:
keep up catch up or give up. Proc 5th Int Coral Reef Symp
3:105–110
Neumann CJ, Cry GW, Caso EI, Jarvinen BR (1981) Tropical cyclones
of the North Atlantic Ocean, 1871–1980. National Climatic Center
Publ, 174p NOAA Environmental Centers for Environmental Information, Ashville
Newell ND (1955) Depositional fabric in Permian reef limestones. J
Geol 63:301–309
Ogston AS, Field ME (2010) Predictions of turbidity due to enhanced
sediment resuspension resulting from sea-level rise on a fringing
coral reef: evidence from Molokai, Hawaii. J Coast Res
26:1027–1037
Oliver TA, Palumbi SR (2011) Do fluctuating temperature
environments elevate thermal tolerance? Coral Reefs 30:429–440
Pandolfi JM (2002) Coral community dynamics at multiple scales.
Coral Reefs 21:13–23
Pandolfi JM, Jackson JBC (1997) The maintenance of diversity on coral
reefs: examples from the fossil record. Proc 8th Int Coral Reef
Symp 1:397–404
Pandolfi JM, Jackson JBC (2001) Community structure of Pleistocene
coral reefs of Curacao, Netherlands Antilles. Ecol Monogr
71:49–67
Perry CT, Spencer T, Kench PS (2008) Carbonate budgets and reef
production states: a geomorphic perspective on the ecological
phase-shift concept. Coral Reefs 27:853–866
Perry CT, Edinger EN, Kench PS, Mumby PJ, Murphy G, Steneck RS,
Smithers SG (2012) Estimating rates of biologically driven coral
reef framework production and erosion: a new census-based carbonate budget methodology and applications to the reefs of Bonaire.
Coral Reefs 31:853–868
Playford P (1980) Devonian “great barrier reef” of Canning Basin,
Western Australia. Am Assoc Petr Geol Bull 64:814–840
Purdy E (1974) Reef configurations: cause and effect. In: LaPorte LF
(ed) Reefs in time and space. SEPM Spec. Publ., vol 18, pp
90–76, Tulsa OK
Quoy JR, Gaimard JP (1825) Memoire sur l’accroissment des polyps
lithophytes consider e geologiquement. Ann Sci Nat 6:373–390
Roberts HH, Murray SF, Suhayda JN (1977) Physical processes in a forereef shelf environment. Proc 3rd Int Coral Reef Symp 2:507–515
Rogers CS (1983) Sublethal and lethal effects of sediment applied to
common Caribbean corals in the field. Mar Pollut Bull 14:378–382
Roy K, Smith SV (1971) Sedimentation and coral development in
turbid water: fanning Lagoon. Pac Sci 25:234–248
Ruddiman WF (2005) How did humans first alter global climate? Sci
Am 295:46–53
Schlager W (1981) The paradox of drowned reefs and carbonate
platforms. GSA Bull 92:197–211
Schroeder JH, Purser BH (1986) Reef diagenesis. Springer, Berlin,
455p
Schroeder JH, Zankl H (1974) Dynamic reef formation: a sedimentological concept based on studies of Recent Bermuda and Bahamian
reefs. Proc 2nd Int Coral Reef Symp 2:413–428
Scoffin TP, Stearn CW, Boucher D, Frydl P, Hawkins CM, Hunter IG,
MacGeachy JK (1980) Calcium carbonate budget of a fringing reef
on the west coast of Barbados: part II, erosion, sediments and
internal structure. Bull Mar Sci 30:47–508
Simskiss K (1964) Phosphates as crystal poisons of calcification. Biol
Rev 39:487–505
Stanley GD, Fagerstrom (1988) Ancient reef ecosystems. Palaios
3:1–142

66
Stearn CW, Scoffin TP, Martindale W (1977) Calcium carbonate budget of a fringing reef on the west coast of Barbados – zonation and
productivity. Bull Mar Sci 27:479–510
Steneck RS (1988) Herbivory on coral reefs: a synthesis. Proc 6th Int
Coral Reef Symp 1:37–49
Taylor JD, Saloman R (1978) Some effects of hydraulic dredging and
coastal development in Boca Clega Bay, FL. Fish Bull 67:213–241
Teichert C (1958) Cold- and deep-water coral banks. Am Assoc Petr
Geol Bull 42:1064–1082
Thompson LG, Mosley-Thompson E, Davis ME, Lin PN, Henderson
KA, Dole-Dai J, Bolzan JF, Jiu KB (1995) Late glacial stage and
Holocene tropical ice core records from Huascaran, Peru. Science
269:46–50
Toomey M, Ashton AD, Perron JT (2013) Profiles of ocean island coral
reefs controlled by sea-level history and carbonate accumulation
rates. Geology 41:731–734
US Naval Weather Service Command (1979) Summary of synoptic
meteorological observations (SSMO) – Caribbean and nearby
island coastal marine areas. National Climatic Center, Washington
DC
Vail PR, Mitchum RM, Thompson S III, Todd RG, Sangree JB,
Widmier JM, Bubb NM, Natelid WG (1977) Seismic stratigraphy
and global sea level changes. Am Assoc Petr Geol Bull Mem
26:49–212
van Eepol R, Grigg D (1970) Effects of dredging at Great Bay, St. John.
Water. Pollution report 5. Caribbean Research Institute, University
of the Virgin Islands, St. Thomas USVI
Vermeij GJ (1978) Biogeography and adaptation. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
Vermeij GJ (1993) Biological history of a seaway. Science
260:1603–1604

D.K. Hubbard
Viau C (1988) The Devonian Swan Hills formation at Swan Hills field
and adjacent areas, central Alberta, Canada: In: Harris P (ed) SEPM
core workshop no. 12, pp 803–853, Tulsa OK
Walker ND, Roberts HH, Rouse LJ, Huh OJ (1982) Thermal history of
reef-associated environments during cold-air outbreak event. Coral
Reefs 1:83–88
Weber JN, White EW (1974) Activation energy for skeletal aragonite
deposited in the hermatypic coral Platygyra app. Mar Biol
26:353–359
Webster PJ, Holland GJ, Curry JA, Chang H-R (2005) Changes in
tropical cyclone number, duration and intensity in a warming environment. Science 309:1844–1846
Weinstein DK, Smith TB, Klaus JS (2014) Mesophotic Bioerosion:
variability and structural impact on U.S. Virgin Island deep reefs.
Geomorphology. doi:10.1016/ j.geomorph.2014.03.005
Wellington GM, Glynn PW, Strong AE, Navarrete SA, Wieters E,
Hubbard DK (2000) Crisis on coral reefs linked to climate change.
Eos 82:1–5
Whitcher E (2011) Macrobioerosion rates of in-situ coral colonies: St.
John, U.S. Virgin Islands. In: Proc 24th Keck Geology Symp
24:219–225
Whitcher E, Hubbard DK, Parsons-Hubbard K, Miller J (2012)
Bioerosion of in situ coral colonies. Book of Abstracts:13th international coral reef symposium p 200 Cairns, Australia
Wilkinson CR (1987) Interocean differences in size and nutrition of
coral sponge populations. Science 236:1654–1657
Zeebe EE, Wolf-Gladrow DA (2001) CO2 in seawater: equilibrium,
kinetics and isotopes. Elsevier Oceanography Ser No 65, 346 p
Amsterdam

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic
Balance
Peter W. Glynn and Derek P. Manzello

The question at once arises, how is it that even the stoutest corals, resting with broad base upon the ground, and
doubly secure from their spreading proportions, become so easily a prey to the action of the same sea which
they met shortly before with such effectual resistance? The solution of this enigma is to be found in the mode of
growth of the corals themselves. Living in communities, death begins first at the base or centre of the group,
while the surface or tips still continue to grow, so that it resembles a dying centennial tree, rotten at the heart,
but still apparently green and flourishing without, till the first heavy gale of wind snaps the hollow trunk, and
betrays its decay. Again, innumerable boring animals establish themselves in the lifeless stem, piercing holes in
all directions into its interior, like so many augurs, dissolving its solid connexion with the ground, and even
penetrating far into the living portion of these compact communities.
L. Agassiz (1852)

Abstract

Bioerosion, involving the weakening and breakdown of calcareous coral reef structures, is
due to the chemical and mechanical activities of numerous and diverse biotic agents. These
range in size from minute, primarily intra-skeletal organisms, the microborers (e.g., algae,
fungi, bacteria) to larger and often externally-visible macroboring invertebrate (e.g.,
sponges, polychaete worms, sipunculans, molluscs, crustaceans, echinoids) and fish (e.g.,
parrotfishes, acanthurids, pufferfishes) species. Constructive coral reef growth and destructive bioerosive processes are often in close balance. Dead corals are generally subject to
higher rates of bioerosion than living corals, therefore, bioerosion and reef degradation can
result from disturbances that cause coral mortality, such as sedimentation, eutrophication,
pollution, temperature extremes, predation, and coral diseases. The effects of intensive
coral reef bioerosion, involving El Niño-Southern Oscillation, Acanthaster predation,
watershed alterations, and over-fishing, are re-examined after ~20 years (early
1990s–2010). We review the evidence showing that the biologically-mediated dissolution
of calcium carbonate structures by endolithic algae and clionaid sponges will be
accelerated with ocean acidification. The CaCO3 budget dynamics of Caribbean and
eastern tropical Pacific reefs is reviewed and provides sobering case studies on the current
state of coral reefs and their future in a high-CO2 world.
Keywords

Rates  Excavating  Degradation  Acidification  Microborer

P.W. Glynn (*)
Department of Marine Biology and Ecology, Rosenstiel School of
Marine and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami, 4600
Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149, USA
e-mail: pglynn@rsmas.miami.edu

D.P. Manzello
Ocean Chemistry and Ecosystems Division, Atlantic Oceanographic
and Meteorological Laboratory, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, 4301 Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149, USA
e-mail: derek.manzello@noaa.gov

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_4

67

68

4.1

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

Introduction

Coral reefs are among the Earth’s most biologically diverse
ecosystems, and many of the organisms contributing to the
high species diversity of reefs normally weaken them and
convert massive reef structures to rubble, sand and silt. The
various activities of those reef species that cause coral and
coralline algal erosion are collectively termed bioerosion, a
name coined by Neumann (1966). A bioeroder is any organism that, through its assorted activities, erodes and weakens
the calcareous skeletons of reef-building species. Although
an extensive terminology has been adopted only during the
past three decades, bioerosion has been recognized as an
important process in reef development and maturation for
more than a century (e.g., Darwin 1842; Agassiz 1852).
Traces of biologically-induced erosion in ancient reef
structures indicate that bioerosion has probably had some

effect on reef carbonate budgets since Precambrian and
Cambrian times (Vogel 1993).
Most bioeroder species are both small in size and secretive in living habits. Although the majority of bioeroders and
other cryptic organisms are not visible on coral reefs, it has
been suggested that their numbers and combined mass equal
or exceed that of the surface biota (Grassle 1973; Ginsburg
1983). Recent research supports this hypothesis (Enochs
2012). Ginsburg has coined the term coelobite to refer to
the profusion of organisms inhabiting cavities on reefs. For
convenience, bioeroders that are usually present and visible
on reef surfaces are termed external bioeroders and those
living within calcareous skeletons are termed internal
bioeroders (Fig. 4.1a). The feeding scars produced by an
external bioeroding pufferfish (Arothron) can become permanently incorporated in the skeleton of a massive coral
(Fig. 4.2a). A heavily infested coral by internal bioeroders,

Fig. 4.1 Variety of external and internal bioeroders that commonly attack coral skeletons. A legend provides identification of the taxa illustrated

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

69

Fig. 4.2 (a) X-ray photograph of
Porites lobata slab cut parallel to
the skeletal growth axis. Lunate
pufferfish feeding scars, produced
externally, are now permanently
embedded in the skeleton (6–8 m
depth, Clipperton Atoll). (b)
Cross section of Porites
panamensis extensively bored by
lithophagine bivalves (5 m depth,
Pearl Islands, Panama)

e.g. lithophagine bivalves, can severely damage and weaken
the colony skeleton (Fig. 4.2b).
Several studies have shown that bioeroders are important
in sculpting coral reef growth and in producing the
sediments (rubble, sand, silt and clay) that characterize
coral reef environments. Indeed, carbonate budget studies
have demonstrated that constructive and destructive

processes are closely balanced on many reefs with net reef
accumulation barely ahead of net reef loss (Scoffin
et al. 1980; Glynn 1988; Fig. 4.3). Bioerosion proceeds at
high rates in certain zones which have high living coral
cover and high rates of accretion (Kiene 1988). Sometimes,
however, an imbalance develops with erosional processes
gaining the upper hand. When environmental conditions

70

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

Fig. 4.3 A generalized scheme illustrating the principal components
of coral-reef construction and destruction. In order for reef growth to
occur, rates of bioerosion and mechanical erosion must not exceed the
rate of net reef accumulation. The relative contribution of inorganic and

biological dissolution (¼ biodissolution) to total reef dissolution is
presently unknown. Both components are likely to increase with
ocean acidification

decline abruptly, for example during a stressful thermal
bleaching event, or over an extended period, such as years
of increasing sedimentation or eutrophication, coral recruitment and growth decline or cease, limestone foundations are
compromised and reef death ensues.
The aim of this chapter is to (a) illustrate the diversity of
bioeroders on coral reefs, (b) identify the most destructive
bioeroder groups, (c) describe the more prevalent modes of
limestone destruction, and (d) highlight some case studies of
intensified bioerosion on particular reef systems. In this
updated review, with reference to the diversity of bioeroding
taxa ‘(a)’, protistan foraminiferans are now included as
agents of reef carbonate breakdown although it is not yet
possible to assess their overall importance. Under case studies ‘(d)’, the effects of continuing, global-scale disturbances
that impact coral communities and accelerate bioerosion,
namely ENSO warming events and eutrophication, are
re-examined in the light of recent findings. For example,
the recovery of the Kān’eohe Bay Porites fringing reef,
from 1993 to the present (2013), is examined. More recently
attention has turned to ocean acidification and its effects on
coral carbonate structures. This newly recognized factor,
affecting calcification and cementation, can potentially
exacerbate bioerosive processes and is also considered
below.
In light of the many well documented studies of
accelerating coral reef decline during the past decade, it is
now all the more critical to understand the conditions that
promote bioerosion, a pivotal process affecting the growth
potential of coral reefs. For more technical information on
this subject, the reader may consult the articles in Carriker

et al. (1969) and Barnes (1983), and the reviews by Golubic
et al. (1975, 2005), Warme (1975, 1977), Risk and
MacGeachy (1978), Trudgill (1983), Macintyre (1984),
Hutchings (1986, 2011), Perry and Hepburn (2008),
Tribollet (2008), and Tribollet and Golubic (2011). An
online bibliographic review of the bioerosion literature is
provided by Wilson (2008).

4.2

Bioeroder Diversity

Bioeroders are abundant and diverse members of coral reef
communities, belonging to four of the five kingdoms of life
on earth, and to most animal phyla. Why have so many taxa
become bioeroders? By far, the bioeroders hidden within
coral skeletons, the cryptic biota, have the greatest taxonomic diversity. It is probable that intense competition and
predation have led to the selection and evolution of cryptic
life styles. Many of these secretive species are without
toxins, armature, spines and thick shells, traits that are so
common to their congeners living on reef surfaces and
exposed to predators.
Depending upon their location on calcareous substrata,
bioeroders can be classified as epiliths, chasmoliths and
endoliths (Golubic et al. 1975). Epilithic species live on
exposed surfaces, chasmoliths occupy cracks and holes,
and endoliths are present within skeletons. Assignment to
these categories is not always clear, however, for some
bioeroders may belong to more than one microhabitat or
change microhabitats during feeding, reproduction and
development.

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

Bioeroders breakdown calcareous substrata in a variety of
ways. The majority of epilithic bioeroders are herbivorous
grazers that scrape and erode limestone rock while feeding
on associated algae. In terms of eroding capabilities, grazers
range from non-denuding and denuding herbivores that
remove mainly algae and cause little or no damage to
substrata to excavating species that remove relatively large
amounts of algae, including calcareous algae, and the underlying limestone substrata (Steneck 1983a). Most endoliths
are borers that erode limestone mechanically, chemically or
by a combination of these processes. The important role of
bioeroders can be appreciated when one realizes that coral
reefs are predominantly sedimentary features made up of
calcareous particles that are generated in large measure by
the activities of bioeroders (Sects. 2.2 and 3.4).
Many species that bioerode calcareous skeletons are minute, requiring microscopical methods for study, and are
referred to as microborers or endolithic microorganisms
(Golubic et al. 1975; Macintyre 1984). To this group belong
three kingdoms, namely bacteria and cyanobacteria
(PROKARYOTAE),
FUNGI,
and
eukaryotic
microorganisms such as protozoans and algae
(PROTOCTISTA). The macroborers are generally more
conspicuous on coral reefs, and include numerous invertebrate and vertebrate taxa in the kingdom ANIMALIA. Most
endolithic invertebrates are suspension feeders, gathering
their food passively or actively from the water column.
Endolithic microborers, possibly Cyanobacteria, are
among the first recognizable bioeroders in the fossil record,
having left minute borings in late Precambrian ooids of
Upper Riphean/Vendian age, 570–700 Myr (Campbell
1982). While endolithic borers increased steadily during
the Paleozoic era, from five to nine classes, they comprised
only a small part of hard-ground communities and
penetrated structures superficially, i.e., to maximum depths
of 2–3 cm (Vermeij 1987). A notable increase in endolithic
taxa occurred during the Mesozoic era with the appearance
of deep borers, such as pelecypods, gastropods and lithotryid
barnacles, capable of penetrating substrates to depths of
15 cm. Excavating bioeroders, comprising mobile epifaunal
invertebrates and herbivorous fishes, made their first appearance during the Late Mesozoic and Early Cenozoic
(70–60 Myr) and have persisted until today. These animals
– chitons, limpets and other gastropods, sea urchins and
parrotfishes – are dominantly herbivores whose feeding
activities incidentally produce large quantities of sediment.
Herbivory and bioerosion by these groups are probably more
intense now than at any time in the past (Steneck 1983b).
Vermeij (1987) has argued that this Mesozoic increase in the
size and extent of excavation among vagile bioeroders can
be interpreted as an evolutionary response to escalating
predation and competition on open rock surfaces.

71

4.2.1

Bacteria

Although our knowledge of the bioeroding potential of bacteria and the various taxa involved is very limited, preliminary
observations suggest that these organisms may be important
under certain conditions. A pilot study in Hawai’i indicated
that brownish areas inside the skeletons of massive corals
contained from 104 to 105 bacteria per gram dry weight
(DiSalvo 1969). Boring sponges also were closely associated
with bacteria, which could possibly have assisted the sponges’
penetration into the coral. Different workers have shown that
bacteria can etch the surface of limestone crystals and dissolve the organic matrix of coral skeletons, causing internal
bioerosion (DiSalvo 1969; Risk and MacGeachy 1978).
Several species of Cyanobacteria, formerly known as
blue-green algae, are capable of eroding reef rock from the
splash zone to depths of at least 75 m. Species of Hyella,
Plectonema, Mastigocoleus, and Entophysalis, for example,
have been found on limestone surfaces, inside cavities, and
penetrating reef rock (Fig. 4.4a, b). A close relative of Hyella
has been found in Precambrian algal reefs that existed 1.7
billion years ago (Vogel 1993). The boring is a dissolution
process accomplished by the terminal cells of specialized
filaments. Cyanobacteria have been implicated in the erosion
of lagoon floor sediments on the Great Barrier Reef,
amounting to the dissolution of between 18 and 30 % of
the sediment influx rate (Tudhope and Risk 1985)
(Table 4.1). (It should be stressed that most of the rates of
erosion listed in Tables 4.1 and 4.2 were obtained with
different methods and therefore should be compared with
due caution. See Kiene [1988] for an assessment of the
strengths of the methods and some problems with the
intercomparisons.)

4.2.2

Fungi

Boring fungi have been found in modern corals in the Caribbean, French Polynesia and on the Great Barrier Reef
(Australia). Twelve genera belonging to the Deuteromycota
or Fungi Imperfecti have been isolated from a variety of
scleractinian corals and a hydrocoral (Kendrick et al. 1982).
Fungi are capable of deep penetration into coral skeletons by
chemical dissolution. The hyphae produce narrow borings
and penetrate the deepest recesses of coral skeletons, probably because of their ability to utilize the organic matrix of
coral skeletons (Fig. 4.4c, d). Endolithic fungi growth can
cause unique skeletal protuberances in living corals due to
the localized deposition of dense skeletal material, perhaps
as defensive barrier (Le Campion-Alsumard et al. 1995).
Fungi have also been implicated in the etching of calcareous
surfaces, the weakening and dissolution of calcareous

72

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

Fig. 4.4 Photomicrographs of
endolithic microborers in
limestone substrates.
Cyanobacteria: (a) Plectonema
terebrans Bornet and Flahault,
scanning electron micrograph
(SEM) of plastic casts of filaments
in an acid-etched shell; (b)
P. terebrans, transmitted light
micrograph (TLM) of filaments
isolated by dissolution. Fungi: (c)
SEM of plastic casts of fine fungal
hyphae intertwined with the
larger filaments of P. terebrans;
(d) SEM of fungal borings
covering and possibly feeding
(arrows) on the underlying
cyanobacterium. Chlorophyta: (e)
Ostreobium brabantium Weber
Van-Bosse, SEM of plastic cast of
large radiating growth form in an
acid-etched shell fragment; (f)
O. brabantium, TLM of filaments
isolated by dissolution. Scale
bars: a ¼ 50 μm, b ¼ 40 μm,
c ¼ 5 μm, d ¼ 25 μm,
e ¼ 200 μm, f ¼ 100 μm (From
May et al. 1982)

sediments as well as the calcareous tube linings of various
endoliths. Because of the difficulty of distinguishing
between fungal and algal borings, estimates of dissolution
rates due to boring fungi alone are not yet available.

4.2.3

Algae

Green (Chlorophyta) and red (Rhodophyta) algae have been
implicated in the erosion of coral rock under various reef
settings. Green and red algae occur on limestone surfaces, in
cavities and within coral skeletons (Fig. 4.4e, f). Freshly
fractured corals often reveal layers of green banding a few
cm beneath the live coral surface. The green color is due to
the presence of chlorophyll pigments, which intercept light

passing through the coral’s tissues and skeleton. This greenish layer is often referred to as the “Ostreobium band”,
named after a green alga that is commonly present in coral
skeletons. However, the green band may also contain a
variety of different kinds of algae, e.g., species of Codiolum,
Entocladia, Eugomontia, and Phaeophila. The importance
of boring algae as bioeroders is controversial; some workers
claim that they are among the most destructive agents of reef
erosion whereas others maintain that they cause only minimal damage (Sect. 1.1). Nonetheless, mixtures of internal
bioeroder taxa – including green and red algae, bacteria,
cyanobacteria, and fungi – can produce similar high-end
erosion rates, ranging from 330 g CaCO3 m2 year-1 on a
Caribbean coral reef at Bonaire to 470 g CaCO3 m2 year-1
on the Great Barrier Reef (Table 4.1).

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

73

Table 4.1 Rates of bioerosion by internal borers
Taxonomic group
Cyanobacteria
Mostly cyanobacteria with
some fungi
Cyanobacteria, algae,
fungi

Erosion rate
(g CaCO3/m2/year)
350

80
430

Borer abundance
Microborings
permeated
sediment grains
Chlorophyte and
cyanobacteria
predominanta

Particle
size (μm)
2–6

?

470
Cyanobacteria,
chlorophytes, rhodophytes,
fungi, bacteria

Porifera
Clionaid sponges, Pione
lampa Laubenfels
predominant
Cliona and
Siphonodictyon

Crustacea
Lithotrya ?dorsalis
Sowerby

Davies Reef,
Great Barrier Reef
(GBR), Australia
Snapper Island,
GBR

Bonaire

Perry et al.
(2012)

Subtidal
limestone
notch, 1–3 m
depth
Subtidal test
blocks
fringing reef

Bermuda

Neumann
(1966)

Bermuda

Rützler
(1975)
Scoffin
et al.
(1980)
Perry et al.
(2012)

?

290  10b

?

?

23,000

Infested limestone
substrates

30–80

7000

Abundant in
crustose coralline
algae and in dead
and live corals

30–80

Cliona delitrix
C. aprica
C. caribbaea
Cliona delitrix

?
?

Leeward reefs,
high coral
cover

?

Seaward reefs,
low coral
cover

10  2
70  20

Harrier Reef
Osprey Reef

Barbados

Bonaire

Source
Tudhope
and Risk
(1985)
Tribollet
and
Golubic
(2005)

690
840
1800

13,000 ind. m2
24,000 ind. m2
85,000 ind. m2

10–30d

Forereef slope
Reef flat
Lagoonal
patch reef

Lizard Island,
GBR

Davies
and
Hutchings
(1983)

14c
0.8 cm3 ind1
year1

Common

?

Fringing reef

Barbados

Common

2–4e

Intertidal
limestone
shore

Aldabra Atoll,
Indian Ocean

Scoffin
et al.
(1980)
Trudgill
(1976)

Uncommon in
corals

<63

Fringing reef

Barbados

Scoffin
et al.
(1980)

Common

?

Intertidal
limestone
shore

Aldabra Atoll,
Indian Ocean

Trudgill
(1976)

Lithotrya sp.

Sipuncula
Phascolosoma, 3 spp.
Paraspidosiphon, 3 spp.
Lithacrosiphon
gurjanovae Murina
Mollusca
Lithophaga nausta
(Phillipi)

Lagoon-floor
carbonate
sediments
Inshore reef,
eutrophic,
turbid waters
Offshore reef,
oligotrophic,
clear waters
Leeward reef,
high coral
cover
Windward
reef, low coral
cover

?

24
54
Polychaeta
Cirratulid, eunicid,
sabellid, and spionid worms

Locality

330  50b

180c

Clionaid sponges

Habitat

8d

0.9 cm3 ind1
year1

(continued)

74

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

Table 4.1 (continued)
Taxonomic group
Lithophaga laevigata
(Quoy and Gaimard)
Lithophaga aristata
(Dillwyn)
Invertebrata
Sipunculans, Polychaete
worms, Bivalve molluscs

Erosion rate
(g CaCO3/m2/year)
9000

Borer abundance
1,870 ind. m2

Particle
size (μm)
10–100

50  23f

All taxa present

?
?

Habitat
Largely dead
patch reef,
6–10 m depth

Locality
Caño Island,
Costa Rica

Source
Scott et al.
(1988)

Inshore reef,
eutrophic,
Turbid waters

Low Isles

Tribollet
and
Golubic
(2005)

280g

Increase in boring
sponges

?

Inshore and
offshore reefs

80g

Worms
predominant
(sipunculans,
polychaetes)

?

Offshore reefs,
oligotrophic

Snapper Island,
GBR
Snapper Island
Low Isles
Harrier Reef
Lizard Island
Ribbon Reef
Osprey Reef

a

Predominant taxa present on exposed surfaces
Mean rate (1SD), low confidence in data
c
Calculated from an overall borer bioerosion rate of 200 g m2 year1, and assuming that sponges were responsible for 89 %, barnacles for 7 %,
and sipunculans for 4 % of the total bioerosion (Scoffin et al. 1980)
d
For an eunicid (Ebbs 1966), and from information supplied by P. Hutchings (pers. comm.)
e
From Ahr and Stanton (1973)
f
Mean rate (1SD) for six sites, exposure time = 1 year
g
Mean rate for three sites, exposure time = 3 years
b

4.2.4

Foraminifera

Some 20 species of bioeroding foraminiferans, belonging to
11 families, have been reported mainly from turbulent, tropical waters (Vénec-Peyré 1996). The majority of these
mostly endolithic species occur in coral reef environments
and have been found to excavate a variety of substrates,
e.g. coralline algae, foraminifers, corals, bryozoans,
molluscs, crustacean carapaces, wood and rocks. Only a
single species from the Red Sea, Cymbaloporella
tabellaeformis (Brady), has been reported to excavate coral
skeletons. Most workers hypothesize that foraminifers penetrate hard substrates by chemical dissolution. Only a few
quantitative studies on the abundances of bioeroding
foraminifers are available. One such survey estimated population densities of between 150,000 and 250,000 individuals/
m2 in bioclasts present in sedimentary biotopes on a coral
reef at Moorea, French Polynesia. No information is presently available on the rates of bioerosion by foraminiferans.
In addition to the erosion caused directly by these protists, it
is likely that the minute depressions excavated on substrates
may also facilitate the recruitment of other bioeroding taxa.
Clearly, much remains to be learned about the destructive
capacity of these organisms.

4.2.5

Sponges

The most important genera of siliceous sponges known to
bore into calcareous substrata are Cliona, Anthosigmella and
Spheciospongia, order Hadromerida, and Siphonodictyon,
order Haplosclerida (Wilkinson 1983). Clionaid sponges
(Family Clionaidae) are among the most common and
destructive endolithic borers on coral reefs worldwide. Zea
and Weil (2003) have revealed that a formerly regarded
single species of Cliona in the Caribbean consists of at
least three distinct excavating sponge species. Upon splitting
open infested corals, clionaid sponges are revealed as brown,
yellow or orange patches lining the corroded interiors of the
coral skeleton (Fig. 4.5a, d). Most boring sponges form
5–15 mm diameter chambers with smaller galleries branching
off the main chambers. Their depth of penetration into the
coral skeleton is usually no greater than about 2 cm. Some
sponges (Siphonodictyon), however, can form chambers up to
100 mm in diameter that penetrate to 12 cm into coral
colonies. Subsurface excavation by clionaid sponges removes
the skeletal support of coral calyces, thus causing the collapse
and death of polyps. In highly infested colonies, some boring
sponges emerge from the skeleton, grow over and even kill
live coral tissues on reef surfaces. On western Atlantic reefs,

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

75

Table 4.2 Rates of bioerosion by external grazers
Erosion rate (g
CaCO3
m2 year1)

Grazer
abundance
(ind. m2)

Particle
size (mm)

103

27.5

0.12–0.5

8.5

0.02

0.25–3.0

227

5.5

Chiton
tuberculatus Linné
Gastropoda
Acmaea sp.

394

Nerita tessellata
Potiez and Michaud
Echinodermata (sea
urchins)
Diadema
antillarum Phillipi
Diadema
antillarum
Diadema
mexicanum A. Agassiz

Taxonomic group
Crustacea (hermit crabs)
Trizopagurus
magnificus (Bouvier)
Aniculus elegans
Stimpson
Mollusca
Polyplacophora
(chitons)
Acanthopleura
granulata Gmelin

Diadema savignyi
Michelin
Echinometra
lucunter (Linnaeus)
Echinometra
mathaei (Blainville)
Echinometra
mathaeia
Echinothrix
diadema (Linnaeus)
Eucidaris
galapagensis Döderlein
Diadema
antillarum
Echinometra
viridis

Habitat

Locality

Source

Pocilloporid patch
reef

Pearl Islands,
Panama

Glynn et al.
(1972)

0.03–1.0

Intertidal
limestone rock

San Salvador
Island, Bahamas

22

?

Lower intertidal
coral rubble

La Parguera,
Puerto Rico

Rassmussen and
Frankenberg
(1990)
Glynn (1970)

19.2

8

0.03–1.0

154

220

0.03–1.0

Intertidal
limestone rock
Intertidal
limestone rock

Andros Island,
Bahamas
Andros Island,
Bahamas

Donn and
Boardman (1988)
McLean (1967)

4,600

9

?

Patch reef

Ogden (1977)

5,300

23

0.05–0.5

Fringing reef

St. Croix, U.S.
Virgin Islands
Barbados

139–277
3,470–10,400
3,400

2–4
50–150
4.8

0.5–2.0

Lower seaward
slope

Gulf of Chiriquı́,
Panama

Sand

Reef lagoon

3,900

100

?

Algal ridge

Ogden (1977)

70–260

2–7

?

Limestone rock

Moorea, French
Polynesia
St. Croix, U.S.
Virgin Islands
Enewetak Atoll

1,600
4,300
803

0.09
14.0
0.6

?

Outer reef flat

La Saline reef,
Reunion Island

Chazottes et al.
(2002)

Sand

Reef lagoon

Bak (1990)

3,320
22,300

4.6
30.8

0.05–3.0

Glynn (1988)

10  10

D. antillarum

?

Reef flat, pre-1982
Reef flat, post1983
Leeward reefs

Moorea, French
Polynesia
Floreana Island,
Galápagos
Islands
Bonaire

Perry et al. (2012)

10  20

Predominant
grazer

Bak (1990)

Russo (1980)

High coral cover

0
Pisces
Scarus iserti
(Bloch)b
Sparisoma viride
(Bonnaterre)

Scoffin et al.
(1980)
Glynn (1988)

Windward reefs
Low coral cover

490

0.6

0.015–0.25

Patch reef

Panama

Ogden (1977)

61

0.01

Silt-sand

Fringing reef

Barbados

Frydl and Stearn
(1978)
(continued)

76

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

Table 4.2 (continued)
Erosion rate (g
CaCO3
m2 year1)
140  30c
2,420  190

Grazer
abundance
(ind. m2)
0.08

Particle
size (mm)
Silt-sand?

Grazing and
browsing fishes
Chlorurus
microrhinosd

110

0.01

?

Patch reef

420–5,470
1,010–3,280
6,500

0.0007–0.009e
0.002–0.005f
0.006

Fine sand
Fine sand

Fringing reef
Fringing reef
Shallow reef edge

Chlorurus
sordidus (Forsskål)

110–500
260–980
110–9,100
400–600

0.02e
0.011–0.12f
?
0.04–0.06

Fine sand

Fringing reef
Fringing reef
Reef flat, slope,
Lagoon habitats
patch reefs

Taxonomic group
Scarus vetula
(Bloch and Schneider)

Parrotfishes
(dominantly)

Scaridae

?
Fine sandgravel

71

primary
grazers

?

320  40

primary
grazers

?

S. viride
predominant

?

Leeward reefs
High coral cover
Seaward reefs
Low coral cover

0.004

2–8

Pocilloporid reef

770  220
Sparisoma viride

2100  1060
2750  1390
950  620
1750  810

Pufferfish
Arothron
meleagris (Bloch and
Schneider)

Habitat
Reef slope
Shallow reef

30

Inshore reefs,
eutrophic, turbid
waters
Offshore,
oligotrophic, clear
waters

Locality
Bonaire,
Netherlands
Antilles
Bermuda
Lizard Island
Heron Island
Lizard Island,
GBR
Lizard Island
Heron Island
Llewellyn reef,
Australia GBR

Source
Bruggemann et al.
(1996)
Bardach (1959,
1961)
Bellwood (1995)
Bellwood (1996)

Bellwood (1995)
Kiene (1988)

Saipan, Mariana
Islands
Snapper Island
Low Isles

Cloud (1959)
Tribollet and
Golubic (2005)

GBR
Lizard Island
Ribbon reef
GBR
Bonaire

Perry et al. (2012)

Pearl Islands,
Panama

Glynn et al.
(1972)

a

Dominant echinoid affecting erosion; represented overall between 80 and 100 % of total sea urchin abundances
A senior synonym of Scarus croicensis
c
Mean  standard deviation
d
Formerly confused with Chlorus gibbus Rüppell, a closely related Red Sea species
e
Abundance data are from Choat and Bellwood (1985)
f
Abundance data are from Choat and Robertson (1975)
b

Cliona sp. is sometimes very abundant, forming dark brown
patches several meters in extent that kill or overgrow dead
surfaces and erode all calcifying organisms (Fig. 4.6). In a
comparative study in Bonaire, of leeward and seaward reefs
with high and low coral cover respectively, Perry et al. (2012)
reported significantly higher clionaid bioerosion rates on the
former than the latter (Table 4.1).
Sponge boring is accomplished by amoebocytes that etch
and chip minute calcareous fragments from limestone
substrata (Rützler and Rieger 1973; Pomponi 1979). The
ends of etching amoebocytes flatten against the calcareous

substratum and extend fine pseudopodial (filopodia) sheets
into the limestone at the cell’s periphery. The filopodia
coalesce centrally, cutting out a hemispherical carbonate
chip (Fig. 4.5e–g). This cutting is accomplished by enzymes
that simultaneously dissolve calcium carbonate and the
organic matter matrix of skeletons. At the end of this process, both the chip and the etching cell are transported away
from the site of erosion and are expelled from the sponge.
Based on careful microscopic examination, Rützler and
Rieger (1973) estimated that only about 2–3 % of coral
skeletons are dissolved with the remainder dispersed as

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

77

Fig. 4.5 Boring sponges in
limestone substrates. (a) Two
oscula of Pione (formerly Cliona)
lampa (Laubenfels) visible on the
surface of a massive coral
(Diploria). (b) Vertical section
through peripheral region of
Spheciospongia othella
Laubenfels revealing abundant
spicules. (c) Chambers of Cliona
dioryssa (Laubenfels) in porous
coral rock. (d) A large tunnel
running below the surface of coral
rock excavated by S. othella. (e)
Upper scalloped and (f) lower
convex surfaces of isolated
limestone chips discharged
through the osculum of P. lampa.
(g) Group of chips etched from
substratum by P. lampa but still in
place. Magnification: a, c, d 3;
b 140; e, f 1,500; g 600
(a–d from Rützler 1974; e, f,
g from Rützler and Rieger 1973)

silt-sized chips. These oval-shaped, faceted chips are
easily recognized in sediments and can contribute up to
30–40 % numerically to the fine silt fraction of sediments
on Pacific and Caribbean reefs. However, a recent study
that simultaneously measured chemical and mechanical
(chip production) bioerosion found that the rate of chemical
dissolution was three times greater than the amount of
CaCO3 eroded via chip production (Zundelevich et al.
2007).

4.2.6

Polychaete Worms

Polychaete worms that bore into reef rock are enormously
abundant in certain environments, prompting some workers
to conclude that they are among the most important endolithic borers on coral reefs (Davies and Hutchings 1983).
Various species in the following families typically form
circular holes 0.5–2 mm in diameter that penetrate up to
10 cm into the interiors of coral skeletons: Cirratulidae,

78

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

Fig. 4.6 A Caribbean boring sponge (Cliona cf caribbea) covering and eroding several square meters of reef substrate, San Blas, Panama, 3 m
depth (30 June 1993). Arrows denote perimeter of sponge patch

Eunicidae, Sabellidae and Spionidae. Eunicid holes often
form a sinuous and anastomosing network (Fig. 4.1). The
mechanism of boring has been reported for a few polychaete
species. Some eunicids employ their mandibles to excavate.
Spionids bore mainly by chemical dissolution with some
removal probably due to mechanical abrasion by chaetae
(Haigler 1969). Cirratulid and eunicid species are predominantly deposit-feeders whereas sabellids and spionids are
mainly filter-feeders. The close physical association of
eunicids and spionids with endolithic algae also has
suggested the utilization of boring algae as a food source
(Risk and MacGeachy 1978).
A quantitative study of boring polychaetes conducted at
Lizard Island, Great Barrier Reef provides numerical
abundances and bioerosion rates of a pioneer polychaete
community. At various times during the study it was not
uncommon to find between 27,000 and 80,000 boring
polychaetes per m2 in experimental coral blocks set out in
three different reef environments (Davies and Hutchings
1983). These worms caused erosional losses of from
0.7 kg m2 year-1 on the reef front to 1.8 kg m2 year-1 on
a leeward patch reef (Table 4.1).

4.2.7

Crustacea

Barnacles, shrimp, hermit crabs and other kinds of
crustaceans can erode reef rock (Warme 1975). Barnacles

and shrimp are endolithic borers, producing cylindrical
chambers whereas hermit crabs are external bioeroders that
abrade live coral surfaces.
Three groups of barnacles contain species that reside in
the skeletons of dead corals, namely thoracicans,
acrothoracicans and ascothoracicans. Members of the latter
two taxa occupy small, mm-sized cavities that keep pace
with the host coral’s growth, i.e., they become embedded
within the coral skeleton without causing extensive erosion.
Species of Lithotrya, members of the thoracican barnacle
taxon, erode 2–10 cm long oval-shaped cavities on the
undersides of reef rock and beach rock in shallow, agitated
waters (Fig. 4.1). The barnacle’s basal plate is attached at the
inner-most end of the cavity and the body hangs downward
toward the opening with cirri exposed to food-bearing
currents. The cavities are formed apparently by mechanical
abrasion effected by calcified plates that cover the barnacle’s
body. Unlike other invertebrate endoliths, such as polychaete worms and gastropods, adjacent tubes of boring
Lithotrya are commonly interconnected, and heavily
infested limestones are thoroughly honeycombed and subject to frequent breakage. An average of one boring per cm2
was observed on beach rock in Puerto Rico, and up to 30 %
of the substratum had been removed from some of the
samples examined (Ahr and Stanton 1973). Overall, however, results from studies in the Caribbean and Indian Ocean
indicate that boring barnacles cause relatively little erosion
compared with other internal borers (Table 4.1).

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

Alpheus simus Guerin-Meneville, a pistol shrimp, bores
into coral rock on Caribbean reefs and causes considerable
erosion on some Costa Rican reefs (Cortés 1985). Male/
female pairs excavate 10–15 mm diameter chambers that
penetrate as deep as 15 cm into dead coral rock. Microscopical study of the chamber walls suggests that this shrimp
bores mainly by chemical means. Seven pairs of shrimp
were found in one 1,500 cm2 block, and each pair occupied
an average chamber volume of 20 cm3. This is equivalent to
the removal of about 950 cm3 of calcium carbonate m2 .
The life span of the shrimp is about 2 years, but since
succeeding generations of shrimp probably occupy the
same chambers it is not possible to calculate annual erosion
rates.
Two species of hermit crabs that feed on live coral
produce large amounts of calcareous sediment when they
scrape corals to remove soft tissues (Fig. 4.1). The average
mass of coral abraded by a small hermit crab [Trizopagurus
magnificus (Bouvier)] was about 10 mg ind1 day1, and
for a large hermit crab (Aniculus elegans Stimpson) about
1 g ind1 day1 (Glynn et al. 1972). Relating hermit crab
population densities and erosion rates, it was found that
Trizopagurus and Aniculus respectively were responsible
for the generation of about 1 and 0.1 metric tons of coral
sediment ha1 year1 on a fringing reef in Panamá
(Table 4.2). Since this rate of coral abrasion by hermit
crabs has not been reported elsewhere, it is possible that
these high levels of erosion are unique to the eastern
Pacific.

4.2.8

Sipuncula

Although it is well known that species in several genera of
sipunculans (peanut worms) penetrate coral skeletons, there
is no general agreement on the overall importance of this
group in the bioerosion of coral reefs. Perhaps this is due to
their great variation in abundance from reef to reef and
across reef zones (Macintyre 1984).
Sipunculan borings are cylindrical and pencil-sized or
slightly smaller, ranging from straight to sinuous and from
near-surface to several cm deep in coral skeletons,
depending on the species (Fig. 4.1). Sipunculans are abundant on some reefs: nearly 800 inds m2 were present in reef
crest substrata, and 1,200 inds m2 in Porites coral skeletons
in Belize (Rice and Macintyre 1982). Even at 30 m depth,
40 inds m2 were found. While feeding, sipunculans
extended their introverts outside of their cavities and appear
to ingest debris, sand and algae. The exact manner of boring
is not known, but may involve both chemical dissolution and
mechanical abrasion (Rice and Macintyre 1972). An
estimated sipunculan erosion rate on a Barbados reef
indicated only minor carbonate loss (Table 4.1).

79

4.2.9

Mollusca

Most bioeroding molluscs are external grazers that abrade
reef rock while feeding on algae and associated organisms
residing on and within limestone substrata. The eroding
capacity of surface enmeshed and endolithic algae, important components of the diet of grazing molluscs, also
weakens the substratum and thus facilitates erosion during
feeding. A group of mussel-like endolithic borers also is
prominent on many reefs worldwide.
Molluscan bioeroders are generally most abundant in the
intertidal zone with some species extending their ranges into
supratidal and subtidal habitats (Fig. 4.7a). Species
abundances also change horizontally with chitons often
most plentiful in areas protected from strong wave assault
and limpets, certain snails, and echinoids more common in
wave swept habitats (Fig. 4.7b). Under quiet to rough water
conditions, grazing molluscs are largely responsible for producing the notches and nicks on tropical limestone shores.
Most early workers surmised that intertidal notches were
formed through strictly physico-chemical processes (e.g.,
the localized lowering of pH and accompanying carbonate
dissolution), which resulted in the erosion of the underlying
rock. Under extremely rough conditions, many bioeroders
either disappear or their activities are greatly reduced.
Calcifying taxa, such as coralline algae and vermetid
molluscs, increase in abundance with increasing exposure,
probably because of ecologic requirements for high energy
habitats and a lower abundance of fish consumers in rough
water areas (Fig. 4.7c). Vermetid/coralline algal buildups
help protect the underlying limestone, thus limiting
bioerosion and the development of intertidal notches and
nicks in such areas (Focke 1978).
Several species of chitons (Class Polyplacophora), e.g.,
members of Acanthopleura and Chiton, erode chiefly intertidal limestone substrata while grazing on algae. The grazing
is achieved with a magnetite (Fe3O4) or other mineralenriched radula, a tooth-bearing strap of chitinous material,
that effectively abrades the substratum (Lowenstam and
Weiner 1989). Some erosion also occurs at homing sites,
rock depressions that are occupied by chitons when not
foraging. As many as 50–100 sausage-shaped, 1–3 mm
long fecal pellets are voided daily by individual chitons
(Rasmussen and Frankenberg 1990). Erosion rates vary
greatly among sites as they are influenced by local
differences in rock type and condition, and ecological
factors affecting chiton abundances and feeding activities
(Table 4.2).
Limpets and snails (Class Gastropoda) often occur with
chitons on intertidal carbonate substrata. Acmaea, Cellana
and Patelloida are common limpet genera, and Cittarium,
Littorina, Nerita and Nodilittorina are some common snail
genera. Like chitons, limpets and snails utilize a radula to

80

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

which they feed (Table 4.2). Some gastropods (muricaceans,
naticids) and cephalopods (notably Octopus spp.) employ
the radula as a drilling tool, producing circular holes in thick
shells to help expose the soft tissues of their gastropod and
bivalve prey (Ekdale et al. 1984). The contribution of the
fine grains thus produced to reef sedimentation rates has not
been reported, but drilled mollusc shells are commonly
observed in reef sediments.
Species of Lithophaga and Gastrochaena (Class
Pelecypoda) bore into dead and live corals, and are most
abundant subtidally, with some of these bivalves attacking
reef corals to their lower depth limits. Fungiacava spp.
penetrate live mushroom corals, but their activities are relatively minor. The siphonal openings of Lithophaga typically
have a keyhole-like appearance on coral surfaces and the
circular holes penetrate vertically into the skeleton, from 1 to
10 cm deep depending upon the species (Figs. 4.1 and 4.2b).
The lithophagines are deposit and suspension feeders, often
most abundant in areas of high productivity. The mantle
glands of Lithophaga secrete acid that dissolves and
weakens the limestone substratum. The vertical and rotational movements of the shell also assist in boring, resulting
in the production of silt/sand-sized sediment. Population
densities in productive equatorial eastern Pacific waters
range from 500 to 10,000 inds m2 (Scott et al. 1988),
which can lead to rapid reef erosion (Table 4.1).

4.2.10 Echinoidea

Fig. 4.7 Vertical (a) and horizontal (b) distributions of bioeroding
molluscs and other bioeroder taxa on a limestone shore at Palau,
Caroline Islands. Theoretical relationship (c) of coastal profile morphology to water turbulence at Curaçao, Netherlands Antilles. An
arrow locates a “transition zone” between the “spray” and “surf
zones” (a and b after Lowenstam 1974; c after Focke 1978)

scrape rock surfaces. The radula of patellacean limpets is an
especially effective excavating organ with opal (SiO2.nH2O)
or goethite (HFeO2)-sheathed radular teeth (Lowenstam and
Weiner 1989). The radula of snails contains proteinaceous
teeth, but these grazers are still capable of erosion because of
the often weakened condition of the rock substratum upon

Sea urchins (Echinoidea) are the only echinoderms capable
of significant bioerosion. Several species in the following
genera abrade large amounts of reef rock while feeding and
excavating
burrows:
Diadema,
Echinometra,
Echinostrephus, and Eucidaris. Sea urchins possess a highly
evolved jaw apparatus (Aristotle’s lantern), a flexible and
protrusible mastigatory organ consisting of five radially
arranged, calcified teeth. The teeth are mineralized, and
must be harder than the corroded surfaces they scrape. Sea
urchin spines also assist in bioerosion when they are
employed in the enlargement of burrows. Sea urchins graze
on algae growing on dead coral substrata, but in some areas
also attack live coral. On seaward reef platforms where
water flow is vigorous, sea urchins usually remain in their
burrows and feed predominantly on drift algae. In the
Bonaire study by Perry et al. (2012), high echinoid
bioerosion occurred on leeward reefs with high coral
cover, but none was reported on windward reefs, similar to
the habitat differences noted for clionaid sponges (Table 4.2).
Sea urchins can cause substantial erosion at low and moderate population densities; at high densities, their destruction
of reef substrata rivals clionaid sponge erosion and can lead
to rapid framework loss.

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

4.2.11 Fishes
Numerous fish species erode reef substrata while grazing on
algae, and also fragment colonies while feeding on live coral
tissues or when extracting invertebrates from coral colonies
(Randall 1974). Surgeonfishes (Acanthuridae) and
parrotfishes (Scaridae) are the principal grazing groups
with some fishes in the latter family capable of scraping
and extensive excavation. On western Pacific reefs,
excavating parrotfishes primarily bite convex surfaces, thus
reducing the topographic complexity of reefs (Bellwood and
Choat 1990). Some Atlantic and Pacific parrotfishes occasionally scrape and ingest live coral tissues (Bellwood and
Choat 1990; Glynn 1990a). Triggerfishes (Balistidae),
filefishes (Monacanthidae) and puffers (Tetraodontidae,
Canthigasteridae) are largely carnivorous in feeding habits
and are responsible for fragmenting or grazing on live coral
colonies (Fig. 4.2a). The jaw muscles and tooth armature are
well developed in all of these families. Parrotfishes also have
a pharyngeal mill, a gizzard-like organ that further reduces
the size of ingested sediment. Fish teeth are composed of
dahllite [Ca5(PO4CO3)3(OH)] or francolite (the fluorinated
form), both apatite minerals that are harder than CaCO3
(Lowenstam and Weiner 1989).
Parrotfish grazers can produce large amounts of sediment
on reefs, especially when their population densities are high.
For example, Scarus iserti generated nearly 0.5 kg CaCO3
m2 year1 on a Caribbean reef in Panamá with a high
abundance of just under one fish per m2. Entire grazing fish
communities, comprised dominantly of parrotfishes, typically erode large amounts of reef substrata. One of the
highest erosion rates reported for fishes, 9.1 kg CaCO3
m2 year1, occurred in the lagoon of an Australian reef
(Table 4.2). It should be recognized, however, that relatively
few scarid species in any given fish community are capable
of excavating significant amounts of carbonate substrata. For
example, Bellwood and Wainwright (2002) noted that only
one of 18 scarid species at a Lizard Island site (Great Barrier
Reef) effected high rates of erosion. Additionally, at a Red
Sea site, three of ten scarids contributed importantly to
bioerosion, and at a Caribbean site (Carrie Bow Cay, Belize)
only one of six scarids excavated reef substrata. In this
regional comparison, the highest rate of bioerosion was
effected by the Australian scarid Chlorurus microrhinos,
which excavated 6,500 g m2 year1 (Table 4.2).
Parrotfishes can exhibit interesting spatial differences
vis-à-vis grazing activity and consequent erosion (Table 4.2).
On the Great Barrier Reef, highest erosion was observed on
offshore reefs in oligotrophic waters compared to inshore
reefs in eutrophic environments (Tribollet and Golubic
2005). On reefs at Bonaire, parrotfish erosion rates were
generally highest on leeward reefs with high coral cover
compared to seaward reefs of low coral cover (Perry
et al. 2012).

81

While carnivorous fishes can cause substantial damage
locally, their reef-wide effects seem to be relatively minor.
For example, a pufferfish (Arothron) that erodes about 20 g
of coral per day results in a total reef loss of only 30 g CaCO3
m2 year1 (Glynn et al. 1972) because of a relatively low
population size of 40 individuals per hectare (Table 4.2).
Several other bioeroders known to produce traces or
otherwise damage reef rock, e.g. foraminifers, zoanthids,
bryozoans and brachiopods (Warme 1975), may contribute
to reef degradation under special conditions. To assess the
relative importance of the various bioeroders considered in
this survey, one may compare their rates of reef destruction
with known carbonate production rates. Net carbonate production rates vary greatly among reefs and between reef
zones, but 3,000–5,000 g CaCO3 m2 year1 have been
reported for many of the world’s coral reefs (Kinsey 1983).
Among the internal borers, clionaid sponges and
lithophagine bivalves can cause a comparable level of
bioerosion, and of the external grazers sea urchins are
equally destructive. Reef frameworks are generally reduced
to silt and fine sand by internal borers and to fine and coarse
sand by external grazers. The combined effects of other
bioeroders may also contribute importantly to reef erosion
in particular areas or zones and at different times.

4.3

Conditions Favoring Bioerosion

Bioerosion increases under a variety of circumstances that
can be classified according to (a) conditions causing coral
tissue death and (b) conditions that provide a growth advantage to bioeroder compared with calcifying species’
populations. Some of the more important situations that
can alter the course of bioerosion are noted here in general
terms. Specific examples are considered below in the examination of case studies (Sect. 4.5).
Aside from a few species that invade coral rock directly
through living tissues (e.g., some boring sponges, bivalves
and barnacles), the great majority of endolithic borers attack
dead skeletons (Fig. 4.8). In general, any condition that
causes coral tissue death will increase the probability of
invasion by borers and grazers. Thus, any natural or anthropogenic disturbances that lead to the loss of live coral tissues
will ultimately increase the chances of bioeroder invasion
and higher rates of limestone loss. Many disturbances leading to tissue loss are obvious, including storm-generated
surge that dislodges and topples corals, sediment scour and
burial, tidal exposures, sudden temperature changes, freshwater dilution, sewage and eutrophication, predation, and
disease outbreaks (Endean 1976; Pearson 1981; Grigg and
Dollar 1990).
While violent tropical storms are natural events that are
known to seriously affect coral reefs, storm damage certainly must be exacerbated on reefs that have been heavily

82

Fig. 4.8 Graphic model showing the probability of excavation of
endolithic bioeroders as a function of distance from a coral’s surface
(Redrawn from Highsmith 1981a). Curves are illustrated for corals with
dead and live surfaces

bioeroded beforehand. Sudden chilling episodes are also
natural disturbances that can have devastating effects on
tidally exposed or shallow coral assemblages, especially on
high latitude reefs. Numerous incidences of coral bleaching
(loss of zooxanthellae and/or pigmentation) and mortality
were observed world-wide in the 1980s and 1990s, and many
of these events occurred during periods of elevated sea
temperatures coincident with El Niño-Southern Oscillation
activity. Corals that were damaged or killed during these
bleaching events have been subject to further damage by
bioerosion. Rützler (2002) noted examples of accelerated
boring sponge erosion on bleached Caribbean corals stressed
by temperature extremes and other suboptimal conditions in
recent years. In some parts of the eastern Pacific where coral
mortality was high and community recovery slow, extensive
damage by both internal and external bioeroders has been
observed.
Increases in nutrient loading often cause coral tissue
mortality, lowered reproductive success and lower rates of
coral settlement and recruitment. Besides such direct negative effects on reef-building corals, nutrient inputs can also
cause changes in the community structure of epilithic algae.
On a La Saline Reef (Reunion Island), increased
nutrification has been found to favor the replacement of
algal turfs by encrusting calcareous algae and macroalgae
(Chazottes et al. 2002). On the one hand, this qualitative
change in algal cover can result in reduced bioerosion by
external bioeroders and macroborers, but on the other hand it
can elevate rates of bioerosion by microendolitic borers.
External bioeroders (sea urchins and fishes) may feed less
on calcareous algae and macroalgae than on turfs. This
reduced grazing in turn allows the proliferation of endolithic
borers, whose growth would otherwise be limited under
intense grazing pressure. It is cautioned that this sequence
of events is not invariant due to other factors that often
accompany elevated nutrient conditions (see below).

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

Predator outbreaks leading to high coral mortality, such
as by seastar (Acanthaster) and snail (Drupella) corallivores
reported from various areas of the Indo-Pacific, can set the
stage for rapid bioerosion. Territorial damselfish that colonize dead reef surfaces can cause complex responses that
both increase and decrease bioerosion. Damselfish that
invade dead coral patches typically kill nearby corals while
enlarging their territories. Studies in Australia have shown
that the algal turf communities maintained by damselfish
favor the proliferation of internal bioeroders (Risk and
Sammarco 1982). However, the territorial defensive behavior of damselfish also limits the bioerosive activities of
external grazers such as parrotfishes and sea urchins
(Glynn and Wellington 1983; Eakin 1993).
Coral tissue loss due to a variety of diseases can be
substantial (Chap. 8; Peters 1984). For example, “black
line disease” or “black band disease”, the result of a
cyanobacterial infection (Rützler et al. 1983), may consume
one-half of the living tissues of a coral during a single warm
season infestation. All live tissues may be sloughed from
corals by “white band disease”, “shut-down-reaction” or
“stress-related-necrosis”. Though the causative agents of
such diseases often remain elusive, their occurrence seems
to be influenced by elevated sea water temperature,
increased sedimentation and turbidity.
Since the majority of endolith bioeroders are suspension
or filter feeders in contrast to calcifying species, which are
dominantly autotrophic, generally increases in nutrients,
organic matter and plankton biomass tend to favor increases
in bioeroder compared with calcifier populations (Fig. 4.9).
Because land runoff usually augments siltation and nutrient
loading simultaneously (and sometimes pollutant levels), it
is often difficult to distinguish between these effects. Unlike
La Saline Reef, Pari et al. (1998) found that a polluted reef in
Tahiti (at Faaa) is subject to intense grazing by sea urchins.
But this South Pacific site is influenced by elevated nutrients,
and additionally by terrigenous sediments and chemical
pollutants. Moreover, the Pacific reef also exhibits different
algal assemblages. Thus, even though both reefs are subject
to high nutrient regimes, it is not possible to predict changes
in the rates of bioerosion because of potentially numerous
confounding influences.
There are at least two ways in which bioerosion is selfreinforcing. The first of these is the weakening effect of
bioeroders on reef structures and the skeletons of calcifying
organisms. For example, as bioerosion increases the volume
of internal spaces (porosity) of coral skeletons, less mechanical force is required for breakage, toppling and overturning
(Fig. 4.10). Thus, heavily bioeroded reefs are more susceptible to damage by strong surge and projectiles accompanying
violent storms. The second kind of positive feedback results
from increasing levels of sediment production by bioeroders
and its deleterious effects on calcifying populations.

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

83

Fig. 4.9 Relationship between
the percentage of massive corals
infested with boring bivalves and
levels of phytoplankton
productivity at several geographic
locations (Redrawn from
Highsmith 1980). Selected areas
with values close to the plotted
means are indicated. Each mean
consists of various sampling areas
and colony numbers,
respectively, as follows: Tuamotu
Islands—6, 212; Gilbert
Islands—2, 58; Seychelle
Islands—2, 12; Australia—7,
135; Barbados—7, 55; Bahama
Islands—2, 64; Panama—4, 70;
Singapore—5, 144

Overfishing can also promote increased bioerosion on
reefs. If natural fish predators of some bioeroder populations
are eliminated, e.g. triggerfishes that prey on sea urchins, then
it is possible for grazing sea urchin populations to increase in
size with a devastating effect on reef limestones. Overfishing
of parrotfishes causes declines in bioerosion, given their role
as important bioeroding agents on reefs. However, the longterm effect of parrotfish exploitation is a depression in the
overall carbonate budget because the absence of parrotfishes
leads to a decline in coral cover and carbonate production
from increases in algal abundance due to reduced grazing
(Kennedy et al. 2013). Angelfish predation exerts a strong
control on the abundances of clionaid sponges (Hill and Hill
2002), thus overfishing of these species might lead to
increases in boring sponge population size.
Climate change, owing to anthropogenic CO2 emissions
since the industrial revolution, is a leading threat to the
survival of coral reef ecosystems over the twenty-first Century (Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2007). Elevated and increasing
CO2 concentration in the Earth’s atmosphere is associated
with global warming and an increase in extreme weather
events and patterns (IPCC 2007). Warm water bleaching
events have increased in severity and spatial scale, particularly over the past 30 years (Baker et al. 2008). Bleaching
events reduce CaCO3 production by corals, but also can be
followed by increases in bioeroder abundances (Glynn
1988). After ENSO-related bleaching and mortality in the
eastern tropical Pacific (ETP), echinoid abundances
increased greatly, in part due to the resultant increase of
algal food sources on dead coral skeletons, and caused
significant bioerosion of reef framework structures (Glynn
1988; Eakin 2001). Clionaid sponges have also been
reported to increase after bleaching events, perhaps due to

the increase in available substrates following coral mortality
(Rützler 2002; Schoenberg and Ortiz 2009). This is not
limited to warm water bleaching, as clionaid sponge
populations also exhibited large increases after cold-water
bleaching in the Florida Keys (Manzello, pers. obs.) that
caused mass coral mortality (Lirman et al. 2011). An
increase in the frequency, severity, and/or duration of
warm and cold-water events with climate change negatively
impact the CaCO3 budget of coral reefs via reductions in
coral calcification and increases in bioerosion.
Anthropogenic CO2 emissions are not only changing the
climate of the planet, but they are also altering the chemistry
of the world’s oceans. About one-third of all the CO2
released into the atmosphere since the industrial revolution
has been taken up by the oceans (Sabine et al. 2004). This
process, termed ocean acidification (OA), has caused a
decline in oceanic pH of 0.1, and will likely cause a further
decline of 0.3–0.4 pH units by the end of the twenty-first
century (IPCC 2007). The anthropogenic acidification of the
oceans is occurring at a rate that is unprecedented over at
least the past 55-300 million years (Hönisch et al. 2012). OA
results in a decrease in seawater [CO32] and, consequently,
a decrease in the saturation state of carbonate minerals
(Ω ¼ [CO32] [Ca2+]/K0 sp, where K0 sp is the solubility
product for a carbonate mineral). Declines in aragonite saturation state (Ωarag, aragonite is the crystalline form of CaCO3
precipitated by scleractinian corals) lead to reduced rates of
coral calcification (Langdon and Atkinson 2005). In this
review, we have emphasized that the rate of CaCO3 production only slightly exceeds its rate of loss on healthy coral
reefs, therefore any disturbance forcing global-scale declines
in calcification, such as OA, is alarming (Kleypas
et al. 1999a).

84

Fig. 4.10 Plot of coral strength to breaking versus amount of
bioerosion by Lithophaga (Redrawn from Scott and Risk 1988). The
compression and bending tests are two measures of a coral’s strength.
N ¼ newton, a unit of force, MN 0.22481  106 lbf. Porosity indicates
the percent of the skeleton removed

Recent experimental work has shown that high-CO2
conditions lead to accelerated rates of bioerosion by endolithic algae and clionaid sponges. Tribollet et al. (2009)
exposed coral blocks to 400 ppm and 750 ppm pCO2 for
three months following the recruitment of a natural epilithic
and endolithic community over 8 months of field deployment in Hawai’i. The alga, Ostreobium querkettii, was the
dominant agent of bioerosion and the depth to which its
filaments penetrated the coral rock substrate increased significantly in the high-CO2 treatment, leading to a 48 %
increase in CaCO3 dissolution. Reyes-Nivia et al. (2013)
observed enhanced biologically-mediated dissolution
associated with increases in endolith biomass and respiration
during combined exposure to elevated CO2 and temperature.
These workers found a significant effect of substrate, as
skeletons of the coral Porites cylindrica exhibited a higher

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

increase in endolith bioerosion when compared to the more
dense Isopora cuneata, as well as an increase in the relative
abundance of O. querkettii within the endolithic community.
This is intriguing as previous authors have suggested that
internal bioerosion is highest in more dense coral skeletons
(Highsmith 1981b; Schönberg 2002), yet the response due to
high temperature and high-CO2 may follow a reverse
pattern.
Bioerosion by clionaid sponges will also intensify in a
high-CO2 world (Wisshak et al. 2012; Fang et al. 2013a, b;
Enochs et al. 2015). Biologically-mediated chemical dissolution by the common Caribbean boring sponge Pione lampa
(formerly Cliona lampa) is predicted to increase 99 % by the
end of the twenty-first century as a result of OA, which is
nearly double the expected decline in coral calcification
(Enochs et al. 2015). Fang et al. (2013a) examined the
combination of high-CO2 and high-temperature and reported
increases in both sponge biomass and bioerosion rate by the
zooxanthellate Pacific boring sponge Cliona orientalis.
However, these workers found that Symbiodinium population abundances within C. orientalis decreased with increasing CO2 and bleached in their experimental treatment,
mimicking elevated temperatures and CO2 concentration
expected by the end of the century under a business-asusual emissions scenario. In spite of this, bioerosion rates
were still highest in the bleached sponges at the highest
exposures of CO2 and temperature, even though biomass
was reduced by bleaching and peaked at a lower CO2 scenario. In a complementary study, it was suggested that the
stimulation of bioerosion at high-CO2 in C. orientalis may
be tempered by high temperatures due to bleaching,
reductions in biomass, and an overall negative energy balance, as more carbon is consumed than produced at high
temperature (Fang et al. 2013b). This suggests that
bioerosion rate could increase up to some thermal threshold
and then decline due to bleaching, and potentially cease, if
mortality occurs.
Enochs et al. (2015) observed a similar parabolic or
asymptotic response in Pione lampa to high-CO2, however
this was independent of bleaching, as this species is
azooxanthellate, and temperature was held constant at
25  C. Further work is necessary to better understand the
mechanism of CO2 stimulation of biologically mediated
chemical dissolution in clionaid sponges to determine if
this similarity is a coincidence or represents an optimal pH
range for clionaid physiological function.

4.4

Variety of Effects

The chief effect of bioerosion emphasized thus far is the
mass of calcium carbonate that is reduced to sediments or is
dissolved from reef substrata. The weakening of reef

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

substrata by bioeroders that remove relatively little carbonate, but attack critical supporting structures, can be just as
important in promoting reef erosion. Large massive corals
may be easily toppled or overturned after their supporting
bases have been weakened by endolithic borers such as
Cliona, Lithotrya and Lithophaga or by grazers that attack
bases and hollow out the interiors of colonies such as
Diadema and Eucidaris. Many of the displaced corals on
reefs, e.g., those making up emergent, rubble ramparts or
deep, forereef talus accumulations, owe their new locations
in large measure to bioerosion. Large stands of Acropora
corals that collapsed after Acanthaster predation on reefs in
Japan, Palau and Australia were presumably destabilized as
a result of the weakening of dead skeletons by intensified
bioerosion (Moran 1986; Birkeland and Lucas 1990).
Aside from weakening reef substrata, the cavities produced by bioeroders increase habitat complexity and thus the
variety and biomass of reef associated organisms (Enochs
and Manzello 2012a, b). Numerous reef species live
Fig. 4.11 Cross-section views of
a fringing reef off the west coast
of Barbados showing coral
framework growth, bioerosion,
and infilling by bioeroded
sediments. Panels a–e illustrate
seaward (deep) to shoreward
(shallow) reef sections. The inset
plan view shows the location of
the panels (After Scoffin
et al. 1980)

85

permanently attached to cavity walls, pass particular stages
of development in cavities, and reside in cavities by day or
night. Reef cavities tend to collect sediments that are produced locally or are transported to reefs from more distant
sources. The microenvironmental settings of cavities promote internal cementation and the strengthening of reef
substrata. Cycles of internal bioerosion, infilling of cavities
and cementation may be repeated so that eventually the reef
rock appears quite different from its original condition.
The sediments generated by bioeroders accumulate
around reefs and eventually infill and bury frame-building
species (Fig. 4.11). This effect leads to the shoaling of reef
waters and influences the development of reef zonation.
Under moderate regimes of bioerosion, sediment accumulation does not overwhelm reef framework growth, however,
excessive bioerosion can lead to premature burial and widespread coral death.
When bioerosion is excessive it can reduce the topographic complexity of reefs. The reefs noted above in the

86

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

western Pacific that were subjected to intense predation by
Acanthaster and then bioeroded, lost much of their three
dimensional structure with the collapse of the Acropora
canopies. The loss of these erect corals would eliminate
important microhabitats for fishes. The topographic complexity of eastern Pacific reefs can also be reduced by echinoid bioerosion following El Niño disturbances. Coral reefs
in the eastern Pacific, particularly in the Galápagos Islands,
have been bioeroded to rubble and fine-grained sediments
following high coral mortality and low recruitment, respectively, during and after the 1982–1983 El Niño event (Glynn
1994; Reaka-Kudla et al. 1996). Erect, branching coral
frameworks have collapsed and massive corals have
detached from the substratum and fragmented. Coral recruitment is now generally severely limited with macrobenthic
communities composed dominantly of turf algae,
gastropods, sea urchins and sea cucumbers.
Like many kinds of plants that spread from cuttings, it
seems that some corals may actually benefit from increased
breakage facilitated by bioerosion. A common mode of
reproduction in many branching coral species is by asexual
fragmentation (Tunnicliffe 1979; Highsmith 1982). It has
been argued that propagation by this means, which usually
results in local rather than distant dispersal, is advantageous
to populations that are well adapted to particular environmental settings. Asexual reproduction occurs most commonly among branching, plate-like and other such colonies
of delicate morphology with bioerosion aiding breakage by
mechanical and biotic agents. Large clones of corals that
dominate certain reef zones have arisen by this means
(Highsmith 1982).

4.5

Case Studies

Six documented cases of environmental alterations that have
affected or threaten reef-building corals are now examined.
The first two examples, disturbances caused by El NiñoSouthern Oscillation and predator outbreaks, are ostensibly
natural events. Runoff and overfishing effects are then examined, representing two examples caused by humankind. In
addition, we discuss how many Caribbean reefs are presently
in a net erosional state and how they will further be affected
by climate change. Lastly, we show how eastern tropical
Pacific reefs represent a real-world climate change model,
providing insight into how thermal stress and ocean acidification may affect coral reefs of the future.

4.5.1

El Niño-Southern Oscillation

Elevated seawater temperatures that accompanied the
1982–1983 El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) caused

high coral mortality on reefs in the equatorial eastern Pacific.
Mortality ranged from 50 to 99 %, resulting in the virtual
elimination of coral cover on many reefs. Coral recruitment
has been low to non-existent on many of the affected reefs,
which had shown little signs of recovery after 10 years. A
more recent analysis of coral reef recovery in the eastern
tropical Pacific, including effects of both the 1982–1983 and
1997–1998 ENSO events, revealed no recovery at most
monitored sites for periods of up to 20+ years (Wellington
and Glynn 2007; Baker et al. 2008; Glynn et al. 2015).
Sea urchin abundances have increased dramatically on
dead reef patches. In Panamá, Diadema population densities
have increased from 3 inds m2 before 1983 to 80 inds m2
after 1983 (Glynn 1988). Similarly, in the Galápagos Islands
Eucidaris population densities increased from 5 to 30 inds
m2 from before to after 1983. Probably contributing to this
post-El Niño sea urchin increase were the high mortality of
lithophagine molluscs (Scott et al. 1988) and the resulting
large numbers of vacant bore holes that became available in
massive Porites colonies. Numerous juvenile Eucidaris
(1 cm test diameter) recruited to these newly available
shelter sites. The grazing activities of these sea urchins are
very destructive (Table 4.2) and their sudden increases in
population size, combined with low coral recruitment, have
resulted in severe bioerosion of coral reef frameworks. Post
El Niño bioerosion rates for Diadema in Panamá amounted
to 10–30 g dry wt CaCO3 m2 day 1, and for Eucidaris in
the Galápagos 50–100 g dry wt CaCO3 m2 day 1. Carbonate breakdown caused by other external and internal
bioeroders was about equal to that caused by sea urchins in
Panamá, but only about one-fifth of the erosion caused by
sea urchins in the Galápagos Islands. Total bioerosion
ranged from 10 to 20 kg CaCO3 m2 year1 in Panamá
and from 20 to 40 kg CaCO3 m2 year1 in the Galápagos
Islands. Both of these rates exceed net carbonate production
of ~10 kg CaCO3 m2 year–1, estimated for reefs in these
areas before 1983. If bioerosion continues at this pace,
without an increase in coral recruitment, it is highly likely
that many reef formations in the eastern Pacific will
disappear.
Studies in the Galápagos Islands and Panamá to the year
2000, demonstrated virtually total reef frame loss in the
central and southern islands (Glynn 1994; Reaka-Kudla
et al. 1996; Glynn et al. 2001) and substantial calcium
carbonate declines in the latter region (Eakin 2001).
Eucidaris population densities have remained high in the
central and southern Galápagos Islands through 2012 with
continuing bioerosion of any remaining limestone structures.
Eakin’s modeling results, incorporating post 1997–1998
data, indicated that the Uva Island reef in Panamá was still
in an erosional state in the year 2000, ranging from around
–3,000 to –18,000 kg CaCO3 year1 net. A current assessment of coral recovery on the Uva reef in Panama, up until

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

2010, has revealed a steady increase in live coral cover of
~35 %, and no increase in populations of echinoid
bioeroders (Glynn et al. 2014).
While the coral mortality noted above had been caused
primarily by elevated sea temperature extremes during El
Niño events, it is necessary to recognize that sudden declines
in temperature during La Niña events can also result in
widespread and significant coral mortality. A sudden transition from a moderate El Niño warm event to a strong La
Niña cold condition in 2007, from 26–28  C to 16  C over
just 6 days, resulted in island-wide coral bleaching in the
Galápagos Islands (Banks et al. 2009). Little recovery was
observed after one year, which likely increased the vulnerability of corals to bioerosive processes.

4.5.2

Crown-of-Thorns Seastar (Acanthaster)

This example is instructive because it reveals some of the
long-term consequences of coral death and bioerosion at the
community level. Between 1981 and 1982, the corallivore
Acanthaster planci increased greatly in abundance at
Iriomote Island, southern Japan, and by the end of 1982 it
had killed virtually all the corals on a large study reef (Sano
et al. 1987). This sudden loss of live coral precipitated major
changes in the physical and biological character of the
coral reef.
About two years following the Acanthaster outbreak,
most of the erect coral (Acropora) canopy had collapsed, a
result of bioerosion and water movement. Compared with
the live reef, the dead reef exhibited low structural complexity. By 1986 all of the corals were broken apart and the reef
formation had been converted into a flat plain of unstructured coral rubble. The degradation of the reef was
correlated with marked changes in the fish community. As
the topographic complexity of the reef decreased, the numbers of associated fish species and their abundances also
declined. Fishes that fed exclusively on live coral tissues
disappeared completely from the dead reefs. The declines in
fishes with other diets, e.g. planktivores, herbivores and
omnivores, were believed due in large measure to the loss
of living space and to overall declines in prey on the
degraded reef.
More recent studies of large-scale coral predation by
Acanthaster, followed by intense bioerosion with reductions
in reef fish abundances and diversity, have followed in broad
outline the course of events at the Iriomote reef described
above. A follow-up study of the degraded Iriomote reef
demonstrated rapid recovery under conditions of high coral
recruitment and survivorship (Sano 2000). Arborescent
Acropora spp. began recruiting in 1989, and by 1995 and
following years coral cover had reached about 100 %,
closely matching pre-Acanthaster live coral cover values.

87

This buildup in coral cover was accompanied by increases in
the species richness and density of adult fish assemblages, to
predisturbance levels. It will be instructive to compare this
example of rapid recovery, occurring over a period of only
eight years, with data from other coral reef areas as they
become available.

4.5.3

Runoff (Eutrophication, Sedimentation,
Freshwater and Pollutants)

One of the best examples of reef degradation caused by
runoff is that reported for the Kāne’ohe Bay, Hawai’i coral
reef ecosystem (Banner 1974; Smith et al. 1981; Jokiel
et al. 1993). Because the mismanagement of the Kāne’ohe
Bay water shed has led to multiple effects, e.g., sewage
pollution, agricultural runoff, increased sedimentation and
freshwater dilution, it is not always possible to identify
individual or combined stressors. However, the occurrence
of coral reef mass mortalities during storm floods and a
general decline in coral cover during a period of increasing
sewage stress implicates these stressors in the degradation of
Kāne’ohe Bay coral reefs over two decades (1960–1978).
During the first half of the Twentieth century the coral
reefs of Kāne’ohe Bay were in a healthy state, supporting a
local artisanal fisheries and offering one of the best underwater vistas of “coral gardens” in the Hawaiian Islands. In
1963, a large sewage outfall was installed in the bay, which
had an increasing effect on corals until 1978 when the outfall
was moved to the deep ocean outside the bay. The eutrophication caused by increasing sewage loads favored the growth
of a bubble alga (Dictyosphaeria cavernosa) and suspension
feeding and bioeroding species that combined to degrade the
reef communities over a 15 year period (Fig. 4.12). Following the sewage diversion, clear signs of renewed coral
growth, reduced bioerosion, and reef community recovery
were evident by 1983. Severe storm flooding in 1987 caused
extensive coral mortality, but surviving corals quickly
resumed rapid growth and the condition of reef communities
(as of 1993) had remained favorable.
Another 16 years have passed without a major disturbance event affecting corals, however, notable changes in
several reef-associated benthic species have occurred.
Thanks to the monitoring efforts of P Jokiel, J Stimson,
and N Sukhraj, the recent status of the Coconut Island (¼
Moku o Loe Island) fringing poritid reef can be briefly
reviewed. Since 2006, Dictyosphaera has decreased in abundance, and several species of red algae have become closely
associated with Porites compressa, in some instances
attached to the peripheral branches of corals (Stimson and
Conklin 2008; N Sukhraj pers comm). In addition, a
non-boring invasive sponge, Mycale grandis, is sometimes
present adhering to the sides of coral branches (Coles

88

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

Fig. 4.12 Cross-section of Porites compressa, the predominant frame-building coral of the Coconut Island fringing reef. Prepollution (1963),
pollution (1973), and postpollution (1983–2013). Arrow marks 1987 flooding event. Colored overgrowth denotes Mycale grandis

et al. 2007). It now appears that interphyletic competition is
more prevalent, but rapid coral growth, with branch elongation rates of 2.4–3.5 cm year1 in reef crest and slope zones
(Jokiel 1986), is contributing to vigorous reef progradation.

Rapid vertical coral growth at shallow crest depths leads to
framework instability, fracturing, and downslope block
transport, extending reef foundations seaward. This case
history illustrates a degree of resiliency to a disturbance

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

that might have led to reef community collapse in a sewagestressed environment.
As the human population continues to increase along
tropical and subtropical coastal areas, it should be no surprise that reports of associated pollution stress are also on the
rise. Indeed, numerous recent studies have documented the
deterioration of coral reefs worldwide with eutrophication,
related to urbanization (sewage pollution), inappropriate
agricultural practices and industrial pollution sources,
being the root cause of this decline. It is cautioned that the
entry of polluted freshwater into coastal zone communities is
not always obvious as sources can include large volumes of
groundwater discharge as well as surface effluents. Representative examples of coral reef bioerosion and deterioration
under nutrient-rich conditions have been documented in
studies in the Indian Ocean (Risk et al. 1993; Chazottes
et al. 2002), Indonesia (Tomascik et al. 1997; Holmes
et al. 2000), the Great Barrier Reef, Australia (Risk
et al. 1995) and at several other Pacific Ocean sites
(Hutchings 1994), off Brazil (Leão et al. 1993) and at several
localities in the Caribbean Sea (Smith and Ogden 1993).

4.5.4

Overfishing

Several studies in the Caribbean and off the Kenyan coast in
the Indian Ocean have presented evidence suggesting that
sea urchin abundances are controlled by finfish predators.
When fish predators of sea urchins are abundant, urchin
abundances tend to be low, but when fishing pressure is
high, leading to the disappearance of urchin predators, then
urchins can become exceedingly abundant. A study of
protected (non-fished) and overfished Kenyan coral reef
lagoons indicates that the removal of top, invertebrateeating, fish carnivores can have cascading effects on coral
reef community structure and function (McClanahan and
Shafir 1990).
Triggerfish predators of sea urchins were relatively abundant in protected coral reef lagoons, but rare in comparable
unprotected environments. The removal of the natural
predators of sea urchins by overfishing resulted in several
direct effects on the urchin prey and several indirect effects
on the condition of the coral reef community. Overfished
reefs demonstrated high sea urchin abundances, high urchin
survival, and high urchin diversity compared with non-fished
reefs. Correlated with the dominance of sea urchins on
overfished reefs were declines in (a) live coral cover,
(b) calcareous and coralline algal cover, (c) substratum
diversity, and (d) topographic complexity. These changes
were caused by increased substratum bioerosion, especially
by Echinometra mathaei (de Blainville), the competitively
dominant sea urchin in unprotected Kenyan reef lagoons.
The end result of overfishing is accelerated bioerosion, a reef

89

surface dominated by algal turf, and likely a decline in the
reef’s fisheries productivity.
A convincing case of the over-harvesting of sea urchin
predators (lobsters, fishes) in the Galápagos Islands, leading
to increased external bioerosion, exemplifies the potential
for secondary additive effects that could impede coral and
reef recovery (Edgar et al. 2010). Low abundances of
Eucidaris galapagensis were present in marine protected
areas or far from fishing ports, sites supporting high natural
abundances of urchin predators. These areas also
demonstrated higher levels of coral cover and less disturbance to coral communities recovering from ENSO mortality events.

4.5.5

Caribbean Reef CaCO3 Budgets: Current
Status and Future Trends

Coral reefs are in decline globally and the state of Caribbean
reefs is arguably the most alarming. Caribbean reefs have
experienced multiple interacting disturbances that have
driven or exacerbated large-scale coral mortality. In no
particular order of importance, the loss of acroporids due
to white-band disease, the basin-wide ecological extinction
of the keystone sea urchin herbivore Diadema antillarum
due to an unidentified pathogen, overfishing, coral
bleaching, and land-based sources of pollution have all
been linked to the collapse of Caribbean coral reefs (Hughes
1994; Aronson and Precht 2001; Jackson et al. 2001; Eakin
et al. 2010). Live coral cover has declined by about 80 %
since the 1970s, reefs are losing architectural complexity,
CaCO3 production has declined to 50 % below historical
averages, and more than a third of sites recently surveyed
(37 %) were already net erosional (Gardner et al. 2003;
Alvarez-Filip et al. 2009; Perry et al. 2013). Many Caribbean
reefs are at or close to CaCO3 budget neutral, termed “accretionary stasis,” leading to the concern that the persistence of
architecturally complex reef framework structures is in
doubt (Perry et al. 2013).
Two recent studies have forecasted future Caribbean reef
CaCO3 budgets using different approaches, yet both yielded
similarly negative prognoses. Enochs et al. (2015) used the
reef budget methodology of Perry et al. (2012) to estimate
present day and future CaCO3 budgets for 37 reefs across the
Florida Reef Tract when projected atmospheric CO2 levels
reach 750 ppm, a conservative estimate for end of the
twenty-first century conditions. These workers assessed
three differing scenarios: (1) no change in coral cover, no
change in coral and coralline algae calcification with OA,
increase in bioerosion with OA; (2) no change in coral cover
relative to present-day, expected declines in coral and coralline algae calcification due to OA, increase in bioerosion;
and (3) 50 % decline in coral cover with expected declines in

90

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

calcification and increases in bioerosion. The declines in
calcification were estimated based on published rates,
whereas changes in bioerosion were based on the rate of
increase in chemical dissolution shown for the common
Caribbean bioeroding sponge P. lampa with high-CO2
(+99 %) in the same study, coupled with the predicted rate
of dissolution increase by endolithic algae of 48 % (Tribollet
et al. 2009). Under present-day conditions, 89 % of reefs on
the Florida Reef Tract were already net erosional. For scenario 1, 92 % of reefs became net erosional, whereas all reefs
considered were net erosional under scenarios 2 and 3. This
modeling exercise illustrated the potential importance of
endolithic algae bioerosion. Even though the rates of dissolution per area coverage and the expected stimulation of
bioersoion at high-CO2 are both lower than what is expected
for P. lampa, the dominance of bare substrate as a result of
very low coral cover leads to a domineering role for endolithic algae in the reef CaCO3 budget in a high-CO2 world.
These projections stress the likely importance of local management to safeguard reef ecosystem function in an era of
global change. Overfishing of those species that control
clionaid populations, such as angelfishes, as well as coastal
eutrophication should be controlled and not allowed to exacerbate the expected increase in bioerosion (Rose and Risk
1985; Hill and Hill 2002; Ward-Paige et al. 2005).
Kennedy et al. (2013) combined ecological models with
carbonate budgets and assessed the dynamics of simulated
Caribbean coral reefs based on the latest climate projections.
This study assessed the interacting role of local management
of fisheries and land-based sources of pollution. The same
trend towards net erosion was apparent under all climate
scenarios of increased temperature and CO2, but local management of fisheries, specifically protection of grazing
parrtofishes, was found to delay reef loss by a decade.
However, positive CaCO3 budgets were only generated
when local action was combined with aggressive emission
reductions that would limit global warming to less than 2  C.
Changes in coral calcification due to warming and acidification were most important in their CaCO3 budget simulations
for healthy, coral-dominated reefs. The controls on
bioerosion, such as sea urchin population sizes, sponge boring rates, and nutrification became the dominant drivers of
the carbonate budget at low coral cover.

4.5.6

Eastern Tropical Pacific Coral Reefs: A
Real-World Climate Change Model

Coral reefs of the eastern tropical Pacific (ETP) provide a
real-world example of reef growth, development, structure
and function under high-CO2, low-Ωarag conditions that
encompass the range of expected changes for the entire
tropical surface ocean with a doubling and tripling of

atmospheric CO2 (Manzello et al. 2008; Manzello 2009,
2010a). The naturally high-CO2 of the ETP causes reefs in
this region to persist near the Ωarag distributional threshold
for coral reefs (Kleypas et al. 1999b). Reef structural development is highly limited in the marginal low-Ωarag environment of the ETP and reef structures are ephemeral on
geological timescales (Manzello 2009). Calcium carbonate
cements, which bind reef frameworks and sediments, do not
precipitate above trace levels in the ETP and rates of
bioerosion are the highest measured anywhere in the world
(Manzello et al. 2008).
Eastern tropical Pacific reef response to ENSO warming
varies regionally as a function of CO2, providing possible
insight into reef persistence vis-à-vis warming in a high-CO2
world. Galápagos coral reef communities experienced a
greater thermal stress (+2 to 3  C for several months) during
the 1982–1983 ENSO when compared to Panamá (+1 to
2  C for two months) (Podestá and Glynn 2001). As a result,
coral bleaching mortality was higher in Galápagos
(97–99 %) compared to Panamá (75–85 %; Glynn 1990b).
Following this mass mortality, reef framework structures in
the southern Galápagos Islands were rapidly bioeroded to
rubble and sand and are now non-existent (Glynn 1994;
Reaka-Kudla et al. 1996). Conversely, reef framework
structures have persisted in Panamá despite net erosion and
the additional severe 1997–1998 ENSO event (Eakin 2001).
Intriguingly, only one reef has persisted in the northern
Galápagos Islands, where pH and Ωarag are regionally elevated (Manzello et al. 2014). The impact of high-CO2,
low-Ωarag seawater on carbonate cement precipitation and
its apparent inverse relationship to bioerosion rate in the
ETP adds a key piece to the puzzle as to why reefs throughout the ETP are poorly developed and ephemeral on geologic time-scales (Manzello et al. 2008).
The observation that the highest bioerosion rates ever
documented on coral reefs are coincident with very
low-Ωarag and bioerosion rates across the ETP are inversely
related to Ωarag and CaCO3 cement abundance (Manzello
et al. 2008) has been criticized by Tribollet and Golubic
(2011). Three specific criticisms were stated: (1) correlations
of bioerosion rate with cement abundance and Ωarag were
considered “erroneous” because they were not supported
experimentally, (2) the presentation of differing types of
bioerosion (total, internal, external) were said to be incomparable, and (3) the increase in substrate available for colonization after the 1982–1983 ENSO coral bleaching
mortality event was argued to be a more “probable” explanation for the high rates of bioerosion reported by ReakaKudla et al. (1996); and they also suggested the rates of
bioerosion during the time of study were likely different.
Only ETP bioerosion rates were compared and plotted
alongside the measured cement abundances in our study
because (a) these are where the Ωarag and cement data were

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

collected, and (b) these rates are in fact comparable.
Bioerosion research in the ETP has a considerable history
and was initiated more than 30 years ago by Glynn
et al. (1979), who showed the characteristic very rapid rate
of bioerosion by the echinoid Eucidaris galapagensis in the
Galápagos Islands. The pioneering research by Glynn and
colleagues was subsequently advanced by Scott et al. (1988)
in Costa Rica, Eakin (1993, 2001) in Panamá and later by
Reaka-Kudla et al. (1996) in the Galápagos Islands. The
methodology employed by Glynn and Eakin was the same
(Glynn et al. 1979; Glynn 1988; Eakin 1996). The work by
Reaka-Kudla et al. (1996) did use different methods, but
generated similar rates to those initially published by
Glynn (1988). Rates of bioerosion were comparably high
prior to the 1982–1983 ENSO (23.5 kg m2 year1) in the
southern Galápagos Islands (Glynn 1988) to the results
reported nearly two decades later by Reaka-Kudla
et al. (1996). The assertion that the rates reported by
Reaka-Kudla et al. (1996) were most likely just an artifact
of an increase in available substrate for colonization is
uninformed. Three different studies have shown that
bioerosion in the Galápagos is uncharacteristically high
and this was known and published before the 1982–1983
ENSO bleaching/mortality disturbance (Glynn et al. 1979;
Glynn 1988; Reaka-Kudla et al. 1996).
A comparison of published rates of bioerosion was
explored by Manzello et al. (2008) because of the suggestion
by pioneering coral reef geologist, Ian Macintyre, that submarine cementation is an important control on the construction and binding of reef framework structures (Macintyre
1997). With this in mind, and the finding that only trace
amounts of cement precipitate in ETP reef structures, maximum published rates of bioerosion were compiled to determine if the rates of ETP bioerosion were unique. The ETP
bioerosion rates mirrored coral reef cement abundances. The
non-ETP maximum rates reported in the literature illustrate
that ETP reefs are subject to unprecedented levels of rapid
bioerosion, reconfirming that which was known for more
than three decades (e.g., Glynn et al. 1979). Differing agents
of bioerosion were indeed reported, but the chief objective
was to show maximum mean recorded rates from the literature, regardless of bioerosion agent, to confirm the far
greater magnitude of rates in the ETP. Bioerosion rates
from outside the ETP were listed for qualitative comparison
and were not used in the study.
This study was further misrepresented by Tribollet and
Golubic (2011) when they claimed that the conclusion was
drawn that bioerosion was negatively correlated with Ωarag
and cement abundance, when no such statistical test was
conducted or reported. In fact, Manzello et al. (2008) solely
stated “cement abundance was positively related to Ωarag,
but inversely related to bioerosion rate in the ETP.” This

91

statement only reported an apparent trend. The lack of
cement in the ETP is later hypothesized to be a factor in
the high bioerosion rates of this region, referencing the other
published rates to show just how high rates in the ETP are
relative to other locations. The publication concludes, “In
summary, this study suggests a link between Ωarag, inorganic
reef cementation, and coral reef development in the
ETP. . .The ETP examples suggest that coral reefs of the
future could be more susceptible to erosion.” Tribollet and
Golubic (2011) misinterpreted the hypotheses, unnecessarily
attacking claims that were not stated.
Recent research on Galápagos reefs and calcification
dynamics provide new insights into reef structure and function in a high-CO2 world. As previously mentioned, only one
coral reef persists today within the entire Galápagos archipelago and this reef is located at the remote, northern-most
Darwin Island (Glynn et al. 2009, 2015), where pH and Ωarag
are regionally elevated (Manzello et al. 2014). Conversely,
coral reefs in the southern islands disappeared where
pH < 8.0 and Ωarag  3.0, and have not recovered. We
found that high nutrients in the upwelled waters of the
southern Galápagos Islands may enhance coral calcification
under high-CO2, but ultimately increase reef ecosystem sensitivity to ocean acidification. The warming and acidification
that caused the functional collapse of Galápagos reefs is
expected to occur world-wide by mid-century for most
reefs based on current CO2 trajectories (Frieler et al. 2013;
van Hooidonk et al. 2014).

4.6

Conclusions

The fossil record demonstrates that bioerosion and reef
growth have always been inseparable. Moderate levels of
bioerosion may benefit coral reefs in at least four ways, by
(1) creating sedimentary substrata that provide lebensraum
for hosts of associated reef species, (2) providing cavities
and contributing toward topographic complexity that serve
to increase the biodiversity, biomass and productivity of reef
communities, (3) structuring reef morphology and growth,
and (4) promoting the regeneration and rejuvenation of
senescent reef-building organisms.
Except for obvious reef destruction by large populations
of sea urchins, bioerosion per se as a possible threat to coral
reefs is seldom considered explicitly. This is probably
because of the large amount of ‘cryptic’ bioerosion caused
by endoliths and the often delayed effects of bioerosion on
coral reef communities. For example, descriptions of reef
damage caused by violent storms are numerous in the literature, but the contributory effects of bioerosion are seldom
mentioned. The prior weakening of reef structures by
bioerosion or the accumulation of sediments causing scour

92

and burial during a storm are effects that may have been
initiated years before an acute disturbance event resulting in
reef devastation.
The existence of coral reefs beyond this century is in
jeopardy. The concern has progressed from the dramatic
losses of live coral (Gardner et al. 2003), to the likelihood
that the underlying framework of coral reefs will erode
away (Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2007; Manzello et al. 2008;
Perry et al. 2013). Coral cover has declined across broad
geographic scales (Gardner et al. 2003; De’ath et al. 2012),
leading to declines in CaCO3 production. Furthermore,
declines in coral growth and calcification have been
documented in the Indian, Pacific, and North Atlantic
Oceans over the past 30 years (Edmunds 2007; Cooper
et al. 2008; Bak et al. 2009; De’ath et al. 2009; Tanzil
et al. 2009; Manzello 2010b). The production of CaCO3
on coral reefs is depressed at a seemingly global scale. This
suggests that the future impacts of OA on the negative side
of the coral reef carbonate budget, namely via stimulation
of biologically-mediated dissolution, may be more detrimental than the decline of coral calcification. Indeed,
Kennedy et al. (2013) explicitly demonstrated that changes
to coral calcification are only reflected in the CaCO3 budget
when coral cover is high. When coral cover is low,
bioerosion of the reef framework becomes the dominant
process.
What are some of the measures that can be taken to limit
bioerosion? The most obvious is to reduce coral mortality
because numerous bioeroders increase their activities and
abundances on dead reef substrata. Direct damage to
calcifying organisms can be reduced significantly by several
practices already adopted within protected coral reef parks.
For example, the use of mooring buoys, navigational
markers, the prohibition of destructive fishing techniques,
and the banning of coral collecting or touching live corals
have all alleviated damage to coral reefs in many areas. The
possibility of indirect effects, such as overfishing causing
increases in bioerosion, should also be considered in coral
reef management plans.
Another method of limiting coral mortality after severe
physical damage, e.g., by a ship grounding, involves restoration techniques to stabilize damaged corals and reef
substrata (Hudson and Diaz 1988). Hard and soft corals
may be transplanted and cemented to stable reef substrata,
fractured frameworks may be secured, and the rebuilding of
reef topography accomplished by replacing and cementing
dislodged corals and sections of framework.
Numerous effects that can accelerate bioerosion are often
far-removed from coral reefs and therefore sometimes difficult to link with reef decline. Deforestation, land-clearing
and mining activities lead to increased sedimentation, freshwater dilution and nutrient loading around reefs that may be
situated hundreds of kilometers from the affected sites.

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello

These sorts of activities may alter reef environments such
that certain types of bioeroders could increase in number and
possibly accelerate destructive processes. The potential
damage of such anthropogenic stresses to coral reefs also
may be augmented by natural disturbances such as violent
storms, extreme temperature changes, diseases and predator
outbreaks. For example, most corals may tolerate low
salinities for a few hours or days, but salinity stress in
combination with a pathogen could precipitate high coral
mortality. Many kinds of runoff include combinations of
several pollutants, e.g. sewage, detergents, heavy metals,
fertilizers, pesticides, and oil, that may act synergistically
to reduce live coral cover.
It is now generally understood that bioerosion will be
accelerated in a high-CO2 world via stimulation of
biologically-mediated chemical dissolution in endolithic
algae and clionaid sponges. It has been suggested that a
similar amplification of erosive ability may occur in all
bioeroding organisms that utilize chemical dissolution to
excavate reef substrates (Enochs et al. 2015). This includes
lithophagine bivalves, cirripedes, and various polychaete
worms. Many of these bioeroders have greater tolerances to
environmental perturbation than corals. In fact, clionaid
sponges appear to gain a competitive advantage during thermal stress and coral bleaching events (Rützler 2002;
Schönberg and Ortiz 2009). There is much to be learned
about coral reef bioerosion, but one thing seems clear –
research on bioerosion will most certainly increase over this
century because the importance of this fundamental process in
coral reef dynamics will likely become increasingly difficult
to ignore. Local-scale management of fisheries and watershed
pollution would not only benefit corals, but should help limit
the proliferation of bioeroders in a high-CO2 world.
In summary, the dynamic balance between reef growth
and bioerosion depends on the vitality of numerous
calcifying species. If humankind’s activities can be limited
to non-intrusive pursuits such as observing and filming reef
organisms, and if reef water quality and natural circulation
patterns can be safeguarded, then one of the world’s most
exquisite ecosystems can be enjoyed by posterity.
Acknowledgments Thanks are due Charles G Messing, Klaus
Rützler, Paul L Jokiel and other referenced workers for the illustrations
in this chapter. Michael J Risk and Charles Birkeland are acknowledged
for helping with various literature leads, and Ann Campbell for her
diligence in providing numerous published sources. Updating of the
condition of the Coconut Island fringing reef was made possible by C
Birkeland, PL Jokiel, John Stimson, and Nadiera Sukhraj. Joshua Levy
kindly assisted in up-dating Fig. 4.12 and Michael P. C. Fuller with
page proofing. Research reported by PW Glynn was supported by the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, National Science Foundation
(Biological Oceanography Program), and the National Geographic
Society. DP Manzello has received support from the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration via the Coral Reef Conservation and
Ocean Acidification Programs.

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

References
Agassiz L (1852) Coral reefs. In: Annual report of the Superintendent
of the Coast Survey, showing the progress of that work during the
year ending November, 1851, pp 153–154, 32d Congr, 1st Sess
Senate Ex Doc No 3, R Armstrong, Printer
Ahr WM, Stanton RJ Jr (1973) The sedimentologic and paleoecologic
significance of Lithotrya, a rock-boring barnacle. J Sediment Petrol
43:20–23
Alvarez-Filip L, Dulvy NK, Gill JA, Côté IM, Watkinson AR (2009)
Flattening of Caribbean coral reefs: region-wide declines in architectural complexity. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 276:3019–3025
Aronson RB, Precht WF (2001) White-band disease and the changing
face of Caribbean coral reefs. Hydrobiologia 460:25–38
Bak RPM (1990) Patterns of echinoid bioerosion in two Pacific coral
reef lagoons. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 66:267–272
Bak RPM, Nieuwland G, Meesters EH (2009) Coral growth rates
revisited after 31 years: what is causing lower extension rates in
Acropora palmata? Bull Mar Sci 84:287–294
Baker AC, Glynn PW, Riegl B (2008) Climate change and coral reef
bleaching: an ecological assessment of long-term impacts, recovery
trends and future outlook. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 80:435–471
Banks S, Vera M, Chiriboga Á (2009) Characterizing the last remaining
reefs: establishing reference points to assess long term change in
Galápagos zooxanthellate coral communities. Galapagos Res
66:43–64
Banner AH (1974) Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii: urban pollution and a coral
reef ecosystem. Proc 2nd Int Coral Reef Symp, Brisbane 2:685–702
Bardach JE (1959) The summer standing crop of fish on a shallow
Bermuda reef. Limnol Oceanogr 4:77–85
Bardach JE (1961) Transport of calcareous fragments by reef fishes.
Science 133:98–99
Barnes DJ (ed) (1983) Perspectives on coral reefs. Brian Clouston,
Manuka, 277 p
Bellwood DR (1995) Direct estimate of bioerosion by two parrotfish
species, Chlorurus gibbus and C. sordidus, on the Great Barrier
Reef, Australia. Mar Biol 121:419–429
Bellwood DR (1996) Production and reworking of sediment by
parrotfishes (family Scaridae) on the Great Barrier Reef, Australia.
Mar Biol 125:795–800
Bellwood DR, Choat JH (1990) A functional analysis of grazing in
parrotfishes (family Scaridae): the ecological implications. Environ
Biol Fish 28:189–214
Bellwood DR, Wainwright PC (2002) The history and biogeography of
fishes on coral reefs. In: Sale PF (ed) Coral reef fishes: dynamics and
diversity in a complex ecosystem. Academic, San Diego, pp 5–32
Birkeland C, Lucas JS (1990) Acanthaster planci: major management
problem of coral reefs. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 257 p
Bruggemann JH, van Kessel AM, van Rooij JM, Breeman AM (1996)
Bioerosion and sediment ingestion by the Caribbean parrotfish
Scarus vetula and Sparisoma viride: implication of fish size, feeding
mode and habitat use. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 134:59–71
Campbell SE (1982) Precambrian endoliths discovered. Nature
299:429–431
Carriker MR, Smith EH, Wilce RT (eds) (1969) Penetration of calcium
carbonate substrates by lower plants and invertebrates. Am Zool
9:629–1020
Chazottes V, Le Campion-Alsumard T, Peyrot-Clausade M, Cuet P
(2002) The effects of eutrophication-related alterations to coral reef
communities on agents and rates of bioerosion (Reunion Island,
Indian Ocean). Coral Reefs 21:375–390
Choat JH, Bellwood DR (1985) Interactions amongst herbivorous
fishes on a coral reef: influence of spatial variation. Mar Biol
89:221–234

93
Choat JH, Robertson DR (1975) Protogynous hermaphroditism in
fishes of the family Scaridae. In: Reinboth R (ed) Intersexuality in
the animal kingdom. Springer, Berlin, pp 264–283
Cloud PE Jr (1959) Geology of Saipan, Mariana Islands, Part 4. Submarine topography and shoal-water ecology. Geol Surv Prof Pap
280-K:361–445
Coles SL, Marchetti J, Bolick H, Montgomery A (2007) Assessment of
invasiveness of the orange keyhole sponge Mycale armata in
Kaneohe Bay, O’ahu, Hawai’i. Final Report, Year 2 for Hawaii
Coral Reef Initiative Research Program. Contribution No. 2007002 to the Hawaii Biological Survey, 30 p
Cooper TF, De’ath G, Fabricius KE, Lough JM (2008) Declining coral
calcification in massive Porites in two nearshore regions of the
northern Great Barrier Reef. Global Change Biol 14:529–538
Cortés J (1985) Preliminary observations of Alpheus simus GuerinMeneville, 1856 (Crustacea: Alphaeidae): a little-known Caribbean
bioeroder. Proc 5th Int Coral Reef Congr Tahiti 5:351–353
Darwin C (1842) The structure and distribution of coral reefs. Smith
Elder & Co., London, 214 p
Davies PJ, Hutchings PA (1983) Initial colonization, erosion and accretion on coral substrate. Experimental results, Lizard Island, Great
Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs 2:27–35
De’ath G, Lough JM, Fabricius KE (2009) Declining coral calcification
on the Great Barrier Reef. Science 323:116–119
De’ath G, Fabricius KE, Sweatman H, Puotinen M (2012) The 27-year
decline of coral cover on the Great Barrier Reef and its causes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:17995–17999
DiSalvo LH (1969) Isolation of bacteria from the corallum of Porites
lobata (Vaughan) and its possible significance. Am Zool 9:735–740
Donn TF, Boardman MR (1988) Bioerosion of rocky carbonate
coastlines on Andros Island, Bahamas. J Coastal Res 4:381–394
Eakin CM (1993) Post-El Niño Panamanian reefs: less accretion, more
erosion and damselfish protection. Proc 7th Int Coral Reef Symp
Guam 1:387–396
Eakin CM (1996) Where have all the carbonates gone? A model
comparison of calcium carbonate budgets before and after the
1982–83 El Niño at Uva Island in the eastern Pacific. Coral Reefs
15:109–119
Eakin CM (2001) A tale of two ENSO events: carbonate budgets and
the influence of two warming disturbances and intervening
variability, Uva Island, Panamá. Bull Mar Sci 69:171–186
Eakin CM, Morgan JA, Heron SF, Smith TB, Liu G, Alvarez-Filip L,
Baca B, Bartels E, Bastidas C, Bouchon C, Brant M, Bruckner AW,
Bunkley-Williams L, Cameron A, Causey BC, Chiappone M,
Christensen TRL, Crabbe MJC, Day O, de la Guardia E, DiazPulido G, DiResta D, Gil-Agudelo DL, Gilliam D, Ginsburg R,
Gore S, Guzman HM, Hendee JC, Hernandez-Delgado E,
Husain E, Jeffrey CFG, Jones RJ, Jordan-Dahlgren E, Kaufman
DM, Kline DI, Kramer P, Lang J, Lirman D, Mallela J,
Manfrino C, Marechal J, Marks K, Mihaly J, Miller J, Muller EM,
Muller M, Orozco-Toro CA, Oxenfor HA, Ponce-Taylor D,
Quinn N, Ritchie KB, Rodriguez S, Rodriguez-Ramirez A,
Romano S, Samhouri JF, Sanchez JA, Schmahl GP, Shank B,
Skirving WJ, Steiner SCC, Villamizar E, Walsh S, Walter C,
Weil E, Williams EH, Woody K, Yusuf Y (2010) Caribbean corals
in crisis: record thermal stress, bleaching, and mortality in 2005.
PLoS One 5:e13969
Ebbs NK (1966) The coral-inhabiting polychaetes of the northern
Florida reef tract. Bull Mar Sci 16:485–555
Edgar GJ, Banks SA, Brandt M, Bustamante RH, Chiriboga Á, Earle
SA, Garske LE, Glynn PW, Grove JS, Henderson S, Hickman CP,
Miller KA, Rivera F, Wellington GM (2010) El Niño, grazers and
fisheries interact to greatly elevate extinction risk for Galapagos
marine species. Global Change Biol 16:2876–2890
Edmunds PJ (2007) Evidence for a decadal-scale decline in the growth
rates of juvenile scleractinian corals. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 341:1–13

94
Ekdale AA, Bromley RG, Pemberton SG (eds) (1984) Ichnology: the
use of trace fossils in sedimentology and stratigraphy. SEPM short
course notes, Ch 10, 15:108–128. doi: 10.2110/scn.84.15
Endean R (1976) Destruction and recovery of coral reef communities.
In: Jones OA, Endean R (eds) Biology and geology of coral reefs.
III. Biology 2. Academic, New York, pp 215–254
Enochs IC (2012) Motile cryptofauna associated with live and dead
coral substrates: implications for coral mortality and framework
erosion. Mar Biol 159:709–722
Enochs IC, Manzello DP (2012a) Species richness of motile
cryptofauna across a gradient of framework erosion. Coral Reefs
31:653–661
Enochs IC, Manzello DP (2012b) Responses of cryptofaunal species
richness and trophic potential to coral reef habitat degradation.
Diversity 4:94–104
Enochs IC, Manzello DP, Carlton R, Graham D, Ruzicka R, Colella M
(2015) Ocean acidification enhances the bioerosion of a common
coral reef sponge: implications for persistence of the Florida Reef
Tract. Bull Mar Sci 91(2):271–290
Fang JKH, Mello-Athayde MA, Schönberg CHL, Kline DI, HoeghGuldberg O, Dove S (2013a) Sponge biomass and bioerosion rates
increase under ocean warming and acidification. Global Change
Biol. doi:10.1111/gcb.12334
Fang JKH, Schönberg CHL, Mello-Athayde MA, Hoegh-Guldberg O,
Dove S (2013b) Effects of ocean warming and acidification on the
energy budget of an excavating sponge. Global Change Biol.
doi:10.1111/gcb.12369
Focke JW (1978) Limestone cliff morphology on Curaçao (Netherlands
Antilles) with special attention to the origin of notches and
vermetid/coralline algal surf benches (“cornices”, “trottoirs”). Z
Geomorphol 22:329–349
Frieler K, Meinhausen M, Golly A, Mengel M, Lebek K, Donner SD,
Hoegh-Guldberg O (2013) Limiting global warming to 2 C is
unlikely to save most coral reefs. Nat Clim Chang 3:165–170
Frydl P, Stearn GW (1978) Rate of bioerosion by parrotfish in Barbados
reef environments. J Sediment Petrol 48:1149–1157
Gardner TA, Côté IM, Gill JA, Grant A, Watkinson AR (2003) Longterm region-wide declines in Caribbean corals. Science 301:958–960
Ginsburg RN (1983) Geological and biological roles of cavities in coral
reefs. In: Barnes DJ (ed) Perspectives on coral reefs. Brian
Clouston, Manuka, pp 148–153
Glynn PW (1970) On the ecology of the Caribbean chitons
Acanthopleura granulata Gmelin and Chiton tuberculatus Linné:
density, mortality, feeding, reproduction, and growth. Smithson
Contrib Zool 66:1–21
Glynn PW (1988) El Niño warming, coral mortality and reef framework destruction by echinoid bioerosion in the eastern Pacific.
Galaxea 7:129–160
Glynn PW (1990a) Feeding ecology of selected coral-reef
macroconsumers: patterns and effects on coral community structure. In: Dubinsky Z (ed) Ecosystems of the world, vol 25, Coral
reefs. Elsevier Science, New York, pp 365–400
Glynn PW (1990b) Coral mortality and disturbance to coral reefs in the
eastern tropical Pacific. In: Glynn PW (ed) Global ecological
consequences of the 1982–83 El Niño-Southern Oscillation.
Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 55–126
Glynn PW (1994) State of coral reefs in the Galápagos Islands: natural
vs anthropogenic impacts. Mar Pollut Bull 29:131–140
Glynn PW, Wellington GM (1983) Corals and coral reefs of the
Galápagos Islands (with an annotated list of the scleractinian corals
of the Galápagos by JW Wells). University of California Press,
Berkeley, 330 p
Glynn PW, Stewart RH, McCosker JE (1972) Pacific coral reefs of
Panamá: structure, distribution and predators. Geol Rundsch
61:483–519

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello
Glynn PW, Wellington GM, Birkeland C (1979) Coral growth in the
Galápagos: limitation by sea urchins. Science 203:47–49
Glynn PW, Maté JL, Baker AC, Calder
on MO (2001) Coral bleaching
and mortality in Panamá and Ecuador during the 1997–1998 El
Niño-Southern Oscillation event: spatial/temporal patterns and
comparisons with the 1982–1983 event. Bull Mar Sci 69:79–101
Glynn PW, Riegl B, Correa AMS, Baums IB (2009) Rapid recovery of
a coral reef at Darwin Island, Galápagos Islands. Galapagos Res
66:6–13
Glynn PW, Enochs IC, Afflerbach JA, Brandtneris VW, Serafy JE
(2014) Eastern Pacific reef fish responses to coral recovery following El Niño disturbances. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 495:233–247
Glynn PW, Riegl B, Purkis S, Kerr JM, Smith TB (2015) Coral reef
recovery in the Galápagos Islands: the northernmost islands
(Darwin and Wenman). Coral Reefs 34:421–436
Golubic S, Perkins RD, Lukas KJ (1975) Boring microorganisms and
microborings in carbonate substrates. In: Frey RW (ed) The study of
trace fossils. Springer, New York, pp 229–259
Golubic S, Radtke G, Le Campion-Alsumard T (2005) Endolithic fungi
in marine ecosystems. Trends Microbiol 13:229–235
Grassle JF (1973) Variety in coral reef communities. In: Jones OA,
Endean R (eds) Biology and geology of coral reefs. II, Biology
1. Academic, New York, pp 247–270
Grigg RW, Dollar SJ (1990) Natural and anthropogenic disturbance on
coral reefs. In: Dubinsky Z (ed) Ecosystems of the world, vol
25, Coral reefs. Elsevier Science, New York, pp 439–452
Haigler SA (1969) Boring mechanism of Polydora websteri inhabiting
Crassostrea virginica. Am Zool 9:821–828
Highsmith RC (1980) Geographic patterns of coral bioerosion: a productivity hypothesis. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 46:177–196
Highsmith RC (1981a) Lime-boring algae in hermatypic coral
skeletons. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 55:267–281
Highsmith RC (1981b) Coral bioerosion: damage relative to skeletal
density. Am Nat 117:193–198
Highsmith RC (1982) Reproduction by fragmentation in corals. Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 7:207–226
Hill MS, Hill AL (2002) Morphological plasticity in the tropical sponge
Anthosigmella varians: responses to predators and wave energy.
Biol Bull 202:86–95
Hoegh-Guldberg O, Mumby PJ, Hooten AJ, Steneck RS, Greenfield P,
Gomez E, Harvell CD, Sale PF, Edwards AJ, Caldeira K,
Knowlton N, Eakin CM, Iglesias-Prieto R, Muthiga N, Bradbury
RH, Dubi A, Hatziolos ME (2007) Coral reefs under rapid climate
change and ocean acidification. Science 318:1737–1742
Holmes KE, Edinger EN, Limmon GV, Risk MJ (2000) Bioerosion of
live massive corals and branching coral rubble on Indonesian coral
reefs. Mar Pollut Bull 40:606–617
Hönisch B, Ridgwell A, Schmidt DN, Thomas E, Gibbs SJ, Sluijs A,
Zeebe R, Kump L, Martindale RC, Greene SE, Kiessling W, Ries J,
Zachos JC, Royer DL, Barker S, Marchitto TM, Moyer R,
Pelejero C, Ziveri P, Foster GI, Williams B (2012) The geological
record of ocean acidification. Science 335:1058–1063
Hudson JH, Diaz R (1988) Damage survey and restoration of M/V
WELLWOOD grounding site, Molasses Reef, Key Largo National
Marine Sanctuary, Florida. Proc 6th Int Coral Reef Symp
Townsville 2:231–236
Hughes TP (1994) Catastrophes, phase shifts, and large-scale degradation of a Caribbean coral reef. Science 265:1547–1551
Hutchings PA (1986) Biological destruction of coral reefs. Coral Reefs
4:239–252
Hutchings PA (1994) The Pacific reefs: a paradise lost? Mar Pollut Bull
29:1–140
Hutchings PA (2011) Bioerosion. In: Hopley D (ed) Encyclopedia of
modern coral reefs: structure, form and process. Springer,
Dordrecht, pp 139–156

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

IPCC (2007) Intergovernmental panel on climate change. In:
Solomon S, Qin D, Manning M, Chen Z, Marquis M, Averyt KB,
Tignor M, Miller HL (eds) Climate change 2007: the physical
science basis: contribution of working group I to the fourth assessment report of the IPCC. Cambridge University Press, New York
Jackson JBC, Kirby MX, Berger WH, Bjorndal KA, Botsford LW,
Bourque BJ, Bradbury RH, Cooke R, Erlandson J, Estes JA, Hughes
TP, Kidwell S, Lange CB, Lenihan HS, Pandolfi JM, Peterson CH,
Steneck RS, Tegner MJ, Warner RR (2001) Historical overfishing
and the recent collapse of coastal ecosystems. Science 293:629–638
Jokiel PL (1986) Growth of the reef coral Porites compressa on the
Coconut Island reef, Kaneohe Bay. In: Jokiel PL, Richmond RH,
Rogers RA (eds) Coral reef population biology, Tech Rept No
37, Hawaii Inst Mar Biol, Oahu, pp 101–110
Jokiel PL, Hunter CL, Taguchi S, Watarai L (1993) Ecological impact
of a fresh-water “reef kill” in Kaneohe Bay, Oahu, Hawaii. Coral
Reefs 12:177–184
Kendrick B, Risk MJ, Michaelides J, Bergman K (1982) Amphibious
microborers: bioeroding fungi isolated from live corals. Bull Mar
Sci 32:862–867
Kennedy EV, Perry CT, Halloran PR, Iglesias-Prieto R, Schönberg
CHL, Wisshak M, Form AU, Carricart-Ganivet JP, Fine M, Eakin
CM, Mumby PJ (2013) Avoiding coral reef functional collapse
requires local and global action. Curr Biol 23:912–918
Kiene WE (1988) A model of bioerosion on the Great Barrier Reef.
Proc 6th Int Coral Reef Symp Townsville 3:449–454
Kinsey DW (1983) Standards of performance in coral reef primary
production and carbonate turnover. In: Barnes DJ
(ed) Perspectives on coral reefs. Brian Clouston, Manuka, pp
209–220
Kleypas JA, Buddemeier RW, Archer D, Gattuso J-P, Langdon C,
Opdyke BN (1999a) Geochemical consequences of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide on coral reefs. Science 284:118–120
Kleypas JA, McManus JW, Meñez LAB (1999b) Environmental limits
to coral reef development: where do we draw the line? Am Zool
39:146–159
Langdon C, Atkinson MJ (2005) Effect of elevated pCO2 on photosynthesis and calcification of corals and interactions with seasonal
change in temperature/irradiance and nutrient enrichment. J
Geophys Res 110:1–16
Le Campion-Alsumard T, Golubic S, Priess K (1995) Fungi in corals:
symbiosis or disease? Interaction between polyps and fungi causes
pearl-like biomineralization. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 117:137–147
Leão ZMAN, Telles MD, Sforza R, Bulhões HA, Kikuchi RKP (1993)
Impact of tourism development on the coral reefs of the Abrolhos
area, Brazil. In: Ginsburg RN (compiler) Global aspects of coral
reefs: health, hazards and history. Rosenstiel School of Marine and
Atmospheric Science, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, pp
254–260
Lirman D, Schopmeyer S, Manzello D, Gramer LJ, Precht WF, MullerKarger F, Banks K, Barnes B, Bartels E, Bourque A, Byrne J,
Donahue S, Duquesnel J, Fisher L, Gilliam D, Hendee J,
Johnson M, Maxwell K, McDevitt E, Monty J, Rueda D,
Ruzicka R, Thanner S (2011) Severe 2010 cold-water event caused
unprecedented mortality to corals of the Florida Reef Tract and
reversed previous survivorship patterns. PLoS One 6:e23047
Lowenstam HA (1974) Impact of life on chemical and physical processes. In: Goldberg ED (ed) The sea, vol 5, Marine Chemistry.
Wiley, New York, pp 715–796
Lowenstam HA, Weiner S (1989) On biomineralization. Oxford University Press, New York, 324 p
Macintyre IG (1984) Preburial and shallow-subsurface alteration of
modern scleractinian corals. In: Oliver WA Jr, Sando WJ, Cairns
SD, Coates AG, Macintyre IG, Bayer FM, Sorauf JE (eds) Recent

95
advances in the paleobiology and geology of the Cnidaria.
Palaeontographica Americana, Ithaca, New York, 54, pp 229–244
Macintyre IG (1997) Reevaluating the role of crustose coralline algae
in the construction of coral reefs. Proc 8th Intl Coral Reef Symp
Panama 1:725–730
Manzello DP (2009) Reef development and resilience to acute (El Niño
warming) and chronic (high-CO2) disturbances in the eastern tropical Pacific: a real-world climate change model. Proc 11th Intl Coral
Reef Symp Ft Lauderdale 1:1299–1304
Manzello DP (2010a) Ocean acidification hotspots: spatiotemporal
dynamics of the seawater CO2 system of eastern Pacific coral
reefs. Limnol Oceanogr 55:239–248
Manzello DP (2010b) Coral growth with thermal stress and ocean
acidification: lessons from the eastern tropical Pacific. Coral Reefs
29:749–758
Manzello DP, Kleypas JA, Budd DA, Eakin CM, Glynn PW, Langdon
C (2008) Poorly cemented coral reefs of the eastern tropical Pacific:
possible insights into reef development in a high-CO2 world. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:10450–10455
Manzello DP, Enochs IC, Bruckner A, Renaud P, Kolodziej G, Budd
DA, Carlton R, Glynn PW (2014) Galápagos coral reef persistence after ENSO warming across an acidification gradient.
Geophys Res Lett 41:9001–9008
May JA, Macintyre IG, Perkins RD (1982) Distribution of microborers
within planted substrates along a barrier reef transect, Carrie Bow
Cay, Belize. In: Rützler K, Macintyre IG (eds) The Atlantic barrier
reef ecosystem at Carrie Bow Cay, Belize I: structure and
communities, Smith Contrib Mar Sci, Washington DC,12, 539 p
McClanahan TR, Shafir SH (1990) Causes and consequences of sea
urchin abundance and diversity in Kenyan coral reef lagoons.
Oecologia 83:362–370
McLean RF (1967) Measurement of beach rock erosion by some
tropical marine gastropods. Bull Mar Sci 17:551–561
Moran PJ (1986) The Acanthaster phenomenon. Oceanogr Mar Biol
Ann Rev 24:379–480
Neumann AC (1966) Observations on coastal erosion in Bermuda and
measurements of the boring rates of the sponge Cliona lampa.
Limnol Oceanogr 11:92–108
Ogden JC (1977) Carbonate-sediment production by parrotfish and sea
urchins on Caribbean reefs. In: Frost SH, Weiss MP, Saunders JB
(eds) Reefs and related carbonates—ecology and sedimentology.
Studies in geology 4. American Association of Petroleum
Geologists, Tulsa, pp 281–288
Pari N, Peyrot-Clausade M, Le Campion-Alsumard T, Hutchings P,
Chazottes V, Golubic S, Le Campion J, Fontaine MF (1998)
Bioerosion of experimental substrates on high islands and on atoll
lagoons (French Polynesia) after two years of exposure. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 166:119–130
Pearson RG (1981) Recovery and recolonization of coral reefs. Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 4:105–122
Perry CT, Hepburn LJ (2008) Syn-depositional alteration of coral reef
framework through bioerosion, encrustation and cementation: taphonomic signatures of reef accretion and reef depositional events.
Earth Sci Rev 86:106–144
Perry CT, Edinger EN, Kench PS, Murphy GN, Smithers SG, Steneck
RS, Mumby PJ (2012) Estimating rates of biologically driven coral
reef framework production and erosion: a new census-based carbonate budget methodology and applications to the reefs of Bonaire.
Coral Reefs 31:853–868
Perry CT, Murphy GN, Kench PS, Smithers SG, Edinger EN, Steneck
RS, Mumby PJ (2013) Caribbean-wide decline in carbonate production threatens coral reef growth. Nature Commun 4:1–7
Peters EC (1984) A survey of cellular reactions to environmental stress
and disease in Caribbean scleractinian corals. Helgoländer
Meeresun 37:113–137

96
Podestá GP, Glynn PW (2001) The 1997–98 El Niño event in Panamá
and Galápagos: an update of thermal stress indices relative to coral
bleaching. Bull Mar Sci 69:43–60
Pomponi SA (1979) Ultrastructure and cytochemistry of the etching
area of boring sponges. In: Lévi C, Boury-Esnault N (eds) Biologie
des Spongiaires, Colloques Internationaux du Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Paris, 291, pp 317–323
Randall JE (1974) The effects of fishes on coral reefs. Proc 2nd Int
Coral Reef Symp Brisbane 1:159–166
Rasmussen KA, Frankenberg EW (1990) Intertidal bioerosion by the
chiton Acanthopleura granulata; San Salvador, Bahamas. Bull Mar
Sci 47:680–695
Reaka-Kudla ML, Feingold JS, Glynn PW (1996) Experimental studies
of rapid bioerosion of coral reefs in the Galápagos Islands. Coral
Reefs 15:101–107
Reyes-Nivia C, Diaz-Pulido G, Kline D, Hoegh-Guldberg O, Dove S
(2013) Ocean acidification and warming scenarios increase
microbioerosion of coral skeletons. Global Chang Biol
19:1919–1929
Rice ME, Macintyre IG (1972) A preliminary study of sipunculan
burrows in rock thin sections. Carib J Sci 12:41–44
Rice ME, Macintyre IG (1982) Distribution of Sipuncula in the coral
reef community, Carrie Bow Cay, Belize. In: Rützler K, Macintyre
IG (eds) The Atlantic barrier reef ecosystem at Carrie Bow Cay,
Belize I: structure and communities. Smithson Contrib Mar Sci,
Washington, DC, pp 311–320
Risk MJ, MacGeachy JK (1978) Aspects of bioerosion of modern
Caribbean reefs. Rev Biol Trop 26(suppl 1):85–105
Risk MJ, Sammarco PW (1982) Bioerosion of corals and the influence
of damselfish territoriality: a preliminary study. Oecologia
52:376–380
Risk MJ, Dunn JJ, Allison WR, Horrill C (1993) Reef monitoring in
Maldives and Zanzibar: low-tech and high-tech science. In:
Ginsburg RN (compiler) Global aspects of coral reefs: health,
hazards and history. Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric
Science, University of Miami, Coral Gables, pp 66–72
Risk MJ, Sammarco PW, Edinger EN (1995) Bioerosion in Acropora
across the continental shelf of the Great Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs
14:79–86
Rose CS, Risk MJ (1985) Increase in Cliona delitrix infestation of
Montastraea cavernosa heads on an organically polluted portion
of the Grand Cayman fringing reef. PSZNI Mar Ecol 6:345–363
Russo AR (1980) Bioerosion by two rock boring echinoids
(Echinometra mathaei and Echinometra aciculatus) on Enewetak
Atoll, Marshall Islands. J Mar Res 38:99–110
Rützler K (1974) The burrowing sponges of Bermuda. Smithson
Contrib Zool 165:1–32
Rützler K (1975) The role of burrowing sponges in bioerosion.
Oecologia 19:203–216
Rützler K (2002) Impact of crustose clionid sponges on Caribbean reef
corals. Acta Geol Hisp 37:61–72
Rützler K, Rieger G (1973) Sponge burrowing: fine structure of Cliona
lampa penetrating calcareous substrata. Mar Biol 21:144–162
Rützler K, Santavy DL, Antonius A (1983) The black band disease of
Atlantic reef corals. III. Distribution, ecology, and development.
PSZNI Mar Ecol 4:329–358
Sabine CL, Feely RA, Gruber N, Key RM, Lee K, Bullister JL,
Wanninkhof R, Wong CS, Wallace DWR, Tilbrook B, Millero FJ,
Peng T-H, Kozyr A, Ono T, Rios AF (2004) The oceanic sink for
anthropogenic CO2. Science 305:367–371
Sano M (2000) Stability of reef fish assemblages: responses to coral
recovery after catastrophic predation by Acanthaster planci. Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 198:121–130
Sano M, Shimizu M, Nose Y (1987) Long-term effects of destruction of
hermatypic coral by Acanthaster planci infestation on reef fish

P.W. Glynn and D.P. Manzello
communities of Iriomote Island, Japan. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
37:191–199
Schönberg CHL (2002) Substrate effects on the bioeroding
demosponge Cliona orientalis. 1. Bioerosion rates. PSZNI Mar
Ecol 23:313–326
Schönberg CHL, Ortiz JC (2009) Is sponge bioerosion increasing? Proc
11th Int Coral Reef Symp, Ft. Lauderdale, USA, pp 520–523
Scoffin TP, Stearn CW, Boucher D, Frydl P, Hawkins CM, Hunter IG,
MacGeachy JK (1980) Calcium carbonate budget of a fringing reef
on the west coast of Barbados. Part II—Erosion, sediments and
internal structure. Bull Mar Sci 30:475–508
Scott PJB, Risk MJ (1988) The effect of Lithophaga (Bivalvia:
Mytilidae) boreholes on the strength of the coral Porites lobata.
Coral Reefs 7:145–151
Scott PJB, Risk MJ, Carriquiry JD (1988) El Niño, bioerosion and the
survival of east Pacific reefs. Proc 6th Int Coral Reef Symp
Townsville 2:517–520
Smith SR, Ogden JC (eds) (1993) Status of recent history of coral reefs
at the CARICOMP network of Caribbean marine laboratories. In:
Ginsburg RN (compiler) Global aspects of coral reefs: health,
hazards and history. Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric
Science, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, pp 73–79
Smith SV, Kimmerer WJ, Laws EA, Brock RE, Walsh TW (1981)
Kaneohe Bay sewage diversion experiment: perspectives on ecosystem response to nutritional perturbation. Pac Sci 35:279–402
Steneck RS (1983a) Quantifying herbivory on coral reefs: just
scratching the surface and still biting off more than we can chew.
In: Reaka ML (ed) The ecology of deep and shallow coral reefs.
NOAA Symp Ser Undersea Res, Walpole, Maine 1:103–111
Steneck RS (1983b) Escalating herbivory and resulting adaptive trends
in calcareous algal crusts. Paleobiology 9:44–61
Stimson J, Conklin E (2008) Potential reversal of a phase shift: the
rapid decrease in the cover of the invasive green macroalga
Dictyosphaeria cavernosa Forsskål on coral reefs in Kāne’ohe
Bay, Oahu, Hawai’i. Coral Reefs 27:717–726
Tanzil JTI, Brown BE, Tudhope AW, Dunne RP (2009) Decline in
skeletal growth of the coral Porites lutea from the Andaman Sea,
South Thailand between 1984 and 2005. Coral Reefs 28:519–528
Tomascik T, Mah AJ, Nontji A, Moosa MK (1997) The ecology of the
Indonesian seas. Vol. 8, part II, chapters 13–23, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, pp 1231–1239
Tribollet A (2008) The boring microflora in modern coral reef
ecosystems: a review of its roles. In: Wisshak M, Tapanila L (eds)
Current developments in bioerosion. Springer, Berlin, pp 67–94
Tribollet A, Golubic S (2005) Cross-shelf differences in the pattern and
pace of bioerosion of experimental carbonate substrates exposed for
3 years on the northern Great Barrier Reef, Australia. Coral Reefs
24:422–434
Tribollet A, Golubic S (2011) Reef bioerosion: agents and processes.
In: Dubinsky Z, Stambler N (eds) Coral reefs: an ecosystem in
transition. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 435–449
Tribollet A, Godinot C, Atkinson M, Langdon C (2009) Effects of
elevated pCO2 on dissolution of coral carbonates by microbial
euendoliths. Global Biogeochem Cycles 23:1–7
Trudgill ST (1976) The marine erosion of limestones on Aldabra Atoll,
Indian Ocean. Z Geomorph NF Suppl Bd 26:164–200
Trudgill ST (1983) Measurements of rates of erosion of reefs and reef
limestones. In: Barnes DJ (ed) Perspectives on coral reefs. Brian
Clouster, Manuka, pp 256–262
Tudhope AW, Risk MJ (1985) Rate of dissolution of carbonate
sediments by microboring organisms, Davies Reef, Australia. J
Sediment Petrol 55:440–447
Tunnicliffe V (1979) The role of boring sponges in coral fracture. In:
Levi C and Boury-Esnault N (eds) Biologie des spongiaires. Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, No. 291, pp 309–315

4

Bioerosion and Coral Reef Growth: A Dynamic Balance

van Hooidonk R, Maynard J, Manzello DP, Planes S (2014) Opposite
latitudinal gradients in projected ocean acidification and bleaching
impacts on coral reefs. Global Chang Biol. doi:10.1111/gcb.12394
Vénec-Peyré M-T (1996) Bioeroding foraminifera: a review. Mar
Micropaleontol 28:19–30
Vermeij GJ (1987) Evolution and escalation, an ecological history of
life. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 531 p
Vogel K (1993) Bioeroders in fossil reefs. Facies 28:109–114
Ward-Paige CA, Risk MJ, Sherwood OA, Jaap WC (2005) Clionid
sponge surveys on the Florida Reef Tract suggest land-based nutrient inputs. Mar Pollut Bull 51:570–579
Warme JE (1975) Borings as trace fossils, and the processes of marine
bioerosion. In: Frey RW (ed) The study of trace fossils. Springer,
New York, pp 181–227
Warme JE (1977) Carbonate borers—their role in reef ecology and
preservation. In: Frost SH, Weiss MP, Saunders JB (eds) Reefs and
related carbonates—ecology and sedimentology. AAPG Stud Geol
4, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, pp
261–279

97
Wellington GM, Glynn PW (2007) Responses of coral reefs to El NiñoSouthern Oscillation sea-warming events. In: Aronson RB
(ed) Geological approaches to coral reef ecology. Springer,
New York, pp 342–385
Wilkinson CR (1983) Role of sponges in coral reef structural processes.
In: Barnes DJ (ed) Perspectives on coral reefs. Brian Clouston,
Manuka, pp 263–274
Wilson MA (2008) An online bibliography of bioerosion references. In:
Wisshack M, Tapanila L (eds) Current developments in bioerosion.
Springer, Berlin, pp 473–478
Wisshak M, Schönberg CHL, Form A, Freiwald A (2012) Ocean
acidification accelerates reef bioerosion. PLoS One 7:e45124
Zea S, Weil E (2003) Taxonomy of the Caribbean excavating sponge
species complex Cliona caribbaea-C. aprica-C. langae (Porifera,
Hadromerida, Clionaidae). Carib J Sci 39:348–370
Zundelevich A, Lazar B, Ilan M (2007) Chemical versus mechanical
bioerosion of coral reefs by boring sponges-lessons from Pione
cf. vastifica. J Exp Biol 210:91–96

5

Interactions Between Corals and Their Symbiotic
Algae
Gisèle Muller-Parker, Christopher F. D’Elia, and Clayton B. Cook

Abstract

The mutualistic relationship between corals and their dinoflagellate endosymbionts is a key
factor in the evolutionary success of hermatypic (reef building) corals. The endosymbiotic
algae benefit corals in numerous ways that have contributed to the long term persistence of
coral reefs over geologic time. In this chapter we review ecological and physiological
aspects of the interactions between corals and their symbiotic algae in light of recent
advances in our knowledge of the diversity of these symbionts. While the role of symbiont
diversity in promoting coral survival during environmental bleaching events has been a
major focus of recent research, its importance in other physiological and ecological
contexts such as inorganic nutrient dynamics and photosynthetic carbon fluxes has received
much less attention. We suggest that cost-benefit analysis is a useful approach to examine
these symbioses in the context of environmental change and human impacts upon corals
and coral reefs. Weighing the costs versus the benefits of the symbiotic association under
specific environmental perturbations has potential for use as an indicator of the health of
not only corals but indeed the whole coral reef ecosystem. Drastic changes in the stability
of the symbiosis, evidenced by changes in the ratio of zooxanthellae to animal biomass in
corals, may turn out to be a useful diagnostic indicator of stresses to coral reefs. By using
new tools developed to assess the stability of the symbiosis, we may be better able to
understand and predict the effects of future stressors and perturbations that threaten these
beautiful reef ecosystems.
Keywords

Cost-benefit  Stability  Holobiont  Bleaching  Calcification

5.1
G. Muller-Parker
Division of Graduate Education, National Science Foundation, 4201
Wilson Blvd, Arlington, VA 22230, USA
e-mail: gtmuller@nsf.gov
C.F. D’Elia
School of the Coast & Environment, 1002-P Energy, Coast &
Environment Building, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA
70803, USA
e-mail: cdelia@lsu.edu
C.B. Cook (*)
Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute at Florida Atlantic University,
5600 US 1 North, Fort Pierce, FL 34946, USA
e-mail: ccook30@fau.edu

Introduction

The mutualistic relationship between corals and their dinoflagellate endosymbionts is a key factor in the evolutionary
success of hermatypic (reef-building) corals. In the two
decades since the original publication of this chapter,
there has been an explosion of research on Symbiodinium

We dedicate this chapter to our late mentor and friend, Len Muscatine,
who was a leading figure in research on algal-invertebrate symbiosis,
and who played a major role in our professional development.

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_5

99

100

(the genus of coral endosymbionts), fueled by advances in
molecular genetics. These advances have the potential to
better understand the adaptive capabilities of the symbiotic
partners that contribute to this success. Different types or
species of zooxanthellae are likely to have differing adaptive
capabilities and tolerances to environmental extremes
(Chap. 7) that will impact the survival of corals. Changes
in the composition of symbiont populations may result in an
increased ability to survive future environmental stresses.
Although the increasing importance of other microbial
associates in the coral holobiont (i.e., the coral host and all
symbionts; Knowlton and Rohwer 2004) is recognized, our
focus here is on corals and their dinoflagellate symbionts,
generally referred to as zooxanthellae.
It has long been known that these endosymbiotic algae
are beneficial to their coral hosts. These include faster rates
of calcification, photoautotrophy as a source of nutrition, the
ability to acquire inorganic nutrients, and many other
attributes that are believed to contribute to the persistence
of coral reefs in geologic time. Consequently, environmental
and physiological conditions that result in changes in the
relationship between the animal host and its symbiotic algae
may have profound ecological effects. The genetic diversity
of the endosymbionts that is now known to exist contributes
to the coral holobiont’s ability to cope with changing environmental conditions (Stat et al. 2006).
This chapter discusses the coral-zooxanthella symbiosis
from the perspective of the nutrient dynamics and energetics
of the association and in the context of the stability and
adaptability of the symbiosis in the coral-reef ecosystem.
We examine aspects of the structure and function of the
symbiosis that contribute to the high rates of calcification
and productivity exhibited by reef corals. We discuss some
of the factors that influence the density of symbionts and
hence the physiological balance between the symbiotic
partners. We consider the effects of both natural and anthropogenic events on coral reef ecosystems with respect to how
they might affect the stability and survival of the symbiosis.
We also consider the possible costs and benefits associated
with the symbiotic condition. While we refer to relevant
advances in our understanding of the genetic diversity of
the endosymbionts, a more detailed discussion is found in
other chapters (Chap. 6). It is becoming increasingly clear
that specific host-symbiont combinations play vital roles in
the physiological and ecological fitness of corals. We conclude our discussion by speculating about the value of using
the coral symbiotic association as a measure of the “health”
of coral reef ecosystems. Other aspects of the symbiosis are
reviewed elsewhere (cell biology: Davy et al. 2012; ecological diversity of Symbiodinium: Finney et al. 2010; infection
by Symbiodinium: Fransolet et al. 2012).

G. Muller-Parker et al.

5.2

Description of the Symbiosis

5.2.1

Coral Anatomy and Location
of Zooxanthellae

For our purposes here, a brief review of coral morphological
features will suffice; a more complete description of coral
morphology can be found in other publications (e.g., Veron
2000; Borneman 2001). Scleractinian corals are typically
colonies of polyps linked by a common gastrovascular system, although some solitary, single-polyped forms exist
(e.g., Fungia spp.). Polyps are small, fleshy extensions of
the live coral tissue covering a non-living calcareous structure of the colony, referred to as the corallum. Although the
living tissue is normally a veneer of just a few millimeters in
thickness, the calcium carbonate it has deposited over time
can be meters in height or diameter (Fig. 5.1). Irrespective of
the size colonies may attain, the thin layer of coral tissue
itself is simply composed of two cell layers: the epidermis
(sometimes referred to as ectodermis) and the gastrodermis
(sometimes referred to as endodermis; Fig. 5.1). A thin
connective-tissue layer, the mesoglea, composed of collagen, mucopolysaccharides, and some cells, separates these
two cell layers. The lower epidermal layer, the calicoblastic
epidermis, secretes the calcareous external skeleton. The
upper layer of epidermis (oral, or free epidermis) is in
contact with seawater (Fig. 5.1). The individual polyps
form corallites, i.e., skeletal tubes of deposited calcium
carbonate that may be connected and fused in brain corals
or are interconnected by what is referred to as the
coenenchyme. The tissues of imperforate corals are
restricted to the surface of the skeleton. In perforate corals,
the skeleton is penetrated by pores containing live coral
tissue, but even in this case living tissues do not extend
deeply into the corallum, and diffusive exchange of oxygen
and other metabolites appears to occur quite readily, aided
by many cilia in the coral’s epidermal layers. Coral colonies
grow by depositing new skeleton and budding additional
polyps as the surface area of the tissues increases with size.
Many coral polyps are biradially symmetrical, with the
central gut cavity lined by gastrodermis (Fig. 5.1). Tentacles,
typically in multiples of six, surround the mouth and are
used for capture of particulate food, including zooplankton.
Food consumed by one polyp is shared with neighboring
polyps via the gastrovascular system that functions in circulation and digestion of food particles. Polyp mouths also
provide direct exchange of water and particulate food and
wastes between the gastrovascular system and the external
seawater.
The arrangement, density and size of polyps are characteristic for each coral species. However, coral species may

5

Interactions Between Corals and Their Symbiotic Algae

101

Fig. 5.1 The coral symbiosis.
A cross-section of a single coral
polyp from a coral colony is
shown in the upper left-hand
boxed inset. The arrow leading
from the coral polyp points to a
section through the two tissue
layers of the oral surface of the
polyp (see also Fig. 5.2). The
epidermis is the upper tissue layer
in contact with the seawater, and
the gastrodermis is the lower
tissue layer in contact with the
gastrovascular cavity. The
gastrodermis contains
zooxanthellae. The arrow from a
zooxanthella points to a crosssection of the alga. The alga is
enclosed in a perivacuolar animal
membrane. Internal features
shown in the cross-section
include the nucleus with its
permanently condensed
chromosomes, sections of the
chloroplast with banded
photosynthetic membranes, a
large (white) vacuole, and starch
and lipid inclusions

exhibit different morphologies depending on environmental
conditions such as water motion and light, and this causes
problems in taxonomy of corals (Veron and Pichon 1976;
Veron 2000). Molecular approaches to coral taxonomy have
been useful in circumventing these problems (Stat
et al. 2012).

5.2.2

Zooxanthellae

“Zooxanthella” is a general descriptive term for all symbiotic golden-colored algae that live in animals, including
corals, sea anemones, molluscs and other taxa. Although
the term has no taxonomic meaning, “zooxanthellae” is
used primarily to refer to dinoflagellate symbionts, a group
of diverse algae. It continues to be a useful label, given the
current state of uncertainty in the taxonomy of coral
symbionts.
Zooxanthellae found in corals are typically 8–12 μm
diameter cells that reside exclusively in membrane-bound
vacuoles in the gastrodermal cells (Fig. 5.1). Their areal
density normally ranges from 1  106 cm2 to 6  106
cells cm2 of coral surface, although this may be highly
variable on both temporal and spatial scales (e.g., Fitt

et al. 2000). Seasonal differences exist in the density of
zooxanthellae in corals; tropical corals during low light
(“winter”) months have greater numbers of zooxanthellae
(Fagoonee et al. 1999; Fitt et al. 2000). More information
about the variability of zooxanthellae densities within
colonies and among coral species is needed, especially
given the critical role of zooxanthellae in coral nutrition,
and the underlying responses to coral bleaching, a phenomenon in which the host loses its symbionts under conditions
of stress.
Based on early morphological studies, zooxanthellae in
corals and other cnidarians were originally believed to
belong to one cosmopolitan species, Symbiodinium
microadriaticum. The genetic diversity of zooxanthellae
was first discovered by comparing the morphology and
growth of symbionts isolated from different hosts in culture,
resulting in the formal description of four species and the
realization that different zooxanthellae were found in different animal hosts (reviewed by Trench 1993; Rowan 1991;
Rowan and Powers 1992). This led to the concept of symbiont specificity, with one host selecting and maintaining one
type of zooxanthella (its specific symbiont) over all other
zooxanthellae. This concept, too, has changed. Our ability to
distinguish among zooxanthellae through genetic analyses

102

of molecular sequences (Chap. 6) has resulted in an explosion of different zooxanthella “taxa” (with some named as
species, LaJeunesse et al. 2012) and the discovery that
different taxa may inhabit the same host species and even
the same host organism. With the use of next-gen and other
sequencing approaches, it is becoming increasingly apparent
that individual hosts may harbor multiple genotypes, with
some persisting at low frequencies (Fay and Weber 2012),
indicating that the symbiotic relationship is much more
flexible than previously thought (Baker 2003), including
the possibility that a given coral may acquire different
types under different conditions. As the potential diversity
of symbionts within a species or individual coral is limited,
the significance of symbiont specificity with respect to the
stability and ecological persistence of the coral symbiosis is
a major research question.
Based on their genetic relatedness, zooxanthellae of
corals and other invertebrate hosts are currently placed in
nine major groups (¼ clades; designated A through I), and
others are likely to be identified. Although members of a
clade are more closely related to each other than to members
of other clades, individual taxa within each clade exhibit
broad genetic diversity. Zooxanthellae belonging to five of
the clades (A–D and G) occur in corals. The individual
genotypes of most zooxanthellae identified by their DNA
sequences have yet to be formally described as new species.
Those coral symbionts that have been given species
designations have been assigned to the genus Symbiodinium.
The biogeographic distribution of members of the different clades of zooxanthellae in corals indicates the diversity
of zooxanthellae is higher in the Caribbean than in the IndoPacific, where the vast majority of corals contain only
members of clades C and D. The reasons for these oceanbasin differences are, as yet, unresolved. In the Caribbean,
clade A zooxanthellae are found in high light shallow water
corals, and members of clade C are found in deeper corals
(LaJeunesse 2002), in the same coral or among different
species. However, interpretation of ecological distribution
patterns is complicated by the observation that some
zooxanthellae are specialists, maintaining specific
associations with only one host, while other generalist
zooxanthellae associate with many hosts and have a wide
biogeographic distribution. No strong relationship is evident
between the types of zooxanthellae in closely related hosts,
nor among the types of hosts inhabited by closely related
zooxanthellae (Baker 2003; LaJeunesse et al. 2010).
The dinoflagellates comprise a diverse group of mostly
planktonic, free-swimming single-celled microscopic algae
that exhibit a variety of feeding modes ranging from
photoautotrophy (photosynthetic carbon fixation) to heterotrophy (dissolved organic carbon uptake or feeding on
particulate food). Zooxanthellae are photosynthetic and contain characteristic dinoflagellate pigments (diadinoxanthin,

G. Muller-Parker et al.

peridinin) in addition to chlorophylls a and c. They are
brown or yellow-brown in color. Although zooxanthellae
may be heterotrophic in corals as they have been shown to
take up and assimilate dissolved organic carbon from host
sea anemones, their own photosynthesis seems to contribute
most to their energetic needs.
Zooxanthellae can live independently of their animal
host. Free-living zooxanthellae have been found in sediment
and water column samples (Takabayashi et al. 2012). Many
strains of Symbiodinium isolated from host tissues have been
cultured in inorganic algal media, although the inability to
culture some strains is of great potential interest. These
uncultivable strains may have specific requirements for
some set of as yet undefined host or other microbial symbiont conditions (including nutritional requirements) that warrant further study. Cultured zooxanthellae have been used to
study growth rates and compare genetic and physiological
characteristics of symbionts from different hosts.
Zooxanthellae living in animal cells are usually found in
the coccoid stage (non-motile, lacking flagella); this differs
from the free-living motile (dinomastigote) stage that
possesses two flagella (Fig. 5.2) and exhibits a characteristic
swimming pattern. In culture, zooxanthellae alternate
between the coccoid and dinomastigote stages, often on a
diurnal pattern. The dominant dinoflagellate feature evident
on the ultrastructural level is the nucleus with permanently
condensed chromosomes (dinokaryon; Fig. 5.1).
Santos and Coffroth (2003) showed that the life cycle of
zooxanthellae, like that of most dinoflagellates, is dominated
by asexual reproduction of haploid vegetative cells. The
high genetic diversity of zooxanthellae suggests extensive
recombination, although sexual reproduction has not been
documented for these algae. As these authors point out,
“questions pertaining to recombination in these enigmatic
dinoflagellates, such as the factors that induce it and whether
it occurs inside or outside a host, remain to be answered”
(Santos and Coffroth 2003).

5.2.3

Acquisition of Zooxanthellae by Corals

Young corals derived from both asexual and sexual reproduction typically contain zooxanthellae. In asexually produced (clonal) coral colonies, zooxanthellae are directly
transmitted in the coral buds or fragments that form new
colonies. In sexually produced corals, acquisition of
zooxanthellae is either directly from the parent (vertical),
or indirectly from the environment (horizontal). The method
of symbiont acquisition and whether or not the eggs contain
zooxanthellae are characteristics of each coral species.
A confounding factor is the frequency of sexual versus
asexual reproduction in each coral. A coral that relies almost
exclusively on asexual reproduction (i.e., budding or

5

Interactions Between Corals and Their Symbiotic Algae

Fig. 5.2 A section through the two tissue layers of the oral surface of
the polyp showing the different life forms of zooxanthellae. A freeliving motile cell (dinomastigote) is shown swimming in the seawater
above the layer of nucleated oral epidermal cells. The two gastrodermal
cells each contain one coccoid zooxanthella; the cell on the left is in the
process of dividing. The actual sizes of zooxanthellae range from 5 to
20 um, depending on species and life form

fragmentation) for propagation, where direct transmission of
zooxanthellae is guaranteed, may not exhibit highly developed mechanisms for transmission of these algae during
sexual reproduction.
During direct transmission via sexual reproduction,
zooxanthellae are transferred to the eggs or to larvae brooded
by the parent. The eggs of most species of corals do not
contain zooxanthellae. For those that do, zooxanthellae free
in the gastrovascular cavity may be ingested by gastrodermal
follicle cells and expelled near the oocytes by passing through

103

temporary gaps in the mesoglea, where they are phagocytosed
by the mature oocyte (Hirose et al. 2001). Alternatively,
cytoplasmic extensions of the gastrodermal cells that contain
zooxanthellae may invade the egg plasm, as has been
described for marine hydroids (Trench 1987). These eggs
may be released and fertilized in the water, or the larvae
may develop from eggs fertilized and retained within the
parent coral. If fertilized eggs do not contain zooxanthellae,
larvae brooded by the parent through the early stages of
development may take up zooxanthellae at any time prior to
release. The presence or absence of zooxanthellae in eggs and
planula larvae may affect their ability to persist in the plankton, as the photoautotrophic contributions of the
zooxanthellae are potentially important factors in explaining
the large distance of dispersion of some species (Richmond
and Hunter 1990).
Corals that do not inherit parental zooxanthellae must
obtain them from seawater. The concentration of
zooxanthellae in seawater over the reefs is likely to be
quite low under normal conditions; free-living zooxanthellae
also occur in sediments (Takabayashi et al. 2012). Positive
chemotaxis of motile zooxanthellae towards the coral animal
increases the probability of contact between appropriate
partners (Fitt 1984; Hollingsworth et al. 2005). Free-living
zooxanthellae may show preferential chemotaxis towards
newly settled nonsymbiotic coral polyps. In experiments
with the soft coral Heteroxenia fuscescens, motile
zooxanthellae were attracted to animal extracts of juvenile
nonsymbiotic polyps but not to extracts of adult symbiotic
polyps and seawater controls (Pasternak et al. 2004).
Zooxanthellae also may be supplied indirectly to the coral
by ingestion of fecal material released by corallivores
and of zooplankton prey containing zooxanthellae. Regardless of the mechanism, indirect acquisition of zooxanthellae
provides the potential for colonization by zooxanthellae that
are genetically distinct from parental symbionts. Whether or
not this actually occurs depends on host coral recognition
and acceptance of a symbiont, and the chance encounter of
the appropriate partners. There is no indication that host
corals with direct, vertically transmitted zooxanthellae contain fewer zooxanthellae types than corals that acquire their
symbionts horizontally by open acquisition (Baker 2003).
Together with recent evidence that newly settled polyps of
some species contain different zooxanthellae than their
respective adult colonies (Coffroth et al. 2001; Cumbo
et al. 2013); corals are likely to be able to acquire different
zooxanthellae throughout their lives.
Coral “bleaching” also provides the potential for establishment of a new population of zooxanthellae in adult
corals. Buddemeier and Fautin (1993) originally proposed
the “Adaptive Bleaching Hypothesis” as a possible explanation for the ability of corals to change the composition of
their zooxanthellae symbionts from one clade to another.

104

G. Muller-Parker et al.

Corals lose coloration (become bleached) when they lose
most of their zooxanthellae or when stressed zooxanthellae
lose their photosynthetic pigments. Corals that survive a
bleaching event involving the loss of zooxanthellae eventually regain normal densities of zooxanthellae (they “rebrown”) when environmental conditions improve. The
source of zooxanthellae for the recovery and re-browning
of a bleached coral is unknown. Free-living zooxanthellae
may invade corals after a bleaching event, residual
zooxanthellae (of the former dominant type or of a cryptic
resident type) may re-populate their bleached host coral, or
both may occur.
Field studies have shown that the re-population of
bleached tissues by free-living or residual zooxanthellae
may change the genetic composition of the population of
symbiotic algae within a coral (Baker et al. 2004; Kemp
et al. 2014). Although changes in the composition of symbiont populations are hypothesized to result in an increased
ability to survive future environmental stresses (Buddemeier
and Fautin 1993), these changes may be temporary, with
subsequent reversions to original symbiont complements
(Thornhill et al. 2006). Some evidence indicates that resistance to bleaching increases after symbiont populations
change (Baker et al. 2004), and that thermally resistant
symbionts may represent a temporary stopgap solution to
surviving periods of heat stress. However, these newly
acquired symbiont strains may confer lowered fitness upon
hosts compared to the normal symbiont complement (Little
et al. 2004; Mieog et al. 2009), and may be opportunistic
“weed” species that confer short term advantages only during stressful periods.

5.3

Nutrition and Adaptations
to Environmental Factors

5.3.1

Coral Nutrition

The success of corals in low-nutrient tropical waters is due
largely to the variety of modes that corals utilize to obtain
nutrition (Fig. 5.3). The animal has two primary nutritional
modes: capture of particulate food by polyps and input of
translocated photosynthetic products from its zooxanthellae.
The amount of photosynthetic carbon translocated to the
animal host is often sufficient to meet its metabolic respiratory requirements. Corals may also take up dissolved organic
compounds from seawater, a process that is aided by the
extremely high surface area to tissue volume ratio of corals
and the presence of cilia on their epidermal cells. However,
the nutritional importance of this uptake, and of that of other
food sources such as microplankton and bacteria (either freeliving or associated with mucus and particulate debris) is
uncertain. Animal metabolic waste products derived from

feeding may be retained within the coral, as they are a source
of the inorganic nutrient elements (e.g., N, P) required by the
zooxanthellae.
Zooxanthellae are photoautotrophs and thus require only
inorganic nutrients, carbon dioxide, and light for photosynthetic carbon fixation. Inorganic nutrients may be acquired
from coral animal waste metabolites, or from seawater after
passage through animal tissues, or from nitrogen fixation by
symbiotic cyanobacteria. Host feeding is probably more
important as a source of N for corals and zooxanthellae at
depth (Muscatine and Kaplan 1994; Heikoop et al. 1998).
Zooxanthellae may also obtain organic nutrients from the
animal, although the extent to which this occurs, and its
significance, is not well understood. The extent of symbiont
heterotrophy may depend on environmental considerations
(light, depth) and the particular strain of symbiont involved.
The variety of coral nutritional modes suggests that corals
are adaptively polytrophic and opportunistic feeders. This
polytrophism seems to account for corals’ ability to thrive in
low-nutrient water (Muscatine and Porter 1977). However,
environmental constraints and energetic costs associated
with the maintenance of symbiotic algae, as discussed
below, may under certain circumstances favor holozoic
modes of nutrition, e.g., at depth (Muscatine et al. 1989) or
following bleaching events (Grottoli et al. 2007).
Uptake of nutrient elements in an inorganic form from
seawater by zooxanthellate corals was first observed by
Yonge and Nicholls (1931) working with phosphate
(PO43). Subsequently, such uptake has been observed by
many authors for a variety of inorganic nutrient forms of
nitrogen and phosphorus (PO43, NO3, NH4+), and it has
been firmly established that net uptake of inorganic nutrients
occurs even at the characteristically low environmental
concentrations observed in tropical seas. This mode of nutrient acquisition, once considered a curiosity, is now believed
by many researchers to constitute a significant source of N
and P to the symbiotic association (Fig. 5.3). However, the
physiological mechanism by which this uptake occurs has
been the subject of considerable debate.
Two alternatives exist to explain the uptake of dissolved
inorganic nutrients even at low ambient concentrations,
algal-mediated assimilation and host-mediated assimilation.
This phenomenon has been investigated most extensively for
ammonium. With respect to algal mediation of assimilation,
D’Elia et al. (1983) proposed the “depletion-diffusion”
hypothesis, suggesting that zooxanthellae reduce the coral
intracellular concentration of inorganic metabolites such as
NH4+ to such low levels that a concentration gradient is
established resulting in an inward (perhaps enzymatically
facilitated) diffusion of dissolved inorganic nutrient from the
external seawater. In contrast, proponents of the hostmediated assimilation model (Rees 1987; Miller and
Yellowlees 1989) suggest that the uptake of NH4+ (and by

5

Interactions Between Corals and Their Symbiotic Algae

105

Fig. 5.3 Particulate (P) and dissolved (D) exchanges of inorganic
(I) and organic (O) carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and phosphorus
(P) between a coral polyp and the seawater environment. “+”
exchanges represent inputs from the environment to the coral, and

“” exchanges represent losses from the coral to the environment.
Internal exchanges (not shown) include uptake by symbiotic algae
and translocation between the algae and the host

extension, other nutrient ions) is more likely mediated by
assimilatory enzymes in animal tissues, and then transported
in an organic form to the zooxanthellae.
For ammonium uptake and assimilation, at least, several
strong lines of evidence suggest that the former mechanism
is the more likely of the two alternatives. Kawaguti (1953)
and Muscatine and D’Elia (1978) found that zooxanthellate,
but not azooxanthellate corals take up ammonium. D’Elia
et al. (1983) found that isolated zooxanthellae take up
ammonium, and that uptake kinetics of isolated algae closely
approximate those of intact symbioses. These authors found
differences in uptake kinetics between isolates of
zooxanthellae, but the genetic basis of these differences is
not known. Given the genetic tools now available for
Symbiodinium, this is a question that should be addressed.
D’Elia and Cook (1988) provided indirect evidence that
ammonium concentrations in host cytoplasm are indeed low
enough to create a concentration gradient from seawater to
the cytoplasm, and Szmant et al. (1990) showed that corals
conserve N, which is consistent with establishing a low
internal ammonium concentration. Most significantly, 15N
studies show that ammonium is initially assimilated by the
zooxanthellae, and that some of this assimilated N is transferred to the host (Swanson and Hoegh-Guldberg 1998;
Kopp et al. 2013). However, there is some evidence that

host tissue may also assimilate ammonium (Lipschultz and
Cook 2002).
The ramifications of the algal-mediated nutrient uptake
mechanism are significant: zooxanthellae in hospite (living
within host cells) are likely to be nutrient-limited, as
hypothesized by Cook and D’Elia (1987), who provided a
list of criteria for establishing nutrient limitation. Accordingly, increases in nutrient concentrations in ambient seawater that corals are exposed to, should, in fact, enhance cell
division, growth rates and biomass of zooxanthellae, as
observed by numerous authors (e.g., Hoegh-Guldberg
1994), affecting the stability and physiological balance of
the symbiotic association.

5.3.2

Productivity of Corals and Role
of Zooxanthellae in Calcification

Photosynthetic carbon fixation by zooxanthellae (Pzx)
accounts for the high productivity of corals (Hatcher 1988,
1997). Any carbon fixed by zooxanthellae in excess of their
own respiratory (Rzx) and growth requirements is potentially
available to the host coral as a carbon and energy source. If
the carbon fixed by zooxanthellae meets or exceeds the
combined respiratory carbon requirement of the coral and

106

zooxanthellae (Pzx > Rzx + animal; ratio of P:R > 1), the
coral is potentially photoautotrophic with respect to carbon
and does not require external carbon sources to obtain
energy. When P:R is less than one, carbon must be supplied
from other nutritional sources, either particulate or dissolved
(Fig. 5.3) for the coral to satisfy energetic needs. P:R ratios
derived from oxygen measurements generally show that
shallow water corals have a P:R > 1, while the P:R of
deep water corals is less than one. Therefore, deep water
corals are more likely to require external subsidies of
organic carbon for maintenance and growth than are shallow
water corals.
Zooxanthellae enhance coral calcification and thus are
responsible for much of the formation of the massive coral
reef framework. The direct relationship between coral calcification rate and light indicates the fundamental importance
of symbiont photosynthesis (Barnes and Chalker 1990),
although how photosynthesis enhances calcification is still
unresolved. Several models have been proposed for the
mechanism of enhancement of calcification by
zooxanthellae. One is the contribution photosynthetic
products of zooxanthellae to the process of calcification.
These products could enhance calcification by providing
energy for aragonite deposition or for the active transport
of calcium ions across the calicoblastic epidermis for calcification. These products could also provide precursors for
the synthesis of the organic matrix upon which CaCO3 is
deposited. Another possibility is that symbiont photosynthesis alters the physico-chemical environment to provide
favorable conditions for calcification (Gattuso et al. 1999).
Photosynthesis removes CO2, raising the pH and the aragonite saturation state, which favors carbonate deposition. In
turn, calcification generates protons (H+) that are transported
back into the coral tissues. The decrease in pH from the extra
protons results in an increase in carbon dioxide, supplying
the primary substrate needed for photosynthesis by
zooxanthellae in the light (Al-Horani et al. 2003). A third
possibility is that the removal of phosphate by zooxanthellae
enhances calcification since phosphate is an inhibitor of
CaCO3 crystal formation (Simkiss 1964). Despite the abundance of models, the significance of each one with respect to
the link between calcification and symbiosis with
zooxanthellae has not been determined.
The following section describes the factors that influence
the productivity of zooxanthellae and hence the amount of
carbon potentially available to the coral. The balance
between primary production and respiration (P:R) for a
coral with a stable population density of zooxanthellae
depends on environmental factors that affect both photosynthesis of the zooxanthellae and respiration rates of
both partners. The most important factors are light and
temperature.

G. Muller-Parker et al.

5.3.3

Effect of Light and Temperature
on Productivity of Zooxanthellae

The reliance of corals on phototrophic nutrition and photosynthetically enhanced calcification favors the proliferation
of corals in shallow, clear waters. Total daily production
depends on the amount of light received by zooxanthellae,
which is related to the light penetrating to the seawater depth
where the coral is located and to the light transmitted
through the coral animal tissues and reflected by the coral
skeleton. Photosynthetic rates increase directly in response
to increase in light intensity up to a certain light intensity,
after which they are either independent of further increases
in light or inhibited by high light (Hatcher 1988). Consequently, mechanisms for regulating light capture and penetration through the coral are advantageous and are evident in
both the zooxanthellae and the host coral.
Some corals grow well in the presence of high levels of
ultraviolet (UV) radiation, while others are killed by exposure to high UV. The former include corals that are normally
found in high light (in shallow water), while the latter
include corals that live at greater depths or that are “shadeloving” species. Corals have a suite of molecules that protect
against UV-induced reactive oxygen species (Lesser 1997;
Mazel et al. 2003) as well as UV-absorbing “sunscreen”
compounds that protect against UV damage (Dunlap and
Chalker 1986). The quantity of their UV-absorbing
sunscreens is related to the incident UV energy, and declines
in corals with depth. These sunscreens include mycosporinelike amino acids (MAAs), and appear to be located primarily
in the animal tissues and afford protection to symbiotic
zooxanthellae that do not make MAAs (e.g., members of
Clade B; Banaszak et al. (2000)) or that have low
concentrations of these compounds.
Animal tissue pigments, contributed by four or more
groups of color types of GFP-like proteins (GFP, green fluorescent protein), may serve to regulate the light received by
zooxanthellae. In high light-adapted corals, fluorescent
proteins are concentrated in the epidermis above the algae
and may serve as a protective screen to scatter the light and
remove excess light energy by fluorescence; the same proteins
located below the algae in the gastrodermis in shade-adapted
corals might help collect light under low light conditions by
back-scattering
and
transformation
of
light
to
photosynthetically-active wavelengths (Salih et al. 2000).
However, Mazel et al. (2003) propose that the physical
absorption, emission and reflection properties of GFPs do
not function in optimizing light conditions for photosynthesis;
instead, GFPs may help remove potentially damaging reactive
oxygen species (ROS) produced during photosynthesis. Given
the role of ROS in coral bleaching (Lesser 1997), GFPs may
serve as a “bleaching monitor” (Roth and Deheyn 2013).

5

Interactions Between Corals and Their Symbiotic Algae

By their location in a thin layer of photoprotective living
tissue, supported by a strong skeleton formed by their animal
partner (Fig. 5.1), zooxanthellae maximize light capture and
are highly productive. This light capture is enhanced by the
physical properties of the skeleton (Enrı́guez et al. 2005).
Although they are essentially “imprisoned phytoplankton,”
they enjoy many of the benefits of a macroscopic benthic
lifestyle such as that of a seaweed. Such advantages include
maintenance in the photic zone with good water exchange.
In addition, individual polyps exhibit behaviors (contraction
and expansion) that help regulate and optimize the light
environment for their symbiotic algae. The coral also
provides protection against herbivores that feed on planktonic algae. As in trees, upper layers of the coral canopy
receive more light than the understory surfaces of coral
branches, and zooxanthellae in shaded and unshaded
portions of the colony may exhibit different degrees of
photoadaptation and exist at different population densities
in coral tissues.
Individual zooxanthellae acclimate to changes in light by
changes in their photosynthetic systems, including the lightharvesting ability of photosynthetic units (amount of pigment) and the rate of carbon fixation (enzymatic
adaptations). Zooxanthellae in corals from shaded habitats
usually contain more chlorophyll and accessory lightharvesting pigments, held in larger chloroplasts with a
greater number of chloroplast membranes, and thus are
more efficient at light capture under low light conditions.
The size of their light harvesting units is large.
Zooxanthellae in corals in high light environments contain
less photosynthetic pigment, in smaller light harvesting units
in fewer chloroplast membranes, and sustain high rates of
carbon fixation under high light conditions by containing
more photosynthetic units. As light intensity also varies on
a daily and seasonal basis, zooxanthellae are also likely to
acclimate to these temporal changes in light conditions.
The differential ability of coral species to photoacclimate
to prevailing light regimes via these mechanisms may limit
their distribution in different light environments. Genetic
differences in the photophysiology of different species or
taxa of zooxanthellae are also likely to have a large effect on
the optimal light regimes of individual coral species, and on
the distribution and ecological role of these corals under
changing environmental conditions. In some cases, a species
may exhibit changes in symbiont composition with depth
(Rowan and Knowlton 1995), while other coral species do
not (Iglesias-Prieto et al. 2004). Clearly, proper quality and
quantity of light are essential at the coral holobiont level for
(1) the overall stability of the association; (2) the ability of
the symbiosis to exhibit net production (P > R); (3) the
expression of photosynthetic pigments and the density of
the zooxanthellae; and (4) diel behavioral aspects such as
polyp expansion and contraction.

107

Temperature also affects metabolic rates of corals and
their symbionts. The influence of temperature on productivity depends on how photosynthesis of the algae and respiration of both the algae and coral animal respond to changes
in temperature. In general, corals are adapted to their ambient temperature conditions. Shallow corals may tolerate a
wider range of temperatures than deep water corals, and
corals (and their zooxanthellae) may show latitudinal
differences in their temperature responses. For example, P:
R ratios for the same species of corals in Hawaii and
Enewetak across a temperature range (18–31  C) showed
that Enewetak corals were adapted to their higher ambient
temperatures (Coles and Jokiel 1977). As was discussed for
light, temperature tolerances may depend on the individual
coral species and the particular genetic strains of
zooxanthellae involved. See Chap. 7 by Barshis for further
discussion.
High temperature is known to cause coral bleaching, but
there is no given temperature that causes coral bleaching.
Instead, prolonged exposure to increases of 1–3  C above
long-term annual maximum temperatures (ranging from
25 to 35–36  C) are likely to induce bleaching (Coles and
Brown 2003). High light and ultraviolet light exposure may
exacerbate the effects of high temperature, and other
stressors may also initiate this phenomenon, which argues
for caution in interpreting every bleaching event as the result
of a temperature anomaly. Clearly, exposure to temperatures
exceeding the tolerance range of the symbiosis affects its
stability, generally resulting in the loss of zooxanthellae and
possibly in the death of the host. The loss may be due to
effects on the zooxanthellae (e.g. Tchernov et al. 2004), on
the host (e.g. Fitt et al. 2009), or on both partners. Both the
rate of the temperature change and the duration of the temperature anomaly can effect bleaching. As with changes in
light, the ability of the coral to adapt to change in temperature or in other environmental factors depends on the
acclimatory capability of one or more of the following: the
animal, the zooxanthellae, and the symbiotic association as a
whole.

5.3.4

Effect of Nutrient Supply
on Zooxanthellae in Corals

Corals thrive in seawater where the concentrations (standing
stock) of the major growth-limiting nutrient elements, nitrogen and phosphorus, are typically very low. A tenet of algalanimal symbiosis is that it evolved in response to relatively
low ambient nutrient concentrations, and that accordingly,
such conditions provide corals a competitive advantage over
other benthic species. Corals conserve nitrogen by having
low rates of protein catabolism and catabolizing translocated
lipids and carbohydrates (Szmant et al. 1990).

108

Various sources of N and P exist for symbiotic
zooxanthellae. The algae can obtain inorganic nutrients via
recycling of waste products from their animal host, and
“new” nutrients from the uptake of dissolved inorganic
compounds from seawater and zooplankton capture by the
coral (Fig. 5.3). In fact, early investigations of the role of
symbiotic algae in corals suggested that they served as the
kidneys for the animal (Yonge and Nicholls 1931), although
this is now considered highly unnecessary because of the
proximity of the tissues to seawater and the relatively small
thickness of the coral tissue layer. Although dissolved
concentrations of nutrients are very low in most tropical
waters, mass transport of nutrients via diffusion or transport
across coral surfaces may be sufficient, when assimilated, to
supply the nutrient requirements of the algae and its host
(Hoegh-Guldberg and Williamson 1999). Such transport is
enhanced by water movement on reefs (Thomas and
Atkinson 1997).
Although corals are adapted to waters containing very
low levels of nutrients, corals can persist when nutrient
levels around reefs become periodically elevated due to
increased run-off from adjacent land, point source inputs
(from sewage and industrial effluents), or periodic upwelling. Most corals are unable to adapt to acute, high level
nutrient enrichments and generally compete poorly with
benthic macroalgae under such conditions. Excess nutrients
may decrease calcification rates, as described earlier phosphate interferes with aragonite crystal formation during calcification. Elevated nitrate inhibits coral calcification
(Marubini and Davies 1996). However, given the differences
in uptake kinetics between cultured isolates of zooxanthellae
(D’Elia et al. 1983), it is possible that symbiont strain is
important in those corals that exist in environments with
reduced nutrients. For example, Godinot et al. (2013) found
differences in alkaline phosphatase activity between
zooxanthellae from different clades, although it is not clear
how these differences relate to environmental concentrations.
Elevated phosphate levels (exceeding about 1 μM) and
dissolved inorganic nitrogen levels (exceeding about 6 μM)
destabilize the symbiosis by enhancing growth rates of the
zooxanthellae, but it is unclear how often reef seawater
concentrations exceed these values. Recent studies have
shown that higher symbiont densities increase the likelihood
that elevated temperatures will trigger bleaching events
(Wooldridge 2009; Wiedenmann et al. 2012; Cunning and
Baker 2013). Under less stressful conditions, elevated
growth rates of the zooxanthellae relative to the host may
simply result in the expulsion of extra algae, The expulsion
of zooxanthellae may also represent a unique detoxification
mechanism for the coral. For example, zooxanthellae have a
high tolerance for heavy metals and accumulate them from
seawater. Periodic expulsion of zooxanthellae could reduce
the “body burden” of heavy metals (and nutrients) in the

G. Muller-Parker et al.

coral animal, as demonstrated for temperate sea anemones
(Harland and Nganro 1990).
Corals that survive direct effects of added nutrients may
succumb to indirect effects such as reduction of light by
increased phytoplankton biomass in the water column and
overgrowth by fleshy seaweeds.

5.4

Stability of the Symbiosis

A stable symbiosis is defined as one in which the density of
zooxanthellae in corals remains relatively constant under a
given set of environmental conditions and the symbiotic
partners do not change over time. This constancy may be
important in balancing the benefits and the costs of the
symbiosis (Table 5.1). Thus, the growth of zooxanthellae
in corals must be regulated somehow relative to the growth
of the host. Either the growth rates of the zooxanthellae and
the animal cells are comparable, or, if different, excess
zooxanthellae are expelled from the coral.
Direct measurements of growth rates of zooxanthellae in
coral tissue are difficult to make. Doubling times have been
estimated from diel measurements of the mitotic index (¼
the percent of dividing cells, Fig. 5.2) of zooxanthellae.
However, this approach makes assumptions about the duration and phasing of cell cycle stages that may be difficult to
validate. Doubling times for symbiotic zooxanthellae calculated by this approach show them to be at least an order of
magnitude lower than for cultured zooxanthellae maintained
in nutrient-enriched seawater.
Zooxanthellae growth rates and densities may be
regulated by the availability of nutrients. Resource limitation
may help maintain the balance between zooxanthellae and
animal biomass and growth rates. Upper density limits are
likely controlled indirectly by the animal cell habitat,
slowing zooxanthella division rates by limitations on space
or diffusion of gases (CO2, O2) through animal tissue. It has
been suggested that the host may produce a compound that
inhibits algal growth once a certain density has been
reached, but this has yet to be demonstrated. Corals are
known to expel zooxanthellae, and this is believed to be an
important mechanism for controlling densities. As discussed
above, corals with elevated symbiont densities following
elevated nutrients may be more susceptible to bleaching
events. Furthermore, as numbers of zooxanthellae increase
in coral tissue, self-shading of cells will reduce available
light and there will be intense competition for limited
resources, CO2 and nutrients, potentially reducing net production and growth. In certain rapidly growing areas of the
coral, animal growth rates may exceed those of the
zooxanthellae, and populations of zooxanthellae are thus
“diluted.” For example, tips of branches of rapidly growing
species often appear white due to reduced algal densities.

5

Interactions Between Corals and Their Symbiotic Algae

109

Table 5.1 Putative benefits and costs of the symbiotic relationship for the coral animal, for zooxanthellae, and for the holobiont
Benefits
A. Animal
Supply of reduced carbon, offsetting respiration costs
and conserving metabolic reserves

Costs

Indirect (+/ effects)

Regulation of algal growth and production of
peri-algal vacuoles

Increased growth and reproduction

Defenses against high oxygen tension, high
light, and UV
Mechanisms for rejection of non-beneficial
types or excess algae
Vulnerability to environmental stresses that
affect plants

High surface area-to-volume ratio
favors both light capture and prey
capture
Restriction to the photic zone

Increased calcification rate
Conservation of nutrients
Sequestration of toxic compounds by algae
B. Zooxanthellae
Supply of CO2 and nutrients from host

Maintenance in photic zone
Protection from UV damage by animal tissues
Maintenance of a high population density of a single or
few genotypes by host under uniform environmental
conditions
C. Coral symbiotic association
Increased growth, more competitive for space on reef
Increased ability to partition resources of food and
space

Translocation of a significant fraction of
photosynthetic carbon to animal; growth rate
is regulated
Regulation of growth rate; growth slower in
coral than in free-living state
Expulsion from host

Nutrient supply is regulated

Protection from grazers
Dispersal by predators on animal
tissue

Supply of CO2 and nutrients limited by host

Compounded sensitivity to environmental
stresses that affect algae, animals, or both
Restricted tolerance range of light,
temperature, and sedimentation conditions
for growth

Increased resistance to water motion due to high
calcification
Notes: Factors which are not direct benefits or costs are listed as indirect effects. The relative contribution of each factor to maintaining the balance
between benefit and cost of the symbiotic association is unknown, as is the synergistic interaction among these factors. Also, not all of these
putative benefits have been documented in corals, such as sequestration of toxic compounds by algae

Environmental factors that are likely to affect both animal
and algal growth include physical conditions and the availability of prey. Light directly affects photosynthetic productivity, while prey capture directly affects animal tissue
growth and indirectly affects growth of zooxanthellae by its
potential supply of nutrients and creation of new animal
tissues that provide habitat for more zooxanthellae. Although
the intracellular habitat of zooxanthellae has been considered
a nutrient-rich environment (Fig. 5.2), these algae display
characteristics that suggest that their growth is normally
nutrient-limited (Cook and D’Elia 1987). It has been frequently observed that the addition of dissolved inorganic
nitrogen to seawater causes an increase in the growth rate
of zooxanthellae (e.g., Hoegh-Guldberg 1994) and in their
nitrogen to phosphorus ratio (Muller-Parker et al. 1994). The
opposite trends occur when symbiotic associations are
maintained with no particulate food resources in low nutrient
seawater. It is unknown if the animal withholds nutrients
from its algae, or if the supply is limited by the availability
of nutrients (including animal prey and seawater as sources),

or both. Nutrient limitation of the growth of zooxanthellae
may favor the coral animal by creating an excess of photosynthetic carbon products that cannot be used for production
of new cells and is therefore translocated to the animal host
(Falkowski et al. 1993). Conversely, the addition of nutrients
may trigger the diversion of photosynthate to fuel symbiont
growth. Wooldridge (2010) has characterized the situation as
one of “controlled parasitism”, in which the host may regulate its symbionts via a number of mechanisms.
The review of Fay and Weber (2012) and more recent
work on the diversity of zooxanthellae taxa in corals make it
clear that apparently stable populations may exhibit profound changes in the genetic composition of the
zooxanthellae inhabiting corals over time. We may expect
more examples of this as more sensitive next-gen sequencing techniques are used to study these associations. As noted
above, the extent of these changes depends on the specific
combinations of host and symbiont. Furthermore, symbiont
densities may follow predictable seasonal cycles, with
highest densities of symbionts during low light winter

110

G. Muller-Parker et al.

months, highest animal tissue biomass in spring, and lowest
population densities of zooxanthellae during late summer
and fall months (Fitt et al. 2000). These seasonal cycles
may represent fine-tuning of the symbiosis in response to
seasonal changes in light and temperature, with resultant
effects on coral growth. In some cases these seasonal
patterns may include periodic changes in the relative
frequencies of symbionts, with more heat-resistant strains
becoming more frequent during warmer months (Chen
et al. 2005). As opposed to these normal cycles in
zooxanthellae population dynamics, symbiont population
densities may be disrupted by stressors that result in the
mass expulsion of zooxanthellae, resulting in visibly
bleached corals. Environmental stresses such as extreme
temperatures, high light, air exposure, or rapid change in
salinity cause coral bleaching. These large-scale disruptions
in the symbiosis may produce positive or negative shifts in
the balance between benefits and costs of the symbiosis
(Table 5.1). If the coral survives the stress and regains a
normal population density of zooxanthellae, there may be a
period during the re-population phase when algal growth
rates exceed those of the animal tissue.

5.5

Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Symbiosis

Table 5.1 presents features that we consider to represent
significant benefits and costs of the symbiotic relationship
between zooxanthellae and their coral animal hosts. These
features are presented from the perspectives of each partner
and of the complete association. We suggest that this
approach, albeit somewhat anthropomorphic, is a useful
way to consider the symbiosis and may be helpful in framing
future research directions. Other perspectives may be found
in Wooldridge (2010) and Lesser et al. (2013).
From the animal’s perspective, “sufficient” numbers of
zooxanthellae (partially determined by strain or type of
zooxanthella) must provide some input of energy towards
offsetting its respiratory requirements. A balance must exist
between photosynthetic production and the metabolic cost of
maintaining the algae. The costs include mechanisms to
cope with high oxygen tension (activation and increase in
levels of antioxidant enzymes) and possible regulation of the
growth rate of zooxanthellae (Table 5.1). Since most corals
contain 1  106 cm2 to 6  106 zooxanthellae cm2, it is
likely that this range represents optimal algal densities that
balance the benefits and costs of the symbiosis. Rapid
changes in densities of zooxanthellae in corals due to environmental perturbations, for example coral bleaching in
response to high temperature and algal growth in response
to increase in seawater nutrients, will upset this balance and
may stress the coral by uncoupling algal and animal growth.
From the alga’s perspective, the coral must provide a good

habitat. The “economic” benefit of the partnership may be
viewed as the net return based on the relative costs of the
symbiosis between zooxanthellae and the coral animal (see
also Wooldridge 2010).
Although it is often difficult to evaluate benefits and
costs, obviously when benefits exceed costs there is a net
benefit to sustaining the symbiosis, and the association might
be expected to persist in a stable state. Conversely, when
costs exceed benefits, the net costs could result in the end of
the association. Thus, the persistence and stability of the
symbiotic relationship at both ecological and evolutionary
scales must depend on the net benefit of the symbiosis over
relevant time scales with respect to its ability to withstand
environmental stresses and to compete for space and other
resources with other benthic organisms.
In some cases, benefits or costs of the partnership have
been experimentally verified. For example, the enhancement
of coral calcification by zooxanthellae is documented, both
from comparison of calcification rates of symbiotic and
non-zooxanthellate corals and by the light-enhanced calcification rates of symbiotic corals. In other cases, the
relationships are less obvious. One must recognize that our
knowledge of the costs and benefits of the relationship is
limited. Subtle yet crucial benefits and costs may exist that
we cannot yet identify or quantify: the use of transcriptomic,
proteomic and metabolomic approaches will likely identify
more of these in the future. Moreover, the cumulative effect
of different costs and benefits may not be simply additive.
The interactive and synergistic effects between factors are
not likely to be easily quantified.
The diversity and number of the entries in Table 5.1
suggest that the balance between benefit and cost for the
relationship is highly dynamic and varies according to both
previous and current conditions, as well as the particular
combinations of host and symbiont. Organisms have a physiological minimum and maximum tolerance to, and an optimum value for, any given factor. Within limits, such ranges
of tolerance are useful constructs for the consideration of the
environmental conditions both necessary and sufficient for
survival. We can only speculate whether the susceptibility of
a coral to given stressors will be increased, decreased or
modulated when compared to the susceptibility of the individual partners to the same stressors.
When a coral is stressed to a point where the relationship is
disrupted, the costs of maintaining a symbiosis have clearly
exceeded the benefits. This may provide for the short-term
survival of the coral and of the zooxanthellae, and involve
changes in symbiont populations, as noted above during
bleaching events. When favorable conditions return, the original symbiosis would be expected to be re-established because
the benefits to the coral are required in the long-term.
Disruption of the association by stressors may, in turn,
have major consequences not only for the individual corals

5

Interactions Between Corals and Their Symbiotic Algae

but also for the coral reef ecosystem. A particularly good
example of this can be seen in the effect of temperatureinduced coral bleaching on community structure in the Eastern Tropical Pacific (Glynn 1991). In 1982–1983, a very
strong El Nino-Southern Ocean oscillation (ENSO) event
resulted in severe warming and severe bleaching of corals
in Costa Rica, Panama, Colombia and Ecuador. Mass
mortalities of corals occurred and reef structure changed
substantially. The mass bleaching events of 1999 caused
widespread mortality of corals in the Indo-Pacific, but
many of these reefs have shown signs of recovery
(Wilkinson 2008). Such severe effects notwithstanding, disruption of the symbiosis by stressors may also provide the
opportunity not just to “weather a storm” but to “change
partners” to other zooxanthella taxa or species that can
provide better benefits and lower costs for particular environmental conditions (Buddemeier and Fautin 2004a). For
example, if zooxanthellae with high thermal tolerance successfully populate bleached corals, the new combination
may be more resistant to subsequent high temperature
stresses.
As we consider the factors affecting the costs and benefits
of maintaining the symbiosis, it is appropriate to consider
three questions: (1) Is viewing symbiosis in terms of benefits
and costs a useful way of assessing the ability of a symbiosis
to persist? (2) What are the factors that shift the balance from
benefit (+) to cost () to the symbiotic association? (3) Are
such factors interrelated? Since we are only capable of
making crude determinations of relative cost or benefit of a
given factor, we cannot realistically provide numbers
(limits) for the quantification of benefits and costs. Although
this means that the answer to the first question is “no” in
most cases, consideration of the relative benefits and costs
does facilitate our ability to conceptualize the response of
the symbiotic association to changes in any factor.
Exposure to extremes in temperature, oxygen, salinity
and nutrient supply are all known to destabilize the symbiosis and result in the loss of zooxanthellae (coral bleaching).
Each of these stressors is likely to exact costs of sustaining
the zooxanthellae that are too great, so that either the host
actively expels them or the zooxanthellae leave on their own
accord. The stressor may damage the zooxanthellae, creating
a liability for the host if the cells were to remain in their
tissues. For example, disruption of photosynthetic
membranes by high temperature leads to the uncoupling of
photosynthetic energy transduction and the production of
damaging reactive oxygen species, killing the zooxanthellae
and damaging host cells (Tchernov et al. 2004). As discussed
above, nutrients may also result in the active expulsion of
zooxanthellae by the host following periods of overgrowth.
In this case, symbionts divert carbon from translocate to
growth under conditions of nutrient repletion, and algal
expulsion serves to keep the host from being overgrown by

111

its less beneficial endosymbionts. A disruption of the balance between the animal host and its zooxanthellae may
result in reductions in productivity and coral growth, leading
to possible overgrowth by faster-growing organisms, especially seaweeds. Below we discuss some practical examples
of how natural and anthropogenic stresses to corals affect the
stability of the symbiosis.
The third question was whether factors that affect the net
benefit of the symbiosis interrelate with one another. It is
possible to define a set of conditions under which a symbiosis will persist, and conversely, under which it will not.
Nonetheless, we presently have almost no information
regarding synergistic interactions and the effects of multiple
stress factors on the net benefits to maintaining the
symbiosis.

5.6

Environmental Effects on the Symbiosis

Other chapters in this book review general ecological
features relating to corals and coral reefs. Here, we consider
the stability of coral/zooxanthellae symbioses with respect
to environmental stresses. We approach this topic first from
the perspective of local and regional effects, and then from
the perspective of global environmental changes and effects
through the alteration of the essential factors of sedimentation, light, nutrients, temperature and pH.

5.6.1

Local and Regional Stresses to Symbiotic
Corals

In coastal areas, human population densities are increasing
at an alarming rate, as people are migrating to within a few
hundred kilometers of coasts as was dramatically illustrated
by the tsunami tragedy of 2004. This demographic factor is
having substantial environmental effects in all coastal areas
in temperate and tropical regions, but to date most attention
has been paid to temperate areas. That situation is beginning
to change (cf Knowlton and Jackson 2008). Numerous
meetings of international authorities on coral reefs over the
last two decades have concluded that the cumulative effects
of local coastal development are presenting more immediate
problems than any present global effect such as ozone depletion or enhanced greenhouse effect due to the anthropogenic
release of carbon dioxide. This is particularly important
because much international policy concern has been focused
on controlling greenhouse gases and climate change, while
equivalent concern about recognizing on an international
level the cumulative threat local stressors has only recently
developed (see below).
Human coastal development brings with it increased
inputs of nutrients from sewage and runoff. The process of

112

over-enrichment by anthropogenic nutrient inputs (“cultural
eutrophication”) is widely recognized and is becoming better
understood in tropical environments where coral reefs are
found. The classic example of this is Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii,
where coral reefs suffered greatly from increases in nutrient
inputs and sedimentation (Smith 1981). Without recognition
or fanfare in the formal scientific literature, remarkable
advances in understanding of coral nutrition and maintenance of stable associations has occurred through the work
of aquarium hobbyists. Building on the work of scientists
seeking to improve public aquarium exhibits, they have
revolutionized the ability to maintain and grow corals in
their own homes (Borneman 2001). The work of Adey
(1983), who recognized the importance of macroalgae in
“scrubbing” excess nutrients from aquaria, and Jaubert and
Gattuso (1989), who recognized the value of enhancing
coupled nitrification and denitrification to maintain a
low-N environment, have stimulated the adoption of devices
such as the “Jaubert plenum,” which is an undergravel
biological filter that maintains low N levels in aquaria. The
success of this system illustrates the value of controlling
serious destabilizing effects of high N levels on
zooxanthellate corals. The aquarium hobbyists have also
learned how to maintain proper seawater chemistry to maintain and promote the growth (calcification) of corals.
Increased sedimentation and runoff are two of the most
pronounced early effects of coastal development, and it has
been recognized for some time that global sediment fluxes
from land to sea are increasing (Milliman and Meade 1983).
In mountainous high precipitation areas especially, clearcutting of forests and development of agrarian economies
result in increased levels of water-borne sediments and
nutrients (Sect. 9.2.1), and decreases (or increases in the
seasonal variation in) salinity. These activities have been
associated with a reduction in coral cover and diversity
(Bartley et al. 2014). At the same time, symbiotic corals
can provide a useful temporal record of environmental
changes within a reef ecosystem because of the dependence
of calcification on zooxanthellae; changes in calcification
rate due to variation in parameters such as temperature,
salinity, turbidity, and pollution are recorded in the density
banding patterns of the coral skeletons.
Studies of terrestrial runoff in Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii, and
other places suggest that suspended sediment in the water is
one of the foremost enemies of reef corals (Chaps. 9 and 11).
Although the major effect of sediment on corals is the
accumulation of particles on coral surfaces that interferes
with feeding, turbidity affects the quantity and quality of
light available for photosynthesis, a matter of clear bearing
on the persistence of the coral-zooxanthellae symbiosis, and
on coral calcification. Alteration of light quality and quantity
results both from sediment-related turbidity and indirectly to
phytoplankton growth stimulated by increased nutrient

G. Muller-Parker et al.

loadings (Sect. 9.2) associated with sedimentation and agricultural land practices (increased fertilizer and pesticide
application, slash and burn and deep tillage agriculture)
(see Sect. 5.2.2 on coral nutrition and calcification).
In addition to the effects on corals, these factors can also
affect the trophic structure of the water column overlying
reefs. This in turn may affect the nutrition and stability of the
symbiosis. The predominant effect of elevated nutrient
levels on corals and coral reefs seems to result from altered
trophic structure resulting from overgrowth of corals by
fleshy seaweeds, high bacterial biomass, increased disease
(Chaps. 8, 9, and 11), etc., which are beyond the scope of this
chapter.

5.6.2

Global Stresses to Symbiotic Corals

Scientists are increasingly concerned about the effects of
global stresses and global change on corals and coral reefs
(Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2007). With respect to the coralzooxanthellae symbiosis, global stresses of particular relevance include: (1) increased UV irradiation due to a reduction in the ozone layer; (2) temperature increases due to
global warming and related changes in oceanic circulation
patterns leading to variation in temperature and nutrient
inputs; (3) cumulative increases in nutrients and turbidity
due to industrial and agricultural development; and
(4) reduction in world ocean pH due to CO2-derived
acidification.
The effect of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) on the depletion of the ozone layer and the subsequent increase in the
flux of ultraviolet (UV) light to the Earth’s surface have
received substantial attention with respect to coral reefs.
Conditions that favor photosynthesis by zooxanthellae
expose corals to UV damage. Although corals contain
pigments and anti-oxidant defenses that may afford considerable protection from UV, the effective metabolic cost of
UV protection for the animal and zooxanthellae with respect
to the symbiosis is unknown. If the cost to the symbiosis is
greater than the benefit of light-driven photosynthesis, then
the symbiosis becomes a liability.
Temperature is a crucial factor affecting the stability of
the coral/zooxanthellae symbiosis at the individual level,
and certainly, in a larger sense, of coral reefs (HoeghGuldberg 1999). Limits of temperature tolerance for corals
and well-developed coral reefs are considered to range from
a winter minimum of approximately 18  C to a summer
maximum of approximately 30  C, although to be sure,
thriving reefs are found at either extreme that appear to be
uniquely adapted to such conditions. Early studies on the
effects of temperature stress on photosynthesis and respiration in corals and coral reefs developed from concerns about
the thermal effects of power plant effluents on local biota

5

Interactions Between Corals and Their Symbiotic Algae

(e.g., Coles and Jokiel 1977). However, over the past 30 years
it has become clear that that increases in the frequency of
worldwide bleaching events are related to rising global
temperatures, due to the enhanced greenhouse effect resulting
from anthropogenic emissions of infrared-absorbing greenhouse gases (e.g., Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2007).
Exposure to temperature extremes may or may not affect
the stability of the symbiosis. Both the length of exposure to
and the severity of a given temperature stress or anomaly are
important factors, as is the particular combination of host
and symbiont. As an example, probably the best-known
response that indicates a destabilization of the coral/
zooxanthellae symbiosis, “bleaching,” depends on all three
of these factors (Fitt et al. 2001). Corals bleach, or actively
expel their zooxanthellae most typically when temperatures
increase sharply for a short period of time (+3-4  C, several
days) or increase moderately for a longer period of time
(+0.5-1.5  C, several weeks) (Glynn and D’Croz 1990;
Jokiel and Coles 1990). Since coral calcification, and therefore reef growth, depends on the presence of zooxanthellae,
a gradual rise in sea level with global warming might result
in the demise of coral reefs at low latitudes and a shift to
higher latitudes. The effects of low light and increased
nutrient inputs from global changes in atmospheric deposition and oceanic circulation patterns factors are discussed in
the previous section.
Whether the global extent of disruption of the coral symbiotic association with zooxanthellae will provide an accurate “barometer” of coral reef degradation due to global
climate change remains an issue of debate and uncertainty.
Secular increases in ocean temperatures are very likely to
increase the number of coral bleaching episodes and the
combination of global climate change and local effects is a
serious threat to coral reefs (Buddemeier et al. 2004b).
Bleaching may simply represent a temporary disruption of
the symbiosis that allows each partner to survive the stress
on its own. As Baker (2004) states, “. . .in an era of climate
change and global warming, the continued success of [coral
reef] ecosystems is dependent on the stable association of
these symbionts with the reef-building organisms which
depend upon them.” The potential for new and more tolerant
combinations of partners after bleaching makes this issue
more complicated, but does offer some hope that successful
combinations may ensue. The recent finding that corals and
their zooxanthellae may have greater acclimatory ability
than previously thought (Palumbi et al. 2014; see also
Chap. 7 by Barshis) adds hope.
A concern now looming on the horizon is the prospect of
the “titration” of oceanic pH as a direct effect of anthropogenic CO2 inputs. Hoegh-Guldberg et al. (2007) used conservative IPCC models to estimate that by the end of this
century atmospheric CO2-driven ocean pH reductions could
reach approximately 0.4 units. This change in the ocean’s
carbonate buffer system could lead to an enhancement of

113

photosynthesis in marine algae by increasing the pCO2, but
it may also decrease carbonate saturation and thereby
decrease calcification (Takahashi 2004). The combination
of these two effects would have profound effects on the
distribution of symbiotic corals by reducing the areal extent
of the ocean suitable to sustain coral growth and survival.

5.7

Summary

The symbiotic association with zooxanthellae is clearly beneficial to corals. Increasing evidence has shown that the
symbiotic state is accompanied by sensitivity to environmental stress, since a common response to a stress is the
disruption of the symbiosis, resulting in coral bleaching. The
response is complex, since zooxanthella taxa (or species)
and different species or genotypes of coral animals may have
different adaptive capabilities and tolerances to environmental extremes, and we are just beginning to understand the
role that host-symbiont diversity plays in this process. As the
host animal depends on its complement of zooxanthellae for
reduced carbon compounds, coral death will ensue if stresses
persist for long periods of time or if they are at levels outside
of the tolerance range of the coral and of the zooxanthellae.
Factors that induce a stress response include: light (quantity
and UV), temperature, sewage and run-off inputs (high
nutrients, increased turbidity), salinity (freshwater run-off
from land due to deforestation and other land-use practices),
pH, and physical damage.
Disruption of the symbiotic association, in turn, has potential for use as an indicator of the health of the coral reef
ecosystem. Drastic changes in the stability of the symbiosis,
as evidenced by changes in the ratio of zooxanthellae to
animal biomass in corals, may turn out to be a useful diagnostic indicator of stresses to coral reefs. Present research is
leading to improved understanding of how and when this can
occur, especially as techniques are being refined to assess
relative algal densities non-invasively by in situ fluorescence
readings and reef color assessed by satellites.
Acknowledgements We thank Katrina Helm for drafting Figs. 5.1,
5.2, and 5.3. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. This is Contribution No. 1937 of the Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute.

References
Adey WH (1983) The microcosm: a new tool for reef research. Coral
Reefs 1:193–201
Al-Horani FA, Al-Moghrabi SM, de Beer D (2003) The mechanism of
calcification and its relation to photosynthesis and respiration in the
scleractinian coral Galaxea fascicularis. Mar Biol 142:419–426

114
Baker AC (2003) Flexibility and specificity in coral-algal symbiosis:
diversity, ecology, and biogeography of Symbiodinium. Ann Rev
Ecol Evol Syst 34:661–689
Baker AC (2004) Symbiont diversity on coral reefs and its relationship
to bleaching resistance and resilience. In: Rosenberg E, Loya Y
(eds) Coral health and disease. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 177–194
Baker AC, Starger CJ, McClanahan TR, Glynn PW (2004) Corals’
adaptive response to climate change. Nature 430:741
Banaszak AT, LaJeunesse TD, Trench RK (2000) The synthesis of
mycosporine-like amino acids (MAA’s) by cultured, symbiotic
dinoflagellates. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 249:219–233
Barnes DJ, Chalker BE (1990) Calcification and photosynthesis in reefbuilding corals and algae. In: Dubinsky Z (ed) Ecosystems of the
world, 25: coral reefs. Elsevier, New York, pp 109–131
Bartley R, Bainbridge ZT, Lewis SE, Kroon FJ, Wilkinson SN, Brodie
JE, Silburne DM (2014) Relating sediment impacts on coral reefs to
watershed sources, processes and management: a review. Sci Total
Environ 468–469:1138–1153
Borneman EH (2001) Aquarium corals: selection, husbandry, and natural history. Microcosm Ltd., Charlotte
Buddemeier RW, Fautin DG (1993) Coral bleaching as an adaptive
mechanism. Bioscience 43:320–326
Buddemeier RW, Baker AC, Fautin DG et al (2004a) The adaptive
hypothesis of bleaching. In: Rosenberg E, Loya Y (eds) Coral health
and disease. Springer, New York, pp 427–444
Buddemeier RW, Kleypas JA, Aronson RB (2004b) Coral reefs &
global climate change: potential contributions of climate change
to stresses on coral reef ecosystems. Pew Center on Global Climate
Change, Arlington
Chen CA, Wang J-T, Fang L-S, Yang Y-W (2005) Fluctuating algal
symbiont communities in Acropora palifera (Scleractinia:
Acroporidae) from Taiwan. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 295:113–121
Coffroth MA, Santos SR, Goulet TL (2001) Early ontogenetic expression
of specificity in a Cnidarian-algal symbiosis. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
222:85–96
Coles SL, Brown BE (2003) Coral bleaching – capacity for
acclimatization and adaptation. Adv Mar Biol 46:181–223
Coles SL, Jokiel PL (1977) Effects of temperature on photosynthesis
and respiration in hermatypic corals. Mar Biol 43:209–216
Cook CB, D’Elia CF (1987) Are zooxanthellae ever nutrient-limited?
Symbiosis 4:199–212
Cumbo VR, Baird AH, van Oppen MJH (2013) The promiscuous
larvae: flexibility in the establishment of symbiosis in corals.
Coral Reefs 32:111–120
Cunning R, Baker AC (2013) Excess algal symbionts increase the
susceptibility of reef corals to bleaching. Nat Clim Chang
3:259–262
D’Elia CF, Cook CB (1988) Methylamine uptake by zooxanthellaeinvertebrate symbioses: insights into host ammonium environment
and nutrition. Limnol Oceanogr 33:1153–1165
D’Elia CF, Domotor SL, Webb KL (1983) Nutrient uptake kinetics of
freshly isolated zooxanthellae. Mar Biol 75:157–167
Davy SK, Allemand D, Weis VM (2012) Cell biology of cnidariandinoflagellate symbiosis. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 76:229–261
Dunlap WC, Chalker BE (1986) Identification and quantitation of nearUV absorbing compounds (S-320) in a hermatypic scleractinian.
Coral Reefs 5:155–159
Enrı́guez S, Méndez ER, Iglesias-Prieto R (2005) Multiple scattering
on coral skeletons enhances light absorption by symbiotic algae.
Limnol Oceangr 50:1025–1032
Fagoonee I, Wilson HB, Hassell MP et al (1999) The dynamics of
zooxanthellae populations: a long-term study in the field. Science
283:843–845
Falkowski PG, Dubinsky Z, Muscatine L, McCloskey L (1993) Population control in symbiotic corals. Bioscience 43:606–611

G. Muller-Parker et al.
Fay SA, Weber MX (2012) The occurrence of mixed infections of
Symbiodinium (Dinoflagellata) within individual hosts. J Phycol
48:1306–1316
Finney JC, Pettay DT, Sampayo EM et al (2010) The relative significance of host-habitat, depth, and geography on the ecology, endemism, and speciation of coral endosymbionts in the genus
Symbiodinium. Microb Ecol 60:250–263
Fitt WK (1984) The role of chemosensory behavior of Symbiodinium
microadriaticum, intermediate hosts, and host behavior in the infection of coelenterates and molluscs with zooxanthellae. Mar Biol
81:9–17
Fitt WK, McFarland FK, Warner ME, Chilcoat GC (2000) Seasonal
patterns of tissue biomass and densities of symbiotic dinoflagellates
in reef corals and relation to coral bleaching. Limnol Oceanogr
45:677–685
Fitt WK, Brown BE, Warner ME, Dunne RP (2001) Coral bleaching:
interpretation of thermal tolerance limits and thermal thresholds in
tropical corals. Coral Reefs 20:51–65
Fitt WK, Gates RD, Hoegh-Guldberg O et al (2009) Response of two
species of Indo-Pacific corals, Porites cylindrica and Stylophora
pistillata, to short-term thermal stress: the host does matter in
determining the tolerance of corals to bleaching. J Exp Mar Biol
Ecol 373:102–110
Fransolet D, Roberty S, Plumier J-C (2012) Establishment of endosymbiosis: the case of cnidarians and Symbiodinium. J Exp Mar Biol
Ecol 420:1–7
Gattuso J-P, Allemand D, Frankignolle M (1999) Photosynthesis and
calcification at cellular, organismal and community levels in coral
reefs: a review on interactions and control by carbonate chemistry.
Am Zool 39:160–183
Glynn PW (1991) Coral reef bleaching in the 1980s and possible
connections with global warming. Trends Ecol Evol 6:175–179
Glynn PW, D’Croz L (1990) Experimental evidence for high temperature stress as the cause of El Niño-coincident coral mortality. Coral
Reefs 8:181–191
Godinot C, Ferrier-Pagès C, Sikorski S et al (2013) Alkaline phosphatase activity of reef-building corals. Limnol Oceangr 58:227–234
Grottoli AG, Rodrigues LJ, Palardy JE (2007) Heterotrophic plasticity
and resilience in bleached corals. Nature 440:1186–1189
Harland AD, Nganro NR (1990) Copper uptake by the sea anemone
Anemonia viridis and the role of zooxanthellae in metal regulation.
Mar Biol 104:297–301
Hatcher BG (1988) The primary productivity of coral reefs: a beggar’s
banquet. Trends Ecol Evol 3:106–111
Hatcher BG (1997) Organic production and decomposition. In:
Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman & Hall,
New York, pp 140–174
Heikoop JM, Dunn JJ, Risk MJ et al (1998) Relationship between light
and the δ15N of coral tissue: examples from Jamaica and Zanzibar.
Limnol Oceanogr 43:909–920
Hirose M, Kinzie RA III, Hidaka M (2001) Timing and process of entry
of zooxanthellae into oocytes of hermatypic corals. Coral Reefs
20:273–280
Hoegh-Guldberg O (1994) Population dynamics of symbiotic
zooxanthellae in the coral Pocillopora damicornis exposed to elevated ammonium concentrations. Pac Sci 48:263–272
Hoegh-Guldberg O (1999) Climate change, coral bleaching and the
future of the world’s coral reefs. Mar Freshwat Res 50:839–866
Hoegh-Guldberg O, Williamson J (1999) Availability of two forms of
nitrogen in the coral Pocillopora damicornis and its symbiotic
zooxanthellae. Mar Biol 133:561–570
Hoegh-Guldberg O, Mumby PJ, Hooten AJ et al (2007) Coral reefs
under rapid climate change and ocean acidification. Science
318:1737–1742

5

Interactions Between Corals and Their Symbiotic Algae

Hollingsworth LL, Kinzie RA III, Lewis TD et al (2005) Phototaxis of
motile zooxanthellae to green light may facilitate symbiont capture
by coral larvae. Coral Reefs 24:523
Iglesias-Prieto R, Beltrán VH, LaJeunesse TC et al (2004) Different
algal symbionts explain the vertical distribution of dominant reef
corals in the eastern Pacific. Proc R Soc Lond B 271:1757–1763
Jaubert J, Gattuso J-P (1989) An integrated nitrifying-denitrifying
biological system capable of purifying seawater in a closed circuit
system Deuxieme Congres International d’Aquariologie. Bulletin
de l’Institut Oceanographique, Monaco, No. special 5, Monaco,
pp 101–106
Jokiel PL, Coles SL (1990) Response of Hawaiian and other
Indo-Pacific reef corals to elevated temperature. Coral Reefs
8:155–162
Kawaguti S (1953) Ammonium metabolism of the reef corals. Biol J
Okayama Univ 1:171–176
Kemp DW, Hernandez-Pech X, Iglesias-Prieto R et al (2014) Community dynamics and physiology of Symbiodinium spp. before, during,
and after a coral bleaching event. Limnol Oceangr 59:788–797
Knowlton N, Jackson JBC (2008) Shifting baselines, local impacts, and
global change on coral reefs. PLoS Biol 6:215–220
Knowlton N, Rohwer F (2004) Multispecies microbial mutualisms on
coral reefs: the host as a habitat. Am Nat 162(Suppl):S51–S62
Kopp C, Pernice M, Domart-Coulon I et al (2013) Highly dynamic
cellular-level response of symbiotic coral to a sudden increase in
environmental nitrogen. mBio 4:e00052–00013
LaJeunesse TC (2002) Diversity and community structure of symbiotic
dinoflagellates from Caribbean coral reefs. Mar Biol 141:387–400
LaJeunesse TC, Pettay DT, Sampayo EM et al (2010) Long-standing
environmental conditions, geographic isolation and host-symbiont
specificity influence the relative ecological dominance and genetic
diversification of coral endosymbionts in the genus Symbiodinium. J
Biogeogr 37:785–800
LaJeunesse TC, Parkinson JE, Reimer JD (2012) A genetics-based
description of Symbiodinium minutum sp. nov. and
S. psygmophilum sp. nov. (Dinophyceae), two dinoflagellates symbiotic with Cnidaria. J Phycol 48:1380–1391
Lesser MP (1997) Oxidative stress causes coral bleaching during exposure to elevated temperatures. Coral Reefs 16:187–192
Lesser MP, Stat M, Gates RD (2013) The endosymbiotic
dinoflagellates (Symbiodinium sp.) of corals are parasites and
mutualists. Coral Reefs 32:603–611
Lipschultz F, Cook CB (2002) Uptake and assimilation of 15N-ammonium by the symbiotic sea anemones Bartholomea annulata and
Aiptasia pallida: conservation versus recycling of nitrogen. Mar
Biol 140:489–502
Little AF, Van Oppen MJH, Willis BL (2004) Flexibility in algal
endosymbioses shapes growth in reef corals. Science
304:1492–1494
Marubini F, Davies PS (1996) Nitrate increases zooxanthellae population density and reduces skeletogenesis in corals. Mar Biol
127:319–332
Mazel CH, Lesser MP, Gorbunov MY et al (2003) Green-fluorescent
proteins in Caribbean corals. Limnol Oceangr 48:402–411
Mieog JC, Olsen JL, Berkelmans R, Bleuler-Martinez SA et al (2009)
The roles and interactions of symbiont, host and environment in
defining coral fitness. PLoS ONE 4:e6364
Miller DJ, Yellowlees D (1989) Inorganic nitrogen uptake by symbiotic
marine cnidarians: a critical review. Proc R Soc Lond B
237:109–125
Milliman JD, Meade RH (1983) Worldwide delivery of river sediment
to the oceans. J Geol 91:1–21
Muller-Parker G, Cook CB, D’Elia CF (1994) Elemental composition
of the coral Pocillopora damicornis exposed to elevated seawater
ammonium. Pac Sci 48:234–246

115
Muscatine L, D’Elia CF (1978) The uptake, retention, and release of
ammonium by reef corals. Limnol Oceanogr 23:725–734
Muscatine L, Kaplan IR (1994) Resource partitioning by reef corals as
determined from stable isotope composition. II. δ15N of
zooxanthellae and animal tissue versus depth. Pac Sci 48:304–312
Muscatine L, Porter JW (1977) Reef corals: mutualistic symbioses
adapted to nutrient-poor environments. Bioscience 27:454–459
Muscatine L, Porter JW, Kaplan IR (1989) Resource partitioning by
reef corals as determined from stable isotope composition. I. d13C
of zooxanthellae and animal tissue vs depth. Mar Biol 100:185–193
Palumbi SR, Barshis DJ, Traylor-Knowles N et al (2014) Mechanisms
of reef coral resistance to future climate change. Science
344:895–897
Pasternak Z, Bchar A, Abelson A, Achituv Y (2004) Initiation of
symbiosis between the soft coral Heteroxenia fuscescens and its
zooxanthellae. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 279:113–116
Rees TAV (1987) The green hydra symbiosis and ammonium I. The
role of the host in ammonium assimilation and its possible regulatory significance. Proc R Soc Lond B 229:299–314
Richmond RH, Hunter CL (1990) Reproduction and recruitment of
corals: comparisons among the Caribbean, the tropical Pacific,
and the Red Sea. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 60:185–203
Roth MS, Deheyn DD (2013) Effects of cold stress and heat stress on
coral fluorescence in reef-building corals. Sci Rpt 3: doi:10.1038/
srep01421
Rowan R (1991) Molecular systematics of symbiotic algae. J Phycol
27:661–666
Rowan R, Knowlton N (1995) Intraspecific diversity and ecological
zonation in coral/algal symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
92:2850–2853
Rowan R, Powers DA (1992) Ribosomal RNA sequences and the
diversity of symbiotic dinoflagellates (zooxanthellae). Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 89:3639–3643
Salih A, Larkum AWD, Cox G, Kuhl M, Hoegh-Guldberg O (2000)
Fluorescent pigments in corals are photoprotective. Nature
408:850–853
Santos SR, Coffroth MA (2003) Molecular evidence that
dinoflagellates belonging to the genus Symbiodinium Freudenthal
are haploid. Biol Bull 204:10–20
Simkiss K (1964) Phosphates as crystal poisons of calcification. Biol
Rev 39:487–505
Smith SV (1981) Responses of Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii, to relaxation of
sewage stress. In: Neilson BJ, Cronin LE (eds) Estuaries and
nutrients. Humana Press, Clifton, pp 391–441
Stat M, Carter D, Hoegh-Guldberg O (2006) The evolutionary history
of Symbiodinium and scleractinian hosts—symbiosis, diversity, and
the effect of climate change. Perspect Plant Ecol Evol Syst 8:23–43s
Stat M, Baker AC, Bourne DG et al (2012) Molecular delineation of
species in the coral holobiont. Adv Mar Biol 63:1–65
Swanson R, Hoegh-Guldberg O (1998) Amino acid synthesis in the
symbiotic sea anemone Aiptasia pulchella. Mar Biol 131:83–93
Szmant AM, Ferrer LM, Fitzgerald LM (1990) Nitrogen excretion and
O:N ratios in reef corals: evidence for conservation of nitrogen. Mar
Biol 104:119–127
Takabayashi M, Adams LM, Pochon X, Gates RD (2012) Genetic
diversity of free-living Symbiodinium in surface water and sediment
of Hawai’i and Florida. Coral Reefs 31:157–167
Takahashi T (2004) Fate of industrial carbon dioxide. Science
305:352–353
Tchernov D, Gorbunov MY, de Vargas C et al (2004) Membrane lipids
of symbiotic algae are diagnostic of sensitivity to thermal bleaching
in corals. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:13531–13535
Thomas FIM, Atkinson MJ (1997) Ammonium uptake by coral reefs:
effects of water velocity and surface roughness on mass transfer.
Limnol Oceangr 42:81–88

116
Thornhill DJ, LaJeunesse TC, Kemp DW et al (2006) Multi-year,
seasonal genotypic surveys of coral-algal symbioses reveal
prevalent stability or post-bleaching reversion. Mar Biol
148:711–722
Trench RK (1987) Dinoflagellates in non-parasitic symbioses. In:
Taylor FJR (ed) The biology of dinoflagellates. Blackwell Scientific
Publications, Oxford, pp 530–570
Trench RK (1993) Microalgal-invertebrate symbioses: a review.
Endocyt Cell Res 9:135–175
Veron JEN (2000) Corals of the world, V1. Australian Institute of
Marine Science, Townsville
Veron JEN, Pichon M (1976) Scleractinia of Eastern Australia. Part
I. Families Thamnesteriidae, Astrocoeniidae, Pocilloporidae. Austr
Inst Mar Sci Monogr Ser I:1–86

G. Muller-Parker et al.
Wiedenmann J, D’Angelo C, Smith EG et al (2012) Nutrient enrichment can increase the susceptibility of reef corals to bleaching. Nat
Clim Chang 3:160–164
Wilkinson C (2008) Status of coral reefs of the world: 2008. Global
Coral Reef Monitoring Network and Reef and Rainforest Research
Centre, Townsville
Wooldridge SA (2009) Water quality and coral bleaching thresholds:
formalising the linkage for the inshore reefs of the Great Barrier
Reef, Australia. Mar Pollut Bull 58:745–751
Wooldridge SA (2010) Is the coral-algae symbiosis really ‘mutually
beneficial’ for the partners? Bioessays 32:615–625
Yonge CM, Nicholls AG (1931) Studies on the physiology of corals.
IV. The structure, distribution and physiology of zooxanthellae. Sci
Rep Great Barrier Reef Exped 1:135–176

6

Exploring Coral Reefs Using the Tools
of Molecular Genetics
Nancy Knowlton and Matthieu Leray

Abstract

The tools of molecular genetics have been transformed over the last decades and have in
turn transformed our understanding of coral reefs. Initially limited to information on single
genes, we are now capable of analyzing entire genomes. These developments make it
possible to do many things that were either impossible or extremely difficult before:
identify cryptic species, microbes, larvae and gut contents; determine relationships
among populations and species; characterize reproductive and dispersal patterns; infer
mechanisms of speciation; and soon perhaps embark on genetic engineering. Notably,
many aspects of coral reef conservation can and will increasingly benefit from insights
derived from the application of molecular genetic tools.
Keywords

Identification  Bioinformatics  Barcoding  Phylogenetics  Speciation

6.1

Introduction

As in other fields of biology, the tools of molecular genetics
have transformed our understanding of coral reefs, giving us
information that is difficult or impossible to access with the
naked eye, or even high-powered microscopes. Though
molecular genetics is no substitute for a deep understanding
of the natural history of coral reefs, there is also no doubting
the transformative advances that these tools have made
possible. Indeed, molecular genetic methods have become
so commonplace that this chapter can only touch on a few of
the many contributions that have been made in this field.
Using “DNA” and “coral reef” or “coral reefs” as coupled
search terms yields over 600 papers published from 2000 to
2014 on the Web of Science.

N. Knowlton (*)  M. Leray
Department of Invertebrate Zoology, National Museum of Natural
History, Smithsonian Institution, MRC 163, 37012 Washington, DC
20013-7012, USA
e-mail: knowlton@si.edu; leray.upmc@gmail.com

Underpinning this progress in understanding have been
enormous technical advances, permitting ever more powerful analytic tools to be employed. Those who have witnessed
the history over decades of the sequential adoption by coral
reef scientists of new genetic tools and approaches (e.g.,
protein electrophoresis, the polymerase chain reaction,
restriction fragment length polymorphism, Sanger sequencing, microsatellites, microarrays, and high-throughput
sequencing technologies; see Glossary) know that what
today seems doable but challenging will be routine in the
not-too-distant future. A high-throughput DNA sequencer
has even been brought on a ship to analyze samples from
some of the most remote reefs of the central Pacific (Lim
et al. 2014). In fact, the difficulties and costs associated with
collecting molecular data are declining so precipitously that
we now face an entirely new challenge, namely how to
analyze the massive amounts of data that can be obtained.
The biggest obstacles to be overcome are increasingly in the
realm of bioinformatics.
With this history of rapid methodological turnover in
mind, our chapter will concentrate on important discoveries
based on molecular methods, rather than focusing in detail

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_6

117

118

N. Knowlton and M. Leray

on specific techniques. The discoveries to be reviewed fall
into seven fields: (1) species identification, (2) ecological
relationships, (3) population structure, (4) evolutionary
relationships, (5) speciation, (6) sexual systems, and
(7) physiology and development. The chapter will conclude
with a discussion of how molecular genetics may contribute
to the conservation of coral reef organisms in the context of
global change.

6.2

Species Identification

Many coral reef species are notoriously difficult to identify
because of the problem of cryptic or sibling species, that is
species that are difficult to distinguish using conventional
morphological traits (Knowlton and Jackson 1994). Factors
contributing to this problem include (1) paucity of diagnostic
characters, (2) traditional preservation methods that eliminate informative characters such as color pattern, and (3) the
fact that in many marine species, mate recognition is
mediated by chemical cues rather than traits that are easily
recognized by scientists.
The existence of complexes of cryptic species is typically
confirmed using molecular genetic approaches (Knowlton
2000), although subtle morphological differences can often
be detected in retrospect (e.g., Jackson and Cheetham 1990).
Cryptic species complexes discovered using these methods
are now so numerous as to defy summary, but they have
notably included dominant members of coral reef
ecosystems, such as the Caribbean coral Orbicella (formerly
Montastraea) annularis (Fukami et al. 2004), the Indo-west
Pacific coral Stylophora pistillata (Keshavmurthy
et al. 2013) (Fig. 6.1), the Indo-Pacific crown-of-thorns
seastar Acanthaster planci (Vogler et al. 2008), and the
snapping shrimp symbiont of corals Alpheus lottini
(Williams et al. 2003).
In some cases widespread “species” are now recognized
as large numbers of geographically circumscribed taxa (e.g.,
the gastropod Astralium in the archipelagoes of the IndoWest Pacific, Meyer et al. 2005); in other cases large numbers of cryptic species are found to be sympatric (e.g., the
brown alga Lobophora in New Caledonia, Vieira
et al. 2014). The criteria for distinguishing cryptic species
in sympatry are relatively straightforward. For nuclear
genes, fixed differences between groups with no heterozygote individuals is strongly suggestive of the absence of
interbreeding. For mitochondrial loci, the strict association
of a diagnostic mitochondrial difference with another independent difference (molecular or morphological) is similarly
informative. In cases of allopatry, there is more room for
argument, as there is no universally accepted genetic definition of a species. However, groups defined by multiple fixed
independent differences (e.g., Meyer et al. 2005) or by large

genetic differences at a single locus (e.g., Vogler et al. 2008)
are often recognized as distinct species.
The facility with which species can be identified by
molecular traits has led to the widespread adoption of
DNA “barcoding” of standard genetic markers [e.g. for
animals, a portion of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase
I (COI) gene]. The result has been the growth of barcode
data in genetic databases [e.g., GenBank, Barcode of Life
Data Systems (BOLD)], thereby facilitating the identification of specimens and comparisons across studies. However,
the ability of a single mitochondrial gene to reliably define
species depends on there being a consistent gap between the
amount of variation that typically exists within species versus between species. Studies of cowries, a highly diverse and
taxonomically well-known group often associated with coral
reefs, suggest that error rates (recognizing taxa that are not
distinct species or failing to recognize taxa that are) are not
trivial (Meyer and Paulay 2005).
Moreover, some animals, including unfortunately corals,
exhibit very little genetic variation in the mitochondrial
genome, limiting the utility of COI-based barcoding for
these groups (Shearer and Coffroth 2008; Huang
et al. 2008). In some cases other genes have been surveyed
and show promise [e.g., in octocorals, McFadden
et al. (2011)]. Nevertheless, a mixture of genetic and other
traits is often needed to distinguish closely related species in
these problematic groups, and many unresolved species
complexes remain (Prada et al. 2014a). The development
of high-throughput sequencing, which allows the routine
sequencing of numerous stretches of DNA simultaneously,
may make a focus on particular barcoding genes obsolete.
Despite these limitations, DNA barcoding has found a
wide variety of applications. For example, even in species
that are readily distinguished as adults, barcoding is far more
reliable for identifying egg and larval stages (Hubert
et al. 2015), although identification efficiency depends on
having a good database against which to match sequences,
which is lacking for many groups and locations (Puillandre
et al. 2009; Leray and Knowlton 2015). DNA barcoding also
has the potential to dramatically increase our understanding
of coral reef diversity as a whole by expanding analyses
beyond the relatively small number of groups that are conspicuous and well known taxonomically [such as those surveyed by Roberts et al. (2002)]. For example, Plaisance
et al. (2011) (Fig. 6.2) found 168 barcode-defined species
(i.e. Operational Taxonomic Units or OTUs) of brachyuran
crabs in just 6.3 m2 of coral reef samples, a number
representing almost 80 % of the diversity of this group for
all European seas. These methods are also now being used
for coral reef fisheries assessment. In the US, mislabeling of
red snapper, a depleted reef fish, was found to be so extensive that 77 % of fish so labeled were likely other species,
in some cases from distant locations (Marko et al. 2004).

6

Exploring Coral Reefs Using the Tools of Molecular Genetics

119

Fig. 6.1 DNA analysis has helped recognize that many species of fish
and invertebrates that were once thought to have widespread
distributions are in fact made up of multiple distinct genetic lineages.
For example, Keshavmurthy et al. (2013, figure above modified from

Figs. 1 and 2) used DNA barcoding to identify four distinct genetic
clades in the widely distributed coral species Stylophora pistillata. The
degree of differentiation suggests that they diverged from one another
51.5–29.6 million years ago

In Belize, 5–7 % of all fillets tested from markets and
restaurants were found to be illegally harvested parrotfish,
and 32–51 % of the fillets tested were misidentified (Cox
et al. 2013).
Finally, traditional DNA barcoding efforts require
identifying organisms one specimen at a time. The relatively
recent application of high-throughput sequencing
approaches promises to transform this field, because tens
of thousands of sequences can be obtained from analyses
of a single sample. Censusing diversity by barcoding DNA
from samples of the environment containing many

organisms is termed metabarcoding. This approach has
been widely used to assess microbial diversity based on the
16S rRNA gene (the standard barcode for Bacteria) and has
revealed staggering numbers of taxa, including on coral
reefs. For example, it was estimated that a single 115 m
transect would yield from 135,326 to 468,600 bacterial
taxa, with algae harboring an even more diverse community
of Bacteria than corals (Barrott et al. 2011). High-throughput
sequencing has also been used to detect rare Symbiodinium
within coral tissues (Quigley et al. 2014). Ironically,
metabarcoding of multicellular eukaryotes has been more

120

Fig. 6.2 Fish and corals have traditionally been used as surrogates to
assess patterns of diversity on coral reefs because they are taxonomically well documented. However, short DNA sequences (barcodes) can
now supplement traditional morphological approaches when identification can otherwise be time consuming, such as in decapods (A: Calcinus
sp., B: Saron sp., C: Galathea cf. ahyongi, D: Epiactaea sp., E:

N. Knowlton and M. Leray

Daldorfia sp.; all collected in the Red Sea; photo credit: Matthieu
Leray). Plaisance et al. (2011, top panel modified from Fig. 4) used
standardized sampling of dead coral heads and settlement structures
(ARMS) with DNA barcoding to describe a gradient of decapod diversity across seven sites; even with large samples diversity had not
reached a plateau in most locations

6

Exploring Coral Reefs Using the Tools of Molecular Genetics

technically challenging, although applications for these
organisms are also increasing (Leray et al. 2013; Leray and
Knowlton 2015).

6.3

Ecological Relationships

Knowing what species are found where underpins most
ecological analyses. For this reason, the identification of
species using molecular tools, as described above, has
transformed understanding of coral reef ecology in a number
of areas where traditional methods for identification are
time-consuming or inefficient. Here we review three: microbial symbiotic associations between corals and
dinoflagellates, coral disease, and the dietary niches of
reef fish.
If one had to choose a single area of coral reef science that
has been most transformed by molecular genetics, it would
be our understanding of the ecology of the symbiosis of
corals and other coral reef organisms with dinoflagellates
belonging to the genus Symbiodinium (Chap. 5). Indeed, a
large proportion of the knowledge reviewed in Chap. 5 is due
to the molecular methods that allow one to identify these
single celled organisms, many of which cannot be readily
discriminated morphologically. It is even possible to extract
and sequence Symbiodinium DNA from museum specimens
of octocorals collected over 150 years ago (Baker
et al. 2013).
Previous research spanning decades on host-symbiont
associations was upended by the realization that what was
once thought to be a single species, S. microadriaticum, was
in fact many. The initial discoveries were supported by
protein electrophoresis and indicated that different hosts
harbored genetically distinct symbionts; later work using
DNA–based approaches revealed enormous diversity
distributed among multiple subgenera of Symbiodinium
(reviewed by Baker 2003). Multiple surveys have revealed
some generalist and many specialist taxa with respect to
host, and a wide variety of habitat preferences with respect
to light and temperature [e.g. as in a recent survey of the
northern Great Barrier Reef, Tonk et al. (2014)]. Discoveries
of even more ecological specialization continue as additional cryptic diversity of both hosts and symbionts is uncovered (Prada et al. 2014b). The discovery of novel symbionts
in unusually warm waters is of particular interest in the
context of global warming [for a recent example see Hume
et al. (2015)].
Symbiodinium are, of course, not the only microbial
associates of corals and coral reefs. Like dinoflagellates,
the Bacteria, Archaea, Fungi and protists found on and in
the waters associated with coral reefs can only be easily
studied with molecular genetic tools. These organisms
have been the subject of especially intensive research of

121

late, in part because of the increasing importance of coral
disease on many coral reefs (Chap. 8). Analyses of changes
in the microbial communities in corals in response to stress
have revealed that manipulations of temperature, pH,
nutrients, and dissolved organic carbon each result in distinct changes in the microbial communities (Thurber
et al. 2009). Similarly, water samples taken from reefs
characterized by different levels of overfishing have distinctive microbial communities, with more potential pathogens
in the waters of the most anthropogenically impacted reefs
(Dinsdale et al. 2008). DNA-based diagnostic tools for coral
diseases have considerable and still largely untapped potential (Pollock et al. 2011).
Turning to the larger organisms on reefs, who eats whom
is central to ecological understanding. Because observations
of predation events are scarce even for conspicuous species,
gut contents have been the traditional source of dietary
information for fishes, the only group that has been intensively studied in this regard. However, there have been very
few comprehensive analyses due to the diversity of potential
prey combined with the difficulty of identifying semidigested material (Bascompte et al. 2005). Molecular analysis of gut contents eliminates some of these challenges; a
barcoding analysis of the gut contents of Mexican lionfish,
for example, detected 34 species of prey from
157 individuals (Valdez-Moreno et al. 2012).
Metabarcoding approaches (see above) provide even more
information because they can characterize DNA from tissue
slurries. The power of this approach is exemplified by a
recent analysis of 16 reef fish guts (Leray et al. 2013)
(Fig. 6.3), which revealed the presence of 334 prey taxa
belonging to 14 phyla, 52.5 % of which could be identified
to species by matches to genetic databases. Broad-scale
application of this approach is likely to reveal diets that are
more diverse than has been realized to date.

6.4

Population Structure

Long before molecular genetic data were available,
scientists understood that marine species have far greater
potential for long-distance dispersal than do terrestrial species. Dispersal typically takes places during the larval stage,
but long distances can also be traversed by adults in some
species. However, only with molecular genetic data has it
been possible to evaluate clearly the extent to which that
potential is realized.
Coral reef species vary considerably in this regard. In
some cases, genetic data indicate surprisingly little genetic
differentiation across large distances, for example across the
5000 km separating the reefs of the central and eastern
Pacific (Lessios and Robertson 2006). In other cases, there
is far more genetic structure dividing populations separated

122

N. Knowlton and M. Leray

Fig. 6.3 Consumer-resource interactions are difficult to document on
coral reefs and have often relied on morphological identification of
prey remains in guts. However, genetic analyses have proven very
powerful because they allow the detection of prey-specific DNA
fragments from unidentifiable prey items (tissue homogenate, left

image, photo credit: Matthieu Leray) even after several hours of digestion. For example, Leray et al. (2013, bar graph modified from Fig. 4a)
used high-throughput sequencing to unveil the wide diversity of prey in
the gut contents of Nectamia savayensis (right image, photo credit:
Jeffrey T Williams), Myripristis berndti and Sargocentron microstoma

by short distances than might be expected (Barber
et al. 2000; Rocha et al. 2005). Moreover, a recent study
showing little difference in genetic diversity between closely
related narrowly endemic versus widespread species
(Delrieu-Trottin et al. 2014) suggests that genetic connectivity between widely separated populations is less than might
be expected based simply on genetic differentiation.
Patterns of genetic connectivity have been of particular
interest in the context of knowing the extent to which
populations are self-sustaining. Some of the best data come
from detailed analyses of anemonefishes, where it is possible
to extensively sample adults and juveniles because of the
discrete and conspicuous nature of the anemone host habitat.
Results based on genetic parentage analysis vary widely
depending on the setting, with more isolated sites exhibiting,
as expected, more self-recruitment (Saenz-Agudelo
et al. 2011). Moreover, even high levels of self-recruitment
in contemporary time do not preclude long-distance genetic
exchange over evolutionary time. One anemonefish species
restricted to three offshore reefs in subtropical Australia had
68–84 % self-recruitment based on microsatellite analyses,
whereas past connectivity over evolutionary time explained

the shared mitochondrial lineages across locations (van der
Meer et al. 2012). In the three-spot dascyllus, not only is
some recruitment localized, but a pair of likely full sibs
(based on their genetic similarity) were observed to settle
together on a single night after spending nearly a month in
the plankton (Bernardi et al. 2012).
The extent of routine connectivity between locations has
important implications for the design of marine protected
areas and other management decisions (Rocha et al. 2007).
For example, Almany et al. (2013) (Fig. 6.4) documented
that larvae of the squaretail coral grouper, a commercially
important fish, often settle within 30 kms of their parents,
suggesting that local communities could benefit directly by
protecting spawning populations.
Patterns of genetic connectivity are also important for
understanding sources of population explosions such as
occur in the coral-eating seastar Acanthaster planci. One
explanation for the temporal patterning of outbreaks is that
an initial outbreak would seed secondary outbreaks via larval dispersal. In the central Pacific, unlike the Great Barrier
Reef, the genetic distinctiveness of populations from different archipelagoes does not support a seeding hypothesis,

6

Exploring Coral Reefs Using the Tools of Molecular Genetics

123

Fig. 6.4 Measuring the benefit
of management actions for
fisheries requires direct estimates
of larval export for the
replenishment of adjacent
populations. Parentage analysis
using microsatellites has been
used as a tool to estimate
distances of larval dispersal by
assigning juveniles to their
parents. Using this approach,
Almany et al. (2013, panel above
from Fig. 2) showed that 50 % of
larvae produced by a managed
spawning aggregation of
squaretail coral grouper
(Plectropomus arelolatus) settled
within 14 kms of the aggregation,
suggesting that management can
provide fisheries benefits over
small spatial scales

suggesting that clustering of outbreaks is instead due to
shared environmental conditions (Timmers et al. 2012).
Finally, molecular genetic data allow one to estimate the
demographic history of a species based on DNA sequence
variation in extant populations. One of the most interesting
case studies involves the Caribbean sea urchin Diadema
antillarum, because of the potential for a genetic bottleneck
following the loss of more than 97 % of its numbers due to a
disease in the 1980s and because of the possibility that
overfishing might have caused it to be more abundant immediately prior to the disease than it was in the more distant
past. Surprisingly, genetic analyses supported neither of
these scenarios, suggesting that the population of
D. antillarum expanded more than 100,000 years ago with
no loss of genetic variability following the recent population
crash (Lessios et al. 2001).

6.5

Evolutionary Relationships

Our understanding of the evolutionary relationships among
species has been transformed thanks to the application of
molecular genetic methods in many groups, with coral reef
organisms being no exception. These studies initially

focused on mitochondrial genes, but phylogenetic studies
now routinely involve multiple mitochondrial and nuclear
genes.
Nowhere has this approach been more revolutionary in its
findings than in the corals themselves, and hypotheses about
relationships based on traditional morphological characters
have been in many cases overturned following the application of molecular methods. One of the first major upheavals
came with the establishment that corals could be divided into
the so-called robust and complex corals, two highly divergent lineages that represent groupings quite distinctive from
traditional arrangements of suborders (Romano and Palumbi
1996). Subsequent molecular analyses confirmed these
results and showed that traditional families were also often
unsupported (Fukami et al. 2008; Kitahara et al. 2010)
(Fig. 6.5). Indeed, molecular genetic analyses have shown
that some Atlantic genera conventionally assigned to different families are more closely related to each other than they
are to “congeneric” taxa from the Pacific, suggesting a much
deeper divide between Atlantic and Pacific reef groups than
usually assumed. Considerable work on various sections of
the scleractinian tree (e.g. Huang et al. 2014) will be
required to sort out the many taxonomic messes that remain
at a variety of taxonomic levels.

124
Fig. 6.5 Molecular analyses
have had a profound impact on
our understanding of evolutionary
relationships of many coral reef
organisms, including corals.
Kitahara et al. (2010, tree above
from Fig. 1), in a recent
comprehensive phylogenetic
analysis of scleractinian corals,
showed that deep-sea
azooxanthellate species are basal
to the group and most recognized
shallow-water zooxanthellate
families are polyphyletic. In some
cases, Atlantic and Pacific species
once thought to belong to the
same genus, are now placed in
different families, such as
Homophyllia (formerly Scolymia)
australis from the Pacific
(Lobophylliidae, left image) and
Scolymia cubensis from the
Atlantic (Mussidae, right image)
(Photos courtesy of JEN Veron)

N. Knowlton and M. Leray

6

Exploring Coral Reefs Using the Tools of Molecular Genetics

Taxonomic revisions based on molecular analyses are not
limited to corals. Other groups of important coral reef
organisms with major reevaluations of relationships based
on molecular data include the damselfish (Quenouille
et al. 2004), wrasses (Westneat and Alfaro 2005), cowries
(Meyer 2003) and cone snails (Puillandre et al. 2014). Where
considerable natural history is available to overlay on the
phylogeny, it is possible to reconstruct the evolution of other
features such as diet. In cone snails, for example, molecular
phylogenies reveal that polychaete feeding is the ancestral
state, and the ability to feed on mollusks and fishes most
likely evolved only once in each case.
These kinds of genetic analyses can also give us insights
into the geography of diversification (phylogeography).
Coral reefs have played a prominent role in such studies
because of their importance in the context of the latitudinal
species gradient and attempts to understand why marine
diversity is concentrated today in the western tropical Pacific
(the so-called Coral Triangle). In evaluating the strengths of
competing hypotheses (e.g. the Coral Triangle as a center of
origin, center of accumulation, or center of overlap), a recent
review (Bowen et al. 2013) concluded that phylogeographic
analyses of a wide variety of organisms provide support for
all three.

6.6

Speciation

A related controversy concerns the relative importance of
allopatric and non-allopatric speciation in the sea (reviewed
in Bowen et al. 2013). Impenetrable barriers are uncommon
in the ocean, one exception being the Isthmus of Panama,
which blocks connections for tropical organisms between
the western Atlantic and the eastern Pacific. This situation
is a model system for understanding allopatric speciation in
the sea (reviewed by Lessios 2008) because closure was
relatively recent (~3 million years ago) and because the
geology of the area has been extensively studied. Analyses
of the extent of molecular divergence between sister taxa on
the two sides of the Isthmus showed that the impact of the
Isthmus in breaking genetic connections began substantially
before final closure, a finding with large implications for the
calibration of molecular clocks for various genes and taxa
(Knowlton and Weigt 1998).
Increasingly, however, speciation in the absence of complete physical barriers has been documented (Bowen
et al. 2013). Cases for coral reef organisms involve speciation across strong ecological gradients (Rocha et al 2005;
Duran and Rützler 2006), as a function of host shifts (Duffy
1996; Munday et al. 2004), and as mediated by assortative
mating (Puebla et al. 2012) (Fig. 6.6). In each of these cases,
genetic analyses have been used to confirm the absence or
reduction in gene flow that underpins the speciation event.

125

Speciation in the absence of geographic barriers can happen
quite rapidly. For example, two sister species of tropical
seastars, one a broadcast spawner and the other a selffertilizing brooder, are thought to have diverged only
6000 years ago (Puritz et al. 2012).
Molecular methods are also critical to understanding the
frequency with which barriers between species break down.
Hybridization has been widely assumed in corals and
undoubtedly occurs. Indeed, Acropora prolifera in the
Caribbean is known to be an F1 hybrid of A. palmata and
A. cervicornis (Vollmer and Palumbi 2002), two species that
have weak barriers to crossing (Fogarty et al. 2012). In this
and other cases, molecular data are crucial for determining
the extent to which gene flow occurs across species
boundaries and for determining the parentage of larvae
resulting from experiments in which eggs are offered a
choice between sperm of two species. In several other well
studied cases, however, gene flow has turned out to be more
restricted than initially assumed, and it is often difficult to
distinguish between hybridization and the maintenance of
ancestral polymorphisms when individuals carry the genetic
signature of two closely related species (Palumbi
et al. 2012).
Finally, the mechanistic processes underlying evolutionary diversification can also be analyzed using molecular
genetics. For marine organisms, these have been most thoroughly explored to understand gamete recognition in species
where fertilization occurs externally (Lessios 2011).
Because many marine organisms release eggs and sperm
into the water, genes that influence the interactions of
sperm and eggs are tightly connected with the process of
speciation itself. Sea urchins and abalones have been the best
studied, and some of these sea urchins are prominent
members of coral reef communities (e.g. Echinometra). In
sea urchins, gametic compatibility is strongly influenced by
the bindin protein and its receptor. The evolution of bindin
has been extensively studied, but the receptor is enormous
(4595 amino acids) and much less well known. Nevertheless, analyses of bindin and the extremely low incidence of
genetically confirmed hybrids in nature suggest that bindin is
one of several factors that contribute to interspecific
boundaries, and that its evolution may have more to do
with intraspecific sexual selection and avoidance of
polyspermy (the fertilization of one egg by many sperm)
than with prevention of interspecific hybridization (Lessios
2007).

6.7

Sexual Systems

Molecular analyses are also useful for studying mating biology within species, including the identification of partners;
indeed when gametes are released into the water column in

126

N. Knowlton and M. Leray

Fig. 6.6 Evolutionary mechanisms underpinning speciation on coral
reefs can be readily studied with the tools of molecular genetics. Using
behavioral observation, population genetic analysis and individualbased simulation, Puebla et al. (2012, above modified from Figs. 1
and 5) demonstrated the role of sexual selection in driving the evolution

of assortative mating in hamlets (Hypoplectrus species). Low levels of
genetic differentiation (Fst) at neutral genetic markers between sympatric color-morphs that occasionally hybridize showed that speciation is
occurring in the presence of gene flow

the absence of clear pairing behavior, genetic analyses are
the only way to analyze mating success. This approach has
been used to determine paternity in spawning fish
(Wooninck et al. 2000) as well as in some invertebrates. In
one species of stony coral, molecular analyses showed that

larvae are often the product of nearby individuals releasing
their gametes nearly simultaneously (Levitan et al. 2011).
Similarly, in a study of the soft coral Pseudopterogorgia
elisabethae, most planula larvae appeared to have been
sired within the 20  20 m of the study area, although closer

6

Exploring Coral Reefs Using the Tools of Molecular Genetics

127

detected with genetic methods. One study using
microsatellites found that 10 of 14 colonies of the coral
Acropora hyacinthus exhibited genetic mosaicism with the
potential to transfer this variation to the next generation via
eggs (Schweinsberg et al. 2014).

6.8

Fig. 6.7 Corals are able to reproduce sexually and asexually but the
prevalence of asexual propagation has been difficult to evaluate. Foster
et al. (2013, panel above from Fig. 2) used microsatellite markers to
genotype individual colonies of Orbicella annularis and show the
contribution of clonal reproduction at various sites across the species’
range. They showed that sites varied widely with respect to the number
of clonemates per genet (each genet consists of a colony or collection of
colonies derived from a single fertilized egg), with asexual reproduction being more common in locations with greater hurricane frequency

or larger males surprisingly did not appear to have an advantage (Lasker et al. 2008). Planula larvae that disperse short
distances can lead to aggregations of close relatives, and
genetic signatures of inbreeding have been detected in
some of these species (Richards and van Oppen 2012;
Carlon and Lippé 2011).
Although sexual reproduction is the dominant form of
reproduction in corals and many other organisms, asexual
reproduction is also sometimes common. Fragmentation
produces large numbers of clonemates that can be readily
recognized with genetic methods (Foster et al. 2013)
(Fig. 6.7). Documenting the geography of clonal reproduction is important because in many mass-spawning corals,
self-fertilization is not possible, with implications for reproductive success. A less common form of asexual reproduction is the production of asexual larvae. The best studied
case among corals is that of Pocillopora damicornis; a
recent analysis using microsatellite data suggested that
over 90 % of the larvae released were produced parthenogenetically (Combosch and Vollmer 2013).
Of course, asexual reproduction does not prevent the
occurrence of mutations. Analogous to the forms of asexual
reproduction described above is the clonal reproduction of
units within colonies (polyps in corals, zooids in bryozoans,
etc.), and growth in general is by its nature a form of asexual
reproduction even in non-colonial forms. Recently, interest
has increased in determining the prevalence of mutations
occurring within individuals due to somatic mutations
(mosaicism), a phenomenon that can only be routinely

Physiology and Development

The preceding sections have reviewed the profound
contributions of molecular genetics to our understanding of
ecology and evolution. At the level of individual organisms,
genes control the structure and production of proteins, so it
goes without saying that these methods have enormous
power to elucidate physiological and developmental processes as well. Until recently, our ability to explore these
aspects of coral biology depended on identifying genes
known to be associated with certain functions in other
metazoans and then using that information to search for
related genes in corals. For example, Levy et al. (2007)
were able to identify genes related to the ability to sense
blue light that could be involved in the synchronization of
spawning.
The landscape of what is possible has changed dramatically, however, now that gene expression, transcriptomes
(sequences of transcribed genes) and entire genomes can
be readily studied in non-model organisms, in particular
corals. For example, comparisons of healthy versus diseased
Acropora cervicornis and Orbicella faveolata show distinct
patterns of gene expression as a function of coral health
(Closek et al. 2014; Libro et al. 2013) (Fig. 6.8). A comparison of gene expression in the bases and branch tips of the
closely related A. cervicornis and A. palmata revealed
marked differences in gene expression that may underpin
their morphological differences (Hemond et al. 2014). An
array of genomic and proteomic data has revealed a suite of
36 proteins likely involved in the formation of coral
skeletons (Drake et al. 2013). Gene expression responses
associated with algal competition, high temperature, excess
nutrients, and ocean acidification are providing a window on
the complex physiologic responses of corals to stressors
associated with locally driven reef degradation and rising
CO2 emissions (Rosic et al. 2014; Shearer et al. 2014; Moya
et al. 2015).
Shinzato et al. (2014) provide a recent snapshot of genomic resources for corals and Symbiodinium. For corals, their
list contains one published scleractinian genome (Acropora
digitifera) and ten published scleractinian transcriptomes
[four of which were for Acropora, two for Porites, and one
each for Favia, Orbicella (listed as Montastraea),
Stylophora, and Pocillopora]. The A. digitifera genome
was about 420 Mbp in size and represented over 23,000
coding genes, about 93 % of which could be related to

128

N. Knowlton and M. Leray

Finally, microbes, being single celled, sit at the intersection of physiology and ecology. Because of their importance
in biogeochemical cycling, one way to explore the metabolism of a reef is through analyzing microbial genes. Kelly
et al. (2014) using a metagenomic approach found for an
array of islands spanning a variety of biological, oceanographic and geographic characteristics, that the type of
organisms living on the bottom (especially the amount of
living coral) was the best predictor of the taxonomic composition of the microbes, whereas distance from the equator
was the strongest predictor of metabolic characteristics of
the microbial community.

6.9

Fig. 6.8 High-throughput RNA sequencing is increasingly used as a
tool to understand the physiological response of corals to stressors.
Libro et al. (2013, above from Figs. 1 and 2) investigated the immune
response of Acropora cervicornis to White-Band Disease (upper photo)
by comparing RNA-seq profiles of healthy and infected tissues. Their
approach identified a series up- and down-regulated genes that represent 4 % of the coral transcriptome (plotted in red below)

genes in other metazoans. Among these are genes linked to
processes associated with calcification, Hox developmental
genes, genes associated with innate immunity (some of
which may be involved in the establishment and maintenance of symbiosis), genes involved in protection against
UV damage, fluorescent protein genes, and photoreceptor
and circadian clock genes. For Symbiodinium, one genome
(~1500 Mbp) and 13 transcriptomes were cited in the review
(the latter including representatives of the four clades commonly found with scleractinian corals). Our understanding
of these data is more limited because of the scarcity of
comparative data on dinoflagellate genomes compared to
metazoans, as well as the large and peculiar features of the
dinoflagellate genome itself. For both corals and
Symbiodinium, the genomic information landscape is changing so rapidly that any review is almost immediately out
of date.

Concluding Remarks: Molecular
Genetics and the Future of Coral Reefs

Part of what drives science is the desire for technical
breakthroughs, and molecular genetics is arguably the scientific field most transformed by such achievements in recent
decades. Yet, despite their seductive appeal, it is important
to remember that these powerful methods are tools. As with
any tool, what really matters are the problems that need
solving and the questions that need answering. For this
reason, the insights provided by molecular genetics are
most compelling when placed in a broader context. In that
light, one of the most important frontiers is increasingly the
linkage between insights on the functioning of coral reefs
provided by molecular genetics and the challenges posed to
reefs by the Anthropocene.
Many of the topics reviewed above have clear conservation implications. The dispersal capabilities of fish have
important ramifications for the design of marine protected
areas (Almany et al. 2013). The identification of stress
resistant genotypes could be useful in facilitating adaptation
to climate change (Chap. 7, Lundgren et al. 2013; Hume
et al. 2015). The characterization of pathogens can form the
underpinnings for the management of disease (Pollock
et al. 2011). Evolutionary trees can be used to predict the
implications of extinctions for the preservation of biodiversity (Huang and Roy 2015). Genetics can play critical roles
in the analysis of diet and populations of invasive species
(Betancur-R. et al. 2011; Valdez-Moreno et al. 2012) and in
tracking the sources of population explosions of native species such as Acanthaster (Timmers et al. 2012). Rapid
biomonitoring of diversity, including as a response to management, is made possible by metabarcoding (Leray and
Knowlton 2015). DNA forensics allows one to assess the
extent to which fisheries regulations are being followed (Cox
et al. 2013). Indeed, the list is nearly endless.
Could genetic engineering be next? Van Oppen
et al. (2015) have considered just that in their thoughtful
essay on using assisted evolution to help save coral reefs.

6

Exploring Coral Reefs Using the Tools of Molecular Genetics

Though they stop well short of the creation of Frankenstein
corals, their list of topics to explore includes exposing
Symbiodinium cultures to mutagens with the goal of producing strains better able to cope with rising temperatures and
declining pH.
In sum, the future of molecular genetics in reef studies is
bright indeed. One can only hope that these powerful
methods will also serve to brighten the future of the reefs
themselves.

Glossary1
Barcode is a standard short stretch of DNA that is unique to
each species and therefore used to delineate species or
identify unknown specimens. In animals, the most common barcode is a 658 bp segment of the mitochondrial
cytochrome c oxidase subunit I gene.
Barcode of Life Data Systems (BOLD) is an online platform for the storage, analysis and publication of DNA
barcode records.
Coalescent theory uses a mathematical model to reconstruct
the genealogy of genes back to their common ancestor.
DNA microarray analyses are most commonly used to
measure the expression levels of a large number of target
genes simultaneously. Microarray chips contain
thousands of microscopic spots where specific DNA
probes are inserted. The relative abundance of target
genes is quantified via fluorescence when target DNA
hybridizes to probes.
Environmental DNA is the sum total of DNA in an environmental sample. It comprises not only the DNA from
intact organisms in the sample, but also other sources of
cellular or extracellular DNA released by an organism
into the environment (e.g. in mucus, gametes, feces).
Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) are portions of complementary DNA (cDNA) that are constructed from messenger RNA. These fragments of expressed coding genes are
used for gene discovery, mapping, gene prediction, gene
expression and polymorphism analysis.
GenBank is a publicly available collection of DNA
sequences hosted by the National Institute of Health (NIH).
Genome is the entirety of the genetic information
contained in an organism.
Genomic library is the collection of DNA fragments
representing the genome of an organism stored as short
fragments within many individual bacteria or yeast cells.
Such collections facilitated early efforts at genome
sequencing.

1
Some terms and concepts useful for understanding molecular genetic
studies.

129

Genomics is the quantitative analysis of the genome.
High-throughput sequencing technologies (i.e. pyrosequencing, semiconductor sequencing) produce millions
of sequences concurrently within a few hours. These
technologies have drastically lowered the cost of studies
that require large amounts of sequence data.
Metabarcoding uses DNA-based species identification and
high-throughput sequencing as a cost- and time-effective
way to infer the species composition of environmental
samples (e.g. plankton, sediments).
Metagenomics is the study of the genetic material collected from the environment. It provides a profile of
diversity, including many small organisms that cannot
be cultured, and a detailed characterization of the metabolic genes present in an environmental sample.
MicroRNA (miRNA) are short non-coding RNA
molecules (approximately 22 nucleotides in length)
found in the genomes of plants, animals and some viruses
that play a key role in the regulation of gene expression.
Microsatellites are short repeating DNA sequences (two to
ten base pairs in length) found across the genome of a
species. Because they evolve rapidly, they are especially
useful for population studies and individual
fingerprinting.
Molecular clock is a mathematical approach that uses the
fossil record and rates of DNA sequence evolution to
estimate the time since two species or a group of species
diverged.
Molecular cloning is a technique that uses a host organism
(easy-to-grow bacteria) to replicate a single DNA molecule into multiple identical copies.
Nuclear DNA/organelle DNA/ribosomal DNA are different types of DNA found in the nucleus and organelles
(such as the mitochondria, mtDNA) of eukaryotic
organisms. Ribosomal DNA (rDNA) refers to the genes
that code the RNA that makes up the ribosomes.
Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) are low-level taxa
often equivalent to species that are defined genetically
rather than being identified to species using traditional
morphological methods.
Phylogeography is the study of historical processes
(i.e. vicariance, population expansion) that explain the
present day distribution of populations or species using
mitochondrial/nuclear gene genealogies.
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) is used to replicate a
single copy of a DNA fragment into millions of copies of
the same DNA fragment within a few hours, allowing the
DNA to be sequenced.
Primers are strands of nucleic acids used as a starting point
for DNA replication during the polymerase chain
reaction.
Protein electrophoresis is a laboratory technique used to
separate individual proteins from complex mixtures using

130

differences in size and electric charge. This was one of
the first molecular genetic tools to be used in coral reef
studies.
Proteomics is the study of the composition, structure and
function of the whole set of proteins produced by the
coding genes of an organism.
Restriction-site Associated DNA (or RAD) sequencing is
a method used to sample thousands of random parts of the
genome of many individuals simultaneously using highthroughput sequencing. Because it analyzes a small fraction of the entire genome, it allows affordable study of
many markers across the genome for population genetic
studies in non-model species.
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP)
analysis is a DNA profiling technique that uses restriction
enzymes to cut stretches of DNA at specific genetic
sequences within a gene, followed by analysis of variation in the lengths of the fragments.
Sanger Capillary Sequencing is an automated DNA
sequencing technology developed in 1977 by Fred
Sanger. It uses a laser to read the position and identity
of dye-labeled nucleotides on DNA fragments previously
amplified via PCR.
Shotgun Sequencing is a method used to read the sequence
of very long stretches of DNA (i.e. genomes). The process involves shearing the long DNA stretch into smaller
fragments (<1000 bp) that can be sequenced individually
and later reassembled bioinformatically using
overlapping regions.
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) is a genetic variant at one position in a DNA sequence shared by multiple
individuals in a population. The frequency of different
SNP alleles can be analyzed with respect to such factors
as environment or geographic locale.
Transcriptomics is the study of sets of genes expressed in
the genome of a given organism under specific
conditions.

References
Almany GR, Hamilton RJ, Bode M et al (2013) Dispersal of grouper
larvae drives local resource sharing in a coral reef fishery. Curr Biol
23:626–630
Baker AC (2003) Flexibility and specificity in coral-algal symbiosis:
diversity, ecology, and biogeography of Symbiodinium. Ann Rev
Ecol Evol Syst 34:661–689
Baker DM, Weigt L, Fogel M et al (2013) Ancient DNA from coralhosted Symbiodinium reveal a static mutualism over the last
172 years. PLoS One 8:e55057
Barber PH, Palumbi SR, Erdmann MV (2000) Biogeography – a marine
Wallace’s line? Nature 406:692–693
Barrott KL, Rodriguez-Brito B, Janouskovec J et al (2011) Microbial
diversity associated with four functional groups of benthic reef

N. Knowlton and M. Leray
algae and the reef-building coral Montastraea annularis. Environ
Microbiol 13:1192–1204
Bascompte J, Melián CJ, Sala E (2005) Interaction strength
combinations and the overfishing of a marine food web. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 102:5443–5447
Bernardi G, Beldade R, Holbrook SJ et al (2012) Full-sibs in cohorts of
newly settled coral reef fishes. PLoS One 7:e44953
Betancur-R R, Hines A, Acero A et al (2011) Reconstructing the
lionfish invasion: insights into Greater Caribbean biogeography. J
Biogeogr 38:1281–1293
Bowen BW, Rocha LA, Toonen RJ et al (2013) The origins of tropical
marine biodiversity. Trends Ecol Evol 28:359–366
Carlon DB, Lippé C (2011) Estimation of mating systems in short and
tall ecomorphs of the coral Favia fragum. Mol Ecol 20:812–828
Closek CJ, Sunagawa S, DeSalvo MK et al (2014) Coral transcriptome
and bacterial community profiles reveal distinct yellow band disease states in Orbicella faveolata. ISME J 8:2411–2422
Combosch DJ, Vollmer SV (2013) Mixed asexual and sexual reproduction in the Indo-Pacific reef coral Pocillopora damicornis. Ecol
Evol 3:3379–3387
Cox CE, Jones CD, Wares JP et al (2013) Genetic testing reveals some
mislabelling but general compliance with a ban on herbivorous fish
harvesting in Belize. Conserv Lett 6:132–140
Delrieu-Trottin E, Maynard J, Planes S (2014) Endemic and widespread coral reef fishes have similar mitochondrial genetic diversity. Proc R Soc B 281:20141068
Dinsdale EA, Pantos O, Smriga S et al (2008) Microbial ecology of four
coral atolls in the Northern Line Islands. PLoS One 3:e1584
Drake JL, Mass T, Haramaty L et al (2013) Proteomic analysis of
skeletal organic matrix from the stony coral Stylophora pistillata.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:3788–3793
Duffy JE (1996) Species boundaries, specialization, and the radiation of
sponge-dwelling alpheid shrimp. Biol J Linn Soc 58:307–324
Duran S, Rützler K (2006) Ecological speciation in a Caribbean marine
sponge. Mol Phylogenet Evol 40:292–297
Fogarty ND, Vollmer SV, Levitan DR (2012) Weak prezygotic
isolating mechanisms in threatened Acropora corals. PLoS One 7:
e30486
Foster NL, Baums IB, Sanchez JA et al (2013) Hurricane-driven
patterns of clonality in an ecosystem engineer: the Caribbean
coral Montastraea annularis. PLoS One 8:e53283
Fukami H, Budd AF, Levitan DR et al (2004) Geographical differences
in species boundaries among members of the Montastraea anularis
complex based on molecular and morphological markers. Evolution
58:324–337
Fukami H, Chen CA, Budd AF et al (2008) Mitochondrial and nuclear
genes suggest that stony corals are monophyletic but most families
of stony corals are not (Order Scleractinia, Class Anthozoa, Phylum
Cnidaria). PLoS One 3:e3222
Hemond EM, Kaluziak ST, Vollmer SV (2014) The genetics of colony
form and function in Caribbean Acropora corals. BMC Genomics
15:1133
Huang D, Roy K (2015) The future of evolutionary diversity in reef
corals. Philos Trans Roy Soc B 370:20140010
Huang D, Meier R, Todd PA et al (2008) Slow mitochondrial COI
sequence evolution at the base of the metazoan tree and its
implications for DNA barcoding. J Mol Evol 66:167–174
Huang D, Benzoni F, Arrigoni R et al (2014) Towards a phylogenetic
classification of reef corals: the Indo-Pacific genera Merulina,
Goniastrea and Scapophyllia (Scleractinia, Merulindae). Zool Scr
43:531–548
Hubert N, Espiau B, Meyer C et al (2015) Identifying the ichthyoplankton
of a coral reef using DNA barcodes. Mol Ecol Resour 15:57–67
Hume BCC, D’Angelo C, Smith EG et al (2015) Symbiodinium
thermophilum sp. nov., a thermotolerant symbiotic alga prevalent

6

Exploring Coral Reefs Using the Tools of Molecular Genetics

in corals of the world’s hottest sea, the Persian/Arabian Gulf. Sci
Rep 5:8562
Jackson JBC, Cheetham AH (1990) Evolutionary significance of
morphospecies: a test with cheilostome Bryozoa. Science
248:579–583
Kelly LW, Williams GJ, Barott KL et al (2014) Local genomic adaptation of coral reef-associated microbiomes to gradients of natural
variability and anthropogenic stressors. Proc Natl Acad Sci
111:10227–10232
Keshavmurthy S, Yang S-Y, Alamaru A et al (2013) DNA barcoding
reveals the coral “laboratory-rat”, Stylophora pistillata
encompasses multiple identities. Sci Rep 3:1520
Kitahara MV, Cairns SD, Stolarski J et al (2010) A comprehensive
phylogenetic analysis of the Scleractinia (Cnidaria, Anthozoa)
based on mitochondrial COI sequence data. PLoS One 5:e11490
Knowlton N (2000) Molecular genetic analyses of species boundaries
in the sea. Hydrobiologia 420:73–90
Knowlton N, Jackson JBC (1994) New taxonomy and niche
partitioning on coral reefs: jack of all trades or master of some?
Trends Ecol Evol 9:7–9
Knowlton N, Weigt LA (1998) New dates and new rates for divergence
across the Isthmus of Panama. Proc R Soc B 265:2257–2263
Lasker HR, Gutierrez-Rodriguez C, Bala K et al (2008) Male reproductive success during spawning events of the octocoral
Pseudopterogorgia elisabethae. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 367:153–161
Leray M, Knowlton N (2015) DNA barcoding and metabarcoding
reveal patterns of diversity in cryptic benthic communities. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 112:2076–2081
Leray M, Yang JY, Meyer CP et al (2013) A new versatile primer set
targeting a short fragment of the mitochondrial COI region for
metabarcoding metazoan diversity: application for characterizing
coral reef fish gut contents. Front Zool 10:34
Lessios HA (2007) Reproductive isolation between species of sea
urchins. Bull Mar Sci 81:191–208
Lessios HA (2008) The great American schism: divergence of marine
organisms after the rise of the Central American Isthmus. Ann Rev
Ecol Evol Syst 39:63–91
Lessios HA (2011) Speciation genes in free-spawning marine
invertebrates. Integr Comp Biol 51:456–465
Lessios HA, Robertson DR (2006) Crossing the impassable: genetic
connections in 20 reef fishes across the eastern Pacific barrier. Proc
R Soc B 273:2201–2208
Lessios HA, Garrido MJ, Kessing BD (2001) Demographic history of
Diadema antillarum, a keystone herbivore on Caribbean reefs. Proc
R Soc B 268:2347–2353
Levitan DR, Fogarty ND, Jara J et al (2011) Genetic, spatial, and
temporal components of precise spawning synchrony in reef building corals of the Montastraea annularis species complex. Evolution
65:1254–1270
Levy O, Appelbaum L, Leggat W et al (2007) Light-responsive
cryptochromes from a simple multicellular animal, the coral
Acropora millepora. Science 318:467–470
Libro S, Kaluziak ST, Vollmer SV (2013) RNA-seq profiles of immune
related genes in the staghorn coral Acropora cervicornis infected
with white band disease. PLoS One 8:e81821
Lim YW, Cuevas DA, Silva GGZ et al (2014) Sequencing at sea:
challenges and experiences in Ion Torrent PGM sequencing
during the 2013 Southern Line Islands Research Expedition. Peer
J 2:e520
Lundgren P, Vera JC, Peplow L et al (2013) Genotype-environment
correlations in corals from the Great Barrier Reef. BMC Genet 14:9
Marko PB, Lee SC, Rice AM et al (2004) Fisheries: mislabeling of a
depleted reef fish. Nature 430:309–310
McFadden CS, Benayahu Y, Pante E et al (2011) Limitations of mitochondrial gene barcoding in Octocorallia. Mol Ecol Resour 11:19–31

131
Meyer CP (2003) Molecular systematics of cowries (Gastropoda:
Cypraeidae) and diversification patterns in the tropics. Biol J Linn
Soc 79:401–459
Meyer CP, Paulay G (2005) DNA barcoding: error rates based on
comprehensive sampling. PLoS Biol 3:e422
Meyer CP, Geller JB, Paulay G (2005) Fine scale endemism on coral
reefs: archipelagic differentiation in turbinid gastropods. Evolution
59:113–125
Moya A, Huisman L, Foret S et al (2015) Rapid acclimation of juvenile
corals to CO2-mediated acidification by upregulation of heat shock
and Bcl-2 genes. Mol Ecol 24:438–452
Munday PL, van Herwerden L, Dudgeon CL (2004) Evidence of
sympatric speciation by host shift in the sea. Curr Biol
14:1498–1504
Palumbi SR, Vollmer S, Romano S et al (2012) The role of genes in
understanding the evolutionary ecology of reef building corals.
Evol Ecol 26:317–335
Plaisance L, Caley MJ, Brainard RE et al (2011) The diversity of coral
reefs: what are we missing? PLoS One 6:e325026
Pollock FJ, Morris PJ, Willis BL et al (2011) The urgent need for robust
coral diagnostics. PLoS Pathog 7:e1002183
Prada C, DeBiasse MB, Neigel JE et al (2014a) Genetic delineation
among branching Caribbean Porites corals. Coral Reefs
33:1019–1030
Prada C, Mcilroy SE, Beltran DM et al (2014b) Cryptic diversity hides
host and habitat specialization in a gorgonian-algal symbiosis. Mol
Ecol 23:3330–3340
Puebla O, Bermingham E, Guichard F (2012) Pairing dynamics and the
origin of species. Proc R Soc B 279:1085–1092
Puillandre N, Strong EE, Bouchet P et al (2009) Identifying gastropod
spawn from DNA barcodes: possible but not yet practicable. Mol
Ecol Resour 9:1311–1321
Puillandre N, Bouchet P, Duda TF et al (2014) Molecular phylogeny
and evolution of the cone snails (Gastropoda, Conoidea). Mol
Phylogenet Evol 78:290–303
Puritz JB, Keever CC, Addison JA et al (2012) Extraordinarily rapid
life-history divergence between Cryptasterina sea star species. Proc
R Soc B 279:3914–3922
Quenouille B, Bermingham E, Planes S (2004) Molecular systematics
of the damselfishes (Teleostei: Pomacentridae): Bayesian phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequences. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 31:66–88
Quigley KM, Davies SW, Kenkel CD et al (2014) Deep-sequencing
method for quantifying background abundances of Symbiodinium
types: exploring the rare Symbiodinium biosphere in reef-building
corals. PLoS One 9:e94297
Richards ZT, van Oppen MJH (2012) Rarity and genetic diversity in
Indo-Pacific Acropora corals. Ecol Evol 2:1867–1888
Roberts CM, McClean CJ, Veron JE et al (2002) Marine biodiversity
hotspots and conservation priorities for tropical reefs. Science
295:1280–1284
Rocha LA, Robertson DR, Roman J et al (2005) Ecological speciation
in tropical reef fishes. Proc R Soc B 272:573–579
Rocha LA, Craig MT, Bowen BW (2007) Phylogeography and the
conservation of coral reef fishes. Coral Reefs 26:501–512
Romano SL, Palumbi SR (1996) Evolution of scleractinian corals
inferred from molecular systematics. Science 271:640–642
Rosic N, Kaniewska P, Chan C-KK et al (2014) Early transcriptional
changes in the reef-building coral Acropora aspera in response to
thermal and nutrient stress. BMC Genom 15:1052
Saenz-Agudelo P, Jones GP, Thorrold SR et al (2011) Connectivity
dominates larval replenishment in a coastal reef fish
metapopulation. Proc R Soc B 278:2954–2961
Schweinsberg M, Gonzalez Pech RA, Tollrian R et al (2014) Transfer
of intracolonial genetic variability through gametes in Acropora
hyacinthus corals. Coral Reefs 33:77–87

132
Shearer TL, Coffroth MA (2008) Barcoding corals: limited by interspecific divergence, not intraspecific variation. Mol Ecol Resourc
8:247–255
Shearer TL, Snell TW, Hay ME (2014) Gene expression of corals in
response to macroalgal competitors. PLoS One 9:e114525
Shinzato C, Mungpakdee S, Satoh N et al (2014) A genomic approach
to coral-dinoflagellate symbiosis: studies of Acropora digitifera and
Symbiodinium minutum. Front Microbiol 5:00336
Thurber RV, Willner-Hall D, Rodriguez-Mueller B et al (2009)
Metagenomic analysis of stressed coral holobionts. Environ
Microbiol 11:2148–2163
Timmers MA, Bird CE, Skillings DJ et al (2012) There’s no place like
home: crown-of-thorn outbreaks in the central Pacific are regionally
derived and independent events. PLoS One 7:e31159
Tonk L, Sampayo EM, LaJeunesse TC et al (2014) Symbiodinium
(Dinophyceae) diversity in reef-invertebrates along an offshore to
inshore reef gradient near Lizard Island, Great Barrier Reef. J
Phycol 50:552–563
Valdez-Moreno M, Quintal-Lizama C, G
omez-Lozano R et al (2012)
Monitoring an alien invasion: DNA barcoding and the identification
of lionfish and their prey on coral reefs of the Mexican Caribbean.
PLoS One 7:e36636

N. Knowlton and M. Leray
van der Meer MH, Hobbs J-PA, Jones GP et al (2012) Genetic connectivity among and self-replenishment within island populations of a
restricted range subtropical reef fish. PLoS One 7:e49660
van Oppen MJH, Oliver JK, Putnam HM et al (2015) Building coral
reef resilience through assisted evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
112:2307–2313
Vieira C, D’hondt S, de Clerck O et al (2014) Towards an inordinate
fondness for stars, beetles and Lobophora? Species diversity of the
genus Lobophora (Dictyotales, Phaeophyceae) in New Caledonia.
J Phycol 50:1101–1119
Vogler C, Benzie J, Lessios H et al (2008) A threat to coral reefs
multiplied? Four species of crown-of-thorns starfish. Biol Lett
4:696–699
Vollmer SV, Palumbi SR (2002) Hybridization and the evolution of
reef coral diversity. Science 296:2023–2025
Westneat MW, Alfaro ME (2005) Phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary history of the reef fish family Labridae. Mol Phylogenet
Evol 36:370–390
Williams ST, Knowlton N, Jara J et al (2003) The marine Indo-West
Pacific break: contrasting the resolving power of mitochondrial and
nuclear genes. Integr Comp Biol 42:941–952
Wooninck LM, Warner RR, Fleischer RC (2000) Relative fitness
components measured with competitive PCR. Mol Ecol 9:1409–1414

7

Genomic Potential for Coral Survival of Climate
Change
Daniel J. Barshis

Abstract

One of the most pressing questions in coral reef biology today is “Will reef-building corals
survive climate change?” Critical to this question is the rate at which climate change is
progressing and whether that rate will be matched or exceeded by the ability of corals to
acclimatize and adapt in their upper stress tolerance limits. The emerging field of genomics
(i.e., genome scale genetics) holds great promise for investigation of the raw material
needed for coral acclimatization and adaptation to climate change: variation in the gene
sequences and activity of the molecular response pathways enabling corals and
Symbiodinium to maintain key biological functions under environmental stress. A growing
number of studies of gene expression signatures and gene frequency distributions are
finding a diverse array of potential targets both for acclimatization potential and adaptive
natural selection in climate change resistance. Additionally, research is consistently finding
greater acclimatization and adaptive potential than previously thought, which when
incorporated into models of coral survival in the future significantly improves the shortterm outlook for reef persistence. Much remains to be determined about the extent of
relevant phenotypic diversity in coral thermal tolerance and resistance to ocean acidification as well as the relative contributions of the coral host, Symbiodinium, and associated
microbes to increased stress resistance. However, application of these new technologies to
the question of coral climate change survival provides new evidence that evolutionary
accumulation of adaptive diversity and phenotypic plasticity may give corals increased
potential for persistence in the Anthropocene.
Keywords

Adaptation  Acclimatization  Acidification  Climate  Selection

7.1

Introduction

There is no longer a question that climate change is affecting
and will continue to affect corals and coral reefs (e.g.,
Hoegh-Guldberg 1999; Hughes et al. 2003; Carpenter
et al. 2008; Doney et al. 2011). The debate now focuses on

D.J. Barshis (*)
Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk,
VA 23529, USA
e-mail: barshis@gmail.com

how extensive these effects will be and whether enough
corals possess the ability to withstand these stresses in the
coming decades without a precipitous decline in coral abundance and a large-scale loss of reef ecosystems and the
services they provide. Central to this debate is the rate at
which climate change is progressing and whether the rate of
change in the environment will be matched or exceeded by
the ability of corals to acclimatize or adapt in their upper
tolerance limits.
Hughes et al. (2003) posits a number of scenarios for how
corals may respond in the future (Fig. 7.1). The only scenario

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_7

133

134

D.J. Barshis

temperature and bleaching threshold

a

b

c

time
Fig. 7.1 A schematic model representing various scenarios regarding
coral bleaching thresholds in relation to future ocean warming. The red
line represents continued sea surface temperature increase while the
black, yellow, and blue lines represent theoretical coral thermal
thresholds. (a) Represents a single thermal threshold for all corals
that would be chronically exceeded in the future as sea surface

temperatures increase. (b) Represents variation among populations
and species in the critical thermal threshold. (c) Represents the capacity
for critical thermal thresholds to change in response to the environment
either via acclimatization or adaption to climate change
(Figure modeled after Figure 2 in Hughes et al. 2003. Printed with
permission from AAAS)

wherein coral bleaching thresholds are able to keep pace
with increased ocean temperatures is one that includes the
capacity for corals to acclimatize and adapt (Fig. 7.1c). It is
generally accepted that climate change will alter ocean temperature and pH such that most corals will experience
conditions above their current tolerance limits (Hughes
et al. 2003; Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2007; Pandolfi
et al. 2011). What has yet to be determined experimentally
and observationally, however, is what capacity corals have
to shift those tolerance limits and whether they can be shifted
quickly enough and with ample magnitude to keep pace with
the changing environment.

Classic ecological and evolutionary theory tells us
organisms may respond to environmental change via four
main pathways: movement, adaptation, acclimatization, or
death/extinction (Holt 1990; Aitken et al. 2008). For the
purposes of this chapter we will focus primarily on the As;
the ability of corals to adapt or acclimatize to the environmental conditions produced by climate change. Movement
relates to larval dispersal and will be touched on briefly near
the end of the chapter. Death/Extinction is fairly selfexplanatory: conditions may change beyond the tolerance
limits and evolutionary capacities of a given organism
making survival no longer possible.

7

Genomic Potential for Coral Survival of Climate Change

For the purposes of this chapter “adaptation” refers to
evolutionary adaptation, wherein natural selection acts on
individuals with heritable genetic mutations that provide
increased fitness, the product of which is an increase in
survival and reproduction of those advantageous genotypes
in the population. “Acclimatization” refers to the ability of a
single individual to adjust its phenotype during the duration
of its lifetime, also referred to as phenotypic plasticity.
Acclimatization signifies a phenotypic change in response
to variation of multiple environmental factors under natural
conditions, while acclimation refers to a phenotypic shift in
response to just a single variable (e.g., temperature only;
Prosser 1991). The important distinction between adaptive
and acclamatory processes is adaptation acts across multiple
generations and is heritable from parent to offspring, while
acclimatization acts within a single generation and is generally not heritable from parent to offspring (though see discussion of epigenetics in Brown and Cossins 2011).

7.2

The Role of Genomics in Coral Climate
Change Science

Genomics is the emerging field of genome-scale genetics
(i.e., examination of a large percentage of the genetic material of an organism rather than a small number of specific
gene fragments). Recent advances in sequencing
technologies have revolutionized the scale at which
hypotheses can be tested and genetics data can be generated.
High-throughput (also known at next generation) sequencing
technologies are now capable of generating billions of base
pairs (single DNA nucleotides) during a sequencing run.
This data generation is orders of magnitude greater than
previous technologies and allows for the simultaneous investigation of tens of thousands of genes within a single experiment. In terms of corals, these genomic technologies enable
examination of the mechanisms behind the adaptation and
acclimatization potential of traits that will allow corals to
survive climate change: e.g. bleaching resistance, recovery
from disturbance, and growth/calcification/reproduction
under anomalous conditions (low pH, increased sedimentation, high temperature events). The link between these traits
and the environment is the actual material needed for
acclimatization and adaptation, i.e., variation in the gene
sequences and activity of the molecular response pathways
enabling corals and Symbiodinium to maintain key
biological functions under environmental stress. This chapter provides an updated review of the role of genomics in
studies of coral adaptation and acclimatization to climate
change. There are a variety of previous, in-depth reviews of
these concepts from a broader perspective (e.g. Coles and
Brown 2003; Jokiel 2004; Brown and Cossins 2011), hence
the purpose here is to provide recent updates to these previous works, as well as a more specific focus on how genomics

135

can lend insight into the raw material responsible for these
processes.

7.3

Acclimatization of Corals to Climate
Change

The sheer temporal and spatial scales of climate change
events make true tests of coral climate change acclimatization difficult, as they would require large-scale manipulations of environmental variables for many years and decades
and across hundreds of kilometers of reef. Researchers have
thus settled on two main experimental approaches to test
coral acclimatization abilities that may be relevant to climate
change survival. The first approach focuses on short-term
responses by recreating thermal or pH stress events in the lab
and assessing changes in response following different
acclimatization treatments. This approach enables accurate
recreation of the environmental perturbations of various
climate change scenarios. However, these experiments are
conducted over short time-scales and may not be indicative
of the multi-year or decadal scale of actual climate change
variation in environmental characteristics. Also, while lab
approaches are powerful in their ability to isolate the effect
of one or a few variables (e.g. temperature and pH), they
generally examine only a subset of the different variables
naturally occurring in the environment (e.g. light variability,
flow regime, nutrient dynamics, sedimentation, dissolved
oxygen, community assemblage interactions) and thus represent an oversimplification of the natural world.
The second approach involves using naturally occurring
extreme habitats as a proxy for climate change effects on
average environments. This approach is powerful in that
corals that have been living in “climate change” like
conditions for many generations (i.e., 100s of years) can be
compared to neighboring populations from more benign
habitats to examine the effects of long-term exposure to
environmental stress. These natural, climate change like
habitats can take the form of back reef pools regularly
reaching high temperatures (Craig et al. 2001), ocean regions
like the Persian/Arabian gulf that reach upwards of 36  C
(Coles 1997), or low pH CO2 seeps (Fabricius et al. 2011),
springs (Crook et al. 2013), and reef areas (Shamberger
et al. 2014) which approximate future ocean acidification
scenarios. The main drawback of these types of experiments
is that present day extreme habitats are not exact replicas of
future climate change scenarios and thus represent only an
approximation of long-term climate change effects. However,
the ability to examine the long-term effects of these types of
exposures can provide valuable insight into the mechanisms
responsible for adaptation and/or acclimatization across the
multiple timescales over which they operate.
Brown and Cossins (2011) present a number of key
conclusions from both laboratory and field approximation

136

D.J. Barshis

approaches in their review of temperature acclimatization
potential in the face of climate change: (a) the ability of
corals to acclimatize to changes in climate remains poorly
characterized and should not be discounted in future
predictions of reef health; (b) a growing number of studies
find increases in thermal tolerance following exposure to
increased solar radiation and/or sub-lethal elevated
temperatures; (c) multiple host and Symbiodinium-specific
mechanisms exist to facilitate acclimatization; and (d) the
role of epigenetics in coral acclimatization is almost entirely
unexplored and could represent additional potential for long
term acclimatization gains. Since the publication of their
comprehensive review, a growing number of studies have
found detectable signatures of coral acclimatization, many
of which involve increases in bleaching resistance following
some type of sub-lethal thermal exposure. Additionally,
implementation of genomic tools has opened the door for
beginning to understand which genes and physiological processes may be involved in the acclimatization response.

7.3.1

Evidence for and Against Coral Thermal
Acclimation

Contrasting ideas regarding acclimatization potential in the
face of climate change have been raised over the years in a
variety of taxa (including coral). For instance, Stillman
(2003) found intertidal porcelain crabs with the highest
current tolerance limits actually had the least ability to
acclimate to additional heat exposures, suggesting the most
thermally tolerant individuals may be the most susceptible to
climate change. The opposite was found in a study of
European diving beetles, wherein there was a positive relationship between upper thermal tolerance and acclimation
ability, with the lowest tolerance populations being the most
at risk of future climate change effects (Calosi et al. 2008).
In the Mediterranean coral Oculina patagonica, RodolfoMetalpa et al. (2014) found little to no thermal acclimation
ability in populations from four habitats with different thermal regimes, despite 14 weeks of slow exposure to increasing temperature. Additionally, they found little evidence for
pre-existing variation in overall thermal tolerance across the
various populations, suggesting few adaptive differences
across the seascape in this relatively new member of the
Mediterranean coral fauna (Rodolfo-Metalpa et al. 2014).
This last finding is in contrast to multiple lines of evidence for thermal adaptation in other Scleractinia (see below
Sect. 7.4). In fact, Howells et al. (2013), found historical
thermal adaptation in Acropora millepora to a warm and
cool region of the Great Barrier Reef likely restricted
acclimatization capacity following a 14 month transplantation to opposing environmental conditions. Corals from the
warmer, northern reef suffered 40 % mortality and grew

74–80 % slower when exposed to cold winter temperatures
in the south, while corals from the cooler, southern reef
suffered 50 % mortality and grew 52–59 % less in the
north than in their native environment. Thus, Howells
et al. (2013) postulate long-term adaptation of the coral
host and associated Symbiodinium to their native
environments may limit acclimatization potential in
response to novel conditions.
In contrast, a short-term thermal acclimation study by
Bellantuono et al. (2012b) showed that a 10-day
pre-conditioning exposure of Acropora millepora from the
Great Barrier Reef to 3  C below their bleaching threshold
(28  C) resulted in complete bleaching resistance to a
subsequent 8-day exposure to 31  C compared to
non-preconditioned corals. This enhanced bleaching resistance was not due to any apparent change in Symbiodinium
type or microbial associates (Bellantuono et al. 2012b). A
follow up study examining the gene expression response
following similar preconditioning treatments found only
nine differentially expressed genes separated preconditioned
and non-preconditioned corals (Bellantuono et al. 2012a). In
fact, there was almost complete overlap between the differentially expressed genes in preconditioned and
non-preconditioned corals under heat stress. However, out
of all of these shared genes, preconditioned corals had lower
levels
of
expression
changes
compared
to
non-preconditioned corals, suggesting it is the magnitude
of expression change, not the specific genes themselves
that may be indicative of acclimation gains in heat resistance
(Bellantuono et al. 2012a).
In a field transplant study over multiple years, Palumbi
et al. (2014) transplanted colonies of Acropora hyacinthus
between a highly variable back-reef pool that frequently
reaches temperatures 2–3  C above the local bleaching
threshold and a more moderately variable pool with corals
known to have lower thermal tolerance levels (Oliver and
Palumbi 2011). Following 12–27 months of acclimatization
to the different pools, corals that had been transplanted into
the highly variable habitat bleached significantly less when
exposed to subsequent heat stress, suggesting a strong, positive effect of acclimatization on their heat resistance. However, corals that came from the more moderate area did not
display the same levels of heat resistance as corals native to
the highly variable habitat despite substantial
acclimatization gains in under 2 years, indicating some
remaining benefit of long-term acclimatization or potential
adaptation of the highly variable natives (Sect. 7.4.2;
Palumbi et al. 2014). Investigation of the gene expression
differences among corals transplanted to the various
environments revealed 74 genes that were different between
identical fragments transplanted to the different locations
and 72 that were different between the corals native to the
two different locations. This is in contrast to the results of

7

Genomic Potential for Coral Survival of Climate Change

Bellantuono et al. (2012a), where there were no differences
in gene expression between the control and preconditioned
treatments after 4 and 20 days of exposure. The number of
differentially expressed genes due to transplantation
observed by Palumbi et al. (2014) may reflect a difference
among the acclimatization strategies of the different species
(A. hyacinthus vs. A. millepora), or could be indicative of a
fundamental difference in short and long-term
acclimatization mechanisms. Regardless of the differences,
similar gains in thermal tolerance over short-term, longterm, lab, and field exposures in these Acropora spp., combined with the lack of change in associated Symbiodinium or
microbial communities supports a substantial role for coral
host acclimatization gains to contribute to coral survival in
the face of climate change.

7.3.2

Unanswered Questions Regarding
Coral Acclimatization and Future
Directions

It is worth noting that acclimatization potential may come
with associated costs. Maintaining the ability for large
degrees of phenotypic plasticity is thought to be energetically costly and may affect the ability of a population to
evolve optimal phenotypes (DeWitt et al. 1998; Relya 2002).
While evidence for costs of acclimatization in corals is
scant, Edmunds (2014) found conflicting evidence that thermal acclimation was actually beneficial for massive Porites
spp. in Moorea, French Polynesia. Instead of evidence
supporting the beneficial acclimation hypothesis (Leroi
et al. 1994), wherein previous acclimation to a particular
environment conveys increased performance during future
exposure to the same environment compared to organisms
acclimated to any other environmental condition, Edmunds
(2014) found only acclimation to increasing temperatures
had a positive influence on a corals ability to withstand
future thermal stress (similar to many of the examples mentioned above). This was termed the “hotter is better”
response, wherein acclimation to increased temperatures
has value in responding to a variety of subsequent
temperatures (Edmunds 2014). It is worth noting this is
one of the first studies to frame investigations of coral
thermal acclimation response in terms of the beneficial
acclimation hypothesis, and the results of most studies to
date of thermal acclimation potential would conform to the
hotter is better hypothesis. Additional studies investigating a
range of acclimation treatments and subsequent crossexposures are required before the extent of the hotter is
better versus the beneficial acclimation hypothesis can be
determined.

137

7.3.2.1 Little Is Known About Acclimatization
to Ocean Acidification
The majority of acclimatization studies have either focused
on thermal acclimation potential (discussed above) or
photoacclimation potential to different light regimes of
coral-associated Symbiodinium (discussed below in
Sect. 7.3.2.2). While thermal stress is thought to represent
the primary coral stressor associated with climate change for
corals, decreasing pH associated with ocean acidification
represents another important stressor that may influence
future coral survival (Chap. 4). A few studies have employed
genomic tools to examine coral response to acidification
stress and have found substantial overlap in the genes
responding to acidification with those responding to temperature stress (e.g., Moya et al. 2012) which suggests
acclamatory and adaptive processes for acidification tolerance may operate on similar cellular mechanisms as thermal
acclimation. However, Crook et al. (2013) found no evidence for long term acclimatization in calcification of
Porites astreoides to chronic exposure to low pH submarine
springs in Quintana Roo, Mexico, despite these corals
spending their entire lifetime in these conditions. This was
determined by comparing P. astreoides calcification rates to
those from neighboring ambient pH areas as well as lowered
pH exposures conducted in previous lab studies. They found
P. astreoides from the submarine springs, which reach lows
of pH 7, showed as great a reduction in calcification as the
same species from multiple areas across the Caribbean with
normal pH conditions when exposed to acidification
conditions, suggesting hundreds to thousands of years of
natural exposure to reduced pH did not induce an
acclimatization response (Crook et al. 2013).
This contrasts with acclimation to low pH observed in the
symbiotic anemone Anemonia viridis, where Symbiodinium
gross photosynthesis and chlorophyll increased significantly
following exposure to decreased pH (Jarrold et al. 2013).
Non-calcifying cnidarians, however, may not be as sensitive
to ocean acidification as most Scleractinians, and unifying
themes are difficult to draw from these few studies. Future
research is greatly needed before we can assess the
acclimatization potential of corals to ocean acidification
scenarios as well as the molecular machinery behind any
potential acclimatization response to reduced pH.
7.3.2.2 Little Is Known About Host
vs. Symbiodinium vs. Other Microbial
Contributions to Acclimatization
There is a wealth of literature concerning the potential for
Symbiodinium photoacclimation and photoadaptation to
changes in light levels and spectral quality (e.g. Dustan 1982;
Anthony and Hoegh-Guldberg 2003; Mass et al. 2007),

138

however very little is known about Symbiodinium
acclimatization potential to changes in temperature and seawater pH. Evidence for both fine-scale and broad-scale differences
in Symbiodinium thermal adaptation are prevalent in the literature (see Sect. 7.4.2), however direct tests of thermal
acclimatization abilities are almost non-existent. The changes
in photosynthetic productivity observed in Symbiodinium from
Anemonia viridis in response to acidification as well as the
pervasive evidence for various forms of photoacclimation certainly suggest that Symbiodinium can acclimate over short
time-scales (Jarrold et al. 2013), however whether this applies
to short-term acclimation responses to temperature remains to
be seen and warrants further investigation. Very little is known
as well about true acclimatization responses (i.e., phenotypic
shifts within individual genotypes) in other coral microbial
associates (e.g., bacteria, fungi, viruses), as most studies have
focused on shifts in the microbial community assemblage (i.e.,
genetic restructuring) rather than phenotypic shifts in a constant
assemblage. In fact, we know very little at all about what
phenotypes these other associates may express and what functional roles they play in the entire community that comprises a
coral (often termed the coral holobiont).

7.3.2.3 The Timing and Magnitude of Coral
Acclimatization
For acclimatization to effectively aid in coral survival of
climate change it must be sufficient in timing and magnitude
to alleviate stress caused by subsequent high temperature
and low pH exposures. To date, there are multiple lines of
evidence supporting both short-term (1–2 week) and longterm (1–2 years) acclimation gains in coral thermal tolerance
(e.g. Middlebrook et al. 2008; Bellantuono et al. 2012;
Palumbi et al. 2014). Another promising study found that
Pocillopora damicornis from a highly thermally variable
upwelling reef in Taiwan were able to fully acclimate to
9 months of exposure to 30  C compared to controls at
26.5  C, suggesting historical, natural exposure to upwelling
variability contributed to the acclimation potential to future
thermal challenge (Mayfield et al. 2013). However, whether
natural sporadic stress events will elicit the same level of
acclimatization and whether acclimatization gains will be
great enough for coral survival remain to be determined.
Also, while Palumbi et al. (2014) found substantial gains in
bleaching resistance after 12+ months of exposure to
increased variability, they also observed a significant
decrease in bleaching resistance when tolerant corals were
moved from the highly variable pool to the more moderate
location, suggesting acclimation gains may not persist for
very long when the driving environmental conditions are
removed. Future studies examining a variety of time-scales
both in the lab and in the field, as well as comparing gene
expression changes in lab-acclimated populations to natural
transcriptional profiles of corals during pre-bleaching

D.J. Barshis

warming are critically needed before we can accurately
predict potential long-term contributions of coral
acclimatization to climate change survival.

7.4

Coral Adaptation to Climate Change

If organisms cannot move or acclimatize to climate change,
they must adapt to survive (Parmesan 2006), a process
sometimes termed “evolutionary rescue” (reviewed in Bell
2013). The concept of evolutionary processes acting as a
rescue from population extinction is not new; consider the
“rescue” of bacterial populations that evolve genetic resistance to antibiotics. However, scientists historically thought
evolution in the environment via natural selection was a
slow process, requiring hundreds to thousands of generations
to elicit substantial change. Yet a growing number of studies
are finding rapid evolutionary changes in nature in response
to strong selection pressures over relatively few generations
(Carroll et al. 2007). Rapid adaptation is thought to occur via
two contrasting mechanisms: (a) rapid generation of novel
mutations that confer increased fitness in response to new
environmental conditions (termed novel mutation), or
(b) rapid increase in the proportion of advantageous
genotypes in the population via selection for already existing
genetic diversity (termed standing genetic variation; Barrett
and Schluter 2008). In the stickleback fish for instance,
Barrett et al. (2011) elicited rapid adaptation in cold tolerance in just three generations of strong selection,
demonstrating the standing genetic variation accumulated
over thousands of years and multiple migrations from fresh
to saltwater in these fish was high enough to enable rapid
adaptation. For novel mutation, one can consider again the
rapid evolution of antibiotic resistance in pathogenic bacterial as an example of how novel mutation (i.e., de novo
evolution of a resistant strain) can facilitate rapid adaptation
of an entire population when faced with strong selective
pressures.

7.4.1

The Contribution of Novel Mutation
to Coral Climate Change Adaptation

Generally, it is believed adaptation from novel mutation
occurs more slowly than that from standing genetic diversity
due to: (a) potential deleterious influence of a particular
mutation that has not been present in the environment long
enough to be “vetted” under various environmental
scenarios, and (b) new mutations likely occur in lower frequency than standing variants and may take longer to
become established in a population (Barrett and Schluter
2008). In terms of reef-building corals, their long generation
times (years to decades), ability to asexually reproduce, and

7

Genomic Potential for Coral Survival of Climate Change

the persistence of older individuals contributing to the gene
pool for hundreds of years all make novel mutation an
unlikely contributor to rapid adaptation to climate change.
However, the rapid generation time of Symbiodinium and
massive population sizes across the reef contrast with the
coral host, and certainly open the possibility for rapid generation of functional novel mutations. This topic is almost
completely unexplored in the literature and thus remains
conceptual and speculative at this time, yet the life history
characteristics of Symbiodinium do not preclude rapid adaptation via novel mutation.

7.4.2

Coral Adaptation from Standing Genetic
Variation

For rapid adaptation to occur in a population from
pre-existing variation, there has to be sufficient standing
genetic diversity in the specific traits needed for survival
of a given selection pressure. In the case of corals and
climate change this would equate to genetically based
differences in thermal tolerance limits and acidification
resistance. The strongest, indirect evidence for genetic
variation in upper thermal tolerance limits in corals
comes from the observation that the bleaching threshold
of most coral populations is only 1–2  C above the mean
summer maximum temperature for a given area (Jokiel and
Coles 1990; Jokiel 2004). This means the same coral
species from different latitudes can have substantially different (>2  C) bleaching thresholds (Clausen and Roth
1975; Coles et al. 1976; Smith-Keune and van Oppen
2006; Howells et al. 2013). This pattern is repeated across
multiple species and multiple locations across the globe,
with corals from the warmest reefs on the planet (e.g. the
Persian/Arabian Gulf) having the greatest thermal tolerance limits (Riegl et al. 2011, 2012), suggesting substantial
standing genetic variation exists in coral bleaching
thresholds around the world. Far less evidence, however,
has been found concerning potential standing genetic variation in coral tolerance to ocean acidification. Of the three
main study areas where coral reefs have been found in
naturally acidified seawater, two find demonstrable effects
on the structure and function of the coral community, with
either a decrease in calcification and increase in bioerosion
in the low pH springs of Mexico (Crook et al. 2013), or a
reduction in coral diversity in the moderate CO2 seeps and
an absence of reef structure completely in the extreme CO2
seeps in Papua New Guinea (Fabricius et al. 2011). The
third area though, holds promise, where Shamberger
et al. (2014) found a diverse coral community and maintenance of calcification in reef communities under chronically low pH (~7.8) in rock island bays in Palau,
suggesting
these
communities
have
developed

139

mechanisms to maintain calcification and reef building in
chronically acidic conditions.
Other studies have found persistent differences in thermal
tolerance across much smaller spatial scales than the latitudinal variation discussed above. Porites astreiodes in the
Florida Keys (Kenkel et al. 2013) and Porites lobata and
Acropora hyacinthus in American Samoa (Oliver and
Palumbi 2011; Barshis et al. 2013;Barshis unpublished data)
all show greater bleaching resistance in corals from warmer,
more thermally variable habitats compared to cooler, more
stable areas separated by as little as 500 m–7.5 km. Also,
during mass bleaching events there is often survival of
scattered colonies, specific communities, or whole reef
sections with bleached and unbleached conspecifics found
adjacent to one another (Fig. 7.2; Sotka and Thacker 2005).
While both small- and large-scale differences in coral
bleaching susceptibility indicate the potential for substantial
standing genetic diversity in coral thermal tolerance
thresholds, most evidence to date is correlative, and comprehensive investigations of the genomic determinants of this
phenotypic diversity have only just begun.

7.4.2.1 Is Variation in Coral Thermal Tolerance
Genetically Determined and Heritable?
The Host Perspective
Unfortunately, linking genotype to complex phenotypes
such as bleaching and acidification resistance in coral
remains a challenging endeavor. The diversity of genes and
molecular processes involved in the coral thermal and
acidification stress responses (e.g., Moya et al. 2012; Barshis
et al. 2013) indicate hundreds of potential targets that could

Fig. 7.2 A photo showing differential bleaching susceptibility of
adjacent colonies of Porites randalli in the Ofu back reef in American
Samoa. Bleaching is commonly patchy across a reef and bleached and
unbleached colonies are often observed in close proximity. Whether
this variability is caused by adaptation or acclimatization of the host or
Symbiodinium remains to be determined

140

be causing an adaptive response to stress. In order for selection to result in adaptation, a substantial enough reduction in
gene flow between the selected population and unselected
neighbors is required, such that selected genotypes are able
to increase in the population without continued dilution with
less fit genetic variants from neighboring areas. Multiple
studies examining neutral markers have found genetic differentiation among coral populations with distinct thermal
tolerance limits, which indicates the potential for genetic
isolation and accumulation of locally adapted genotypes.
For instance, Smith-Keune and van Oppen (2006) found
small but significant genetic structuring in nine populations
of Acropora millepora from distinct thermal ecoregions
along the Great Barrier Reef, raising the possibility of
enough genetic isolation to accumulate adaptive divergence.
These results are only correlative, however, and do not
purport to examine genetic differentiation at adaptive
markers.
Other studies have found similar genetic differentiation
among different thermal habitats, though across much
smaller spatial scales. Barshis et al. (2010) found significant
genetic structuring in Porites lobata that correlated with
differences in growth and thermal tolerance between corals
native to a more thermally variable back reef vs. a more
stable forereef separated by only 5 km in American Samoa
(Smith et al. 2007; Barshis unpublished data). Similarly,
Kenkel et al. (2013) found thermal tolerance differences
and genetic differentiation between Porites astreoides from
a nearshore reef with warmer conditions and a cooler offshore reef 7.1 km away in the Florida Keys. This genetic
differentiation corresponded with constitutive upregulation
of metabolic genes in corals from the warmer inshore location during subsequent heat stress, suggesting a potential
adaptive role of coral energy management in coral thermal
tolerance (Kenkel et al. 2013).
Other studies have taken a more direct approach by either
examining genetic differentiation in putatively adaptive
gene regions or directly testing differences in stress tolerance among larvae of known genetic composition and parental genotypes. Lundgren et al. (2013) performed a gene
mining investigation to find specific candidate genes for
adaptive genetic markers in Pocillopora damicornis and
Acropora millepora across the thermal gradient from the
northern to the southern Great Barrier Reef. They found
significant correlations between allele frequencies (proportion of a particular genotype in the population) and thermal
habitat type in up to 55 % of the gene markers examined,
representing evidence for one of the first sets of candidate
genes for adaptive environmental stress tolerance in corals
(Lundgren et al. 2013). A different, transcriptome-wide scan
between Acropora hyacinthus from a thermally tolerant vs. a
more thermally susceptible population in American Samoa
(the same populations investigated in Oliver and Palumbi
2011; Barshis et al. 2013; Palumbi et al. 2014), identified

D.J. Barshis

114 highly divergent genetic loci as candidates for environmental selection for heat resistance (Bay and Palumbi 2014).
Many of these loci showed significant allele frequency
correlations with temperature, in the form of amount of
time spent above the local bleaching threshold of 31  C.
Taken together, these investigations are starting to reveal
some of the first direct signs of selection in coral genomes
that might be responsible for adaptive differences in upper
thermal tolerance limits.
An alternative approach to genome scans is direct examination of differences in thermal tolerance among closely
related larval crosses to assess the role of genotype in determining thermal tolerance limits. These types of
investigations have also found preliminary evidence that
variation in thermal tolerance may be genetically-based
between closely related families. In larvae from experimental crosses of Acropora millepora, two out of six families
lost significantly more protein during larval development at
increased temperatures, while the other families did not
show an effect of temperature (Meyer et al. 2009). In Caribbean Acropora palmata, Baums et al. (2013) found significant differences in larval development rate and swimming
speed under high temperature among larval families,
suggesting genotype may constrain larval performance during thermal exposure. Although neither of these studies
directly assessed thermal tolerance differences in the parent
colonies, nor the heritability of parental phenotype to the
offspring, the finding of significantly different responses to
temperature among closely related larval families certainly
supports the hypothesis of standing genetic variation in coral
temperature sensitivity.

7.4.2.2 Standing Genetic Variation
in Symbiodinium and the Potential
Contribution to Coral Adaptive Tolerance
A comprehensive review of the genetic diversity of
Symbiodinium and their functional role in coral thermal
tolerance is well beyond the scope of this chapter and is
well covered elsewhere (e.g., Chap. 5 of this book;
Berkelmans and van Oppen 2006; Stat et al. 2006; Stat and
Gates 2011). For the purposes of this chapter, a few common
themes are relevant to the discussion herein.
First, an extraordinary amount of genetic diversity exists
within coral-associated Symbiodinium and many physiological differences relevant to climate change stress tolerances
have been found among different Symbiodinium genotypes.
For example, association with some phylotypes of
Symbiodinium clade D can provide enhanced thermal tolerance to host corals when dominated by these types (reviewed
in Stat and Gates 2011). Increased prevalence of certain
Symbiodinium phylotypes has also been found in habitats
characterized by unusually high temperatures and in areas
recently influenced by natural bleaching events (Fabricius
et al. 2004; Jones et al. 2008; Oliver and Palumbi 2009,

7

Genomic Potential for Coral Survival of Climate Change

2011). Corals hosting different Symbiodinium phylotypes
have also been shown to exhibit reduced levels of bleaching
and greater maintenance of photosynthetic efficiency during
thermal exposure (Berkelmans and van Oppen 2006; Oliver
and Palumbi 2011). Although this phenomenon is not universally the same across coral species (Fabricius et al. 2004;
Abrego et al. 2008), one potential mechanism for corals to
persist in a warming ocean is through association with a
more thermally tolerant Symbiodinium type (Buddemeier
and Fautin 1993; Berkelmans and van Oppen 2006). Additionally, substantial physiological differences exist among
specific phylotypes within clades as well as between clades
(e.g. Cantin et al. 2009; Howells et al. 2012). Specific strains
of a single subtype can show different thermal tolerances
and growth rates even in isolated cultures (Howells
et al. 2012; Parkinson and Baums 2014), suggesting
increased tolerance could be gained via association with a
different strain within a subclade type or member of a
different clade altogether.
As a whole, there is clearly a substantial amount of
genetic variability in coral associated Symbiodinium, and
we are only just beginning to understand the physiological
relevance of the vast majority of this diversity. Genomic
investigations have revealed potential candidates for adaptive evolution relevant to temperature tolerance differences
among different Symbiodinium clades (Bayer et al. 2012;
Ladner et al. 2012; Barshis et al. 2014). Highly specific host
and Symbiodinium combinations exhibit substantial variation in thermal sensitivity (e.g. Abrego et al. 2008; Howells
et al. 2012; Parkinson and Baums 2014), which are undoubtedly relevant to coral survival of global warming and ocean
acidification.
Whether
specific
host/Symbiodinium
associations represent true adaptation vs. acclimatization
remains debatable and depends on the “heritability” of the
intact symbiosis from parent to offspring. Some larvae
inherit the full complement of Symbiodinium from their
parents (“vertical transmission”) while others have to establish the symbiosis de novo from the environment each generation (“horizontal transmission”; Sect. 5.2.3). Thus, the
stability of the symbiosis from generation to generation
depends on a number of different factors and while certain
hosts can show strong fidelity to a particular Symbiodinium
type, many hosts are more flexible in the associations they
maintain, calling into question how persistent more tolerant
host-Symbiodinium combinations would be in a changing
environment (Stat et al. 2008; Putnam et al. 2012).

7.4.3

Coral Climate Change Adaptation
in Real Time

Genetic-based changes attributable to recent anthropogenic
climate change have been observed in the present-day timing

141

of breeding and migration in animals and flowering in plants,
as well as the increased frequency of warm-adapted
genotypes in higher-latitude populations (reviewed in Parmesan 2006; Hoffmann and Sgro 2011; Crozier and
Hutchings 2014). Evidence of recent adaptation to climate
change in corals also exists, though it is correlative in nature.
Contrasting bleaching responses of a variety of coral taxa
have been observed across years and reefs with recently
differing thermal histories. Maynard et al. (2008) found a
30–100 % reduction in bleaching severity across three major
coral genera (Acropora, Pocillopora, and Porites) during a
severe thermal stress event on the Great Barrier Reef in 2002
when compared to a previous event in 1998. Acroporids and
pocilloporids showed the greatest increase in tolerance,
despite being more susceptible to thermal stress than Porites
spp. Similarly, Guest et al. (2012) reported lower bleaching
across multiple genera in South East Asian reefs that
bleached during 1998 and had greater historical temperature
variability and lower rates of warming. Again, Acropora and
Pocillopora were among the most susceptible at the site with
highest bleaching (Pulau Weh, Sumatra, Indonesia), yet the
least susceptible at an area with a substantial history of
thermal stress (Singapore). While both studies are correlative, the authors invoke acclimatization and adaptation in
response to recent thermal histories as a likely explanation
for the contrasting bleaching responses across sites and years
and indicate Acropora and Pocillopora spp. as likely candidate taxa for rapid acclimatization and adaptation to environmental change.
Natural thermal adaptation to historical temperatures has
also been suggested to explain a substantial departure in
corals from the Gulf of Aqaba in the Red Sea from the
putative “universal” bleaching threshold of 1–2  C above
local mean summer maximum temperatures. Fine
et al. (2013) found only mild bleaching (<45 % change in
Symbiodinium density) after 4 weeks of exposure to 34  C
(7  C above the summer maxima) and no bleaching after
3 weeks at 31  C (4  C above the summer maxima) for five
different species (Stylophora pistillata, Pocillopora
damicornis, Acropora eurystoma, Porites sp. and Favia
favus). They also developed a stepping stone larval dispersal
model and hypothesized coral larvae that reach the northern
Red Sea could represent only those that successfully survived passage across the hotter reefs to the south (which can
be 5–6  C warmer than the north). What is particularly
fascinating is this mismatch between bleaching threshold
and local environmental conditions may have persisted
despite thousands of years of exposure to the colder
conditions of the Gulf of Aqaba, suggesting either little to
no selective cost of maintaining thermal tolerance in cooler
conditions or a complete purging of less tolerant genotypes
from the population via the heat selective barrier to the south
(Fine et al. 2013). The apparent lack of reversion of these

142

D.J. Barshis

thermally tolerant corals in the north could represent a
potential climate change refuge, as conditions in the Gulf
of Aqaba are not projected to reach the elevated bleaching
thresholds of these corals until at least 100 years after their
relatives to the south.
Correlative evidence representing possible thermal adaptation such as the above studies has led some to propose
more radical manipulative conservation measures based on
these results. Multiple authors have suggested that putative
thermally adapted genotypes (e.g., those from the Arabian
Gulf or Gulf of Aqaba) could be used as source material for
restoration of cooler reefs following widespread bleaching
and mortality (Coles and Riegl 2013). Termed “assisted
migration”, this would involve transplantation of adults
and/or larvae to distant areas where native genotypes are
not pre-adapted to increased temperatures. Researchers
acknowledge that such efforts present several monumental
challenges and concerns regarding biodiversity preservation,
thus they should only be considered as a last resort when
viable alternatives may no longer exist (Hoegh-Guldberg
et al. 2008; Coles and Riegl 2013). Alternatives such as
selectively cultivating these potential adapted genotypes in
coral nurseries (Coles and Riegl 2013), or even cryogenically preserving them for future reanimation (Hagedorn
et al. 2012) have also been proposed as possible conservation strategies to combat climate change effects, though
these strategies also present substantial logistical and practical challenges.

7.4.4

Unanswered Questions in Coral Climate
Change Adaptation

One of the biggest unanswered questions in terms of coral
climate change adaptation is what degree of adaptive diversity exists in coral susceptibility to ocean acidification. In a
recent review of the potential for adaptation to ocean acidification in all marine organisms, Kelly et al. (2013) suggest
that variation in pH across the seascape does not follow as
strong and consistent a spatial pattern as variation in temperature, which may not elicit as strong a selective force on
intraspecific genetic variation. However, variation among
individual genotypes in susceptibility to OA has been
observed for some marine species (urchins, bryozoans,
oysters, and coccolithophores), and many studies are beginning to find more spatial variability in pH conditions than
initially predicted (Kelly et al. 2013). They conclude that our
understanding is still limited and additional investigations
utilizing genomic approaches and technological advances in
pH instrumentation are critically needed before we can begin
to ask whether adaptation might rescue vulnerable
populations from future acidification effects (Kelly
et al. 2013).

For corals, there appears to be significant inter-specific
variability in OA sensitivity, with only certain species able
to survive in naturally acidified springs and seeps
(e.g. Fabricius et al. 2011; Crook et al. 2013), and significant
differences among species in susceptibility to lab exposures
of low pH (Edmunds et al. 2013). Whether these interspecific differences reflect similar diversity within species
and across populations remains to be determined.
We also have a limited understanding of the spatial scale
of relevant diversity in coral thermal tolerance limits. While
latitudinal variation in bleaching thresholds indicate the
potential for evolutionary rescue of less tolerant populations
in cooler regions, there needs to be sufficient dispersal ability between habitats for recolonization to be realistically
possible; but not so much dispersal as to dilute the accumulation of relevant adaptive diversity (Garant et al. 2007). The
small-scale differences in temperature tolerance observed
between inshore and offshore reefs in the Florida Keys
(Kenkel et al. 2013) and back reef pools in American
Samoa (Oliver and Palumbi 2011) certainly fall within the
range of predicted dispersal distances of most corals, but
whether ecologically relevant dispersal can realistically
occur between thermally adapted populations across latitudinal extremes remains unknown.
Additionally, aside from a few isolated study sites (e.g.,
Ofu Island in American Samoa, Sugarloaf Key in Florida),
very few detailed investigations of small-scale spatial
variability in thermal tolerance limits have been conducted
and even in these well-studied areas, whether observed
differences are truly due to evolutionary adaptation also
remains to be determined. Lastly, while a growing number
of studies have identified gene expression signatures of
acclimatization, only a select few have started to shed light
on the genes and molecular processes that may be responsible for adaptive variation in coral thermal tolerance limits.
As the evolution of thermal and acidification tolerance in
corals is likely determined by a variety of physiological and
biochemical processes, substantial additional research is
required before we can begin to understand the relationship
between current genetic diversity, environmental tolerance
limits, and future response of coral populations to climate
change influences.

7.5

Summary

Genomics has ushered in a new era of investigation into the
molecular mechanisms of coral acclimatization and adaptation potential. Studies of gene expression signatures and
gene frequency distributions reveal a complex pattern underlying thermal tolerance differences among corals and
mechanisms of acclimatization and adaptation. There is no
single gene or gene family implicated in coral temperature

7

Genomic Potential for Coral Survival of Climate Change

tolerance, but variation in both the magnitude and composition of the stress response across a multitude of different
physiological and cellular processes. This represents a
diverse array of potential targets both for acclimatization
potential and adaptive natural selection in climate change
resistance.
An increasing number of studies are finding greater
acclimatization and adaptive potential than previously
thought, which when incorporated into models of coral survival in the future significantly improves the short-term
outlook for reef persistence (Donner et al. 2005; Logan
et al. 2014). Significant associations between large-scale
and small-scale genetic differentiation and temperature tolerance continue to be discovered in corals from different
eco-regions and habitats as well as closely related larval
families. As a whole, these studies illustrate a substantial
amount of diversity in acclimatization ability and adaptive
potential in current day coral populations. However, this
may only buy reefs a finite amount of time, and without
serious conservation actions to mitigate effects of local
stressors and reduce global CO2 emissions, environmental
change in the Anthropocene will quickly outpace the ability
of corals to acclimatize and adapt.

7.5.1

What Is Ahead?

We are only just beginning to enter the era of coral genomics
research. Already, insight from the first generation of studies
is dramatically altering previous concepts regarding the
extent of acclimatization and adaptation potential in coral
survival of climate change. Many important questions still
remain to be answered in the coming decades:
• Are genetically based differences in coral thermal tolerance truly heritable from parents to offspring?
• How stable are beneficial host/symbiont associations
through time and across generations?
• What is the extent of genetic diversity and acclimatization
potential in coral resistance to ocean acidification?
• What are the relevant spatial scales of standing genetic
variation in thermal tolerance limits and larval dispersal
potential?
Studies to date have focused on relatively few species and
genera and predominantly investigated cosmopolitan species
of Acropora (A. millepora and A. hyacinthus), Pocillopora
damicornis, and Porites (P. astreoides and P. lobata).
Release of the first coral (Acropora digitifera; Shinzato
et al. 2011) and Symbiodinium (S. minutum; Shoguchi
et al. 2013) genomes has opened the door for comparative
evolutionary studies and investigation of the genotype to
phenotype relationship of various corals. With a variety of

143

other draft genomes in progress (Montastraea cavernosa,
Acropora millepora, Seriatopora hystrix, Stylophora
pistillata, Symbiodinium clade A-type), our understanding
of the genetic determinants of coral physiology and evolution is only just beginning.

7.5.2

A Cautionary Note

Genomics has really changed how we analyze and look at
data. We used to visually align genetic sequences and identify mutations by hand. With 100s–1000s of sequences, this
was time-consuming but feasible. Now, with datasets routinely consisting of millions to billions of individual
sequences, hand curation and analysis is simply impossible.
Biologists are increasingly relying on computer programs to
interact with and analyze data. We’re essentially seeing
through the eyes of the computer most of the time, and
“seeing” the actual animals of interest and the environment
less and less so. A holistic way forward necessitates that we
combine approaches and find ways to bridge between
specialties and navigate among disciplines (e.g., ecologists,
taxonomists, evolutionary biologists, natural historians, and
‘omics). Our tools and interpretation are only as good as the
sampling and experimental design and knowledge of the
animals and system. This is particularly relevant for genomics, given the enormous time and resource investment to
obtain, process, and analyze these large datasets.
Similarly, while genomics is revolutionizing the scale at
which we can identify the genes and molecular pathways
that may be responsible for acclimatization and adaptation to
climate change, it can only get us so far. Genome wide
scanning and gene expression profiling are powerful tools,
but ultimately only describe a correlation between genotypic
and phenotypic variability. It is really the fields of quantitative genetics (e.g. controlled crosses, artificially selected
family lines) and cell biology (e.g. gene knockdowns, cell
cultures, genetic mutants, and genetic modifications) that
truly test the effects of genotype on organismal phenotype
and ultimately, the contributions of acclimatization and
adaptation to coral survival in an uncertain future.

References
Abrego D, Ulstrup KE, Willis BL, van Oppen MJH (2008) Speciesspecific interactions between algal endosymbionts and coral hosts
define their bleaching response to heat and light stress. Proc R Soc
Lond Ser B Biol Sci 275:2273–2282
Aitken SN, Yeaman S, Holliday JA, Wang T, Curtis-McLane S (2008)
Adaptation, migration or extirpation: climate change outcomes for
tree populations. Evol Appl 1:95–111
Anthony KR, Hoegh-Guldberg O (2003) Kinetics of photoacclimation
in corals. Oecologia 134:23–31

144
Barrett RD, Schluter D (2008) Adaptation from standing genetic variation. Trends Ecol Evol 23:38–44
Barrett RD, Paccard A, Healy TM, Bergek S, Schulte PM, Schluter D,
Rogers SM (2011) Rapid evolution of cold tolerance in stickleback.
Proc R Soc B 278:233–238
Barshis DJ (unpublished data)
Barshis D, Stillman JH, Gates RD, Toonen RJ, Smith LW, Birkeland C
(2010) Protein expression and genetic structure of the coral
Porites lobata in an environmentally extreme Samoan back reef:
does host genotype limit phenotypic plasticity? Mol Ecol
19:1705–1720
Barshis D, Ladner JT, Oliver TA, Seneca FO, Traylor-Knowles N,
Palumbi SR (2013) Genomic basis for coral resilience to climate
change. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:1387–1392
Barshis DJ, Ladner JT, Oliver TA, Palumbi SR (2014) Lineage-specific
transcriptional profiles of Symbiodinium spp. unaltered by heat
stress in a coral host. Mol Biol Evol 31:1343–1352
Baums IB, Devlin-Durante MK, Polato NR, Xu D, Giri S, Altman NS,
Ruiz D, Parkinson JE, Boulay JN (2013) Genotypic variation
influences reproductive success and thermal stress tolerance in the
reef building coral, Acropora palmata. Coral Reefs 32:703–717
Bay RA, Palumbi SR (2014). Multi-locus adaptation associated
with heat resistance in reef-building corals. Curr Biol 24(24):
$32#2952–2956
Bayer T, Aranda M, Sunagawa S, Yum L, DeSalvo M, Lindquist E,
Coffroth MA, Voolstra CR, Medina M (2012) Symbiodinium
transcriptomes: genome insights into the dinoflagellate symbionts
of reef-building corals. PLoS ONE 7:e35269
Bell G (2013) Evolutionary rescue and the limits of adaptation. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 368:20120080
Bellantuono AJ, Granados-Cifuentes C, Miller DJ, Hoegh-Guldberg O,
Rodriguez-Lanetty M (2012a) Coral thermal tolerance: tuning gene
expression to resist thermal stress. PLoS ONE 7:e50685
Bellantuono AJ, Hoegh-Guldberg O, Rodriguez-Lanetty M (2012b)
Resistance to thermal stress in corals without changes in symbiont
composition. Proc Roy Soc B Biol Sci 279:1100–1107
Berkelmans R, van Oppen MJH (2006) The role of zooxanthellae in the
thermal tolerance of corals: a ‘nugget of hope’ for coral reefs in an
era of climate change. Proc R Soc B 273:2305–2312
Brown BE, Cossins AR (2011). The potential for temperature
acclimatisation of reef corals in the face of climate change. In:
Dubinsky Z, Stambler N (eds) Coral reefs: an ecosystem in transition. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg/New York, pp 421–433
Buddemeier RW, Fautin DG (1993) Coral bleaching as an adaptive
mechanism. A testable hypothesis. Bioscience 43:320–325
Calosi P, Bilton DT, Spicer JI (2008) Thermal tolerance, acclimatory
capacity and vulnerability to global climate change. Biol Lett
4:99–102
Cantin N, van Oppen MJH, Willis BL, Mieog JC, Negri A (2009)
Juvenile corals can acquire more carbon from high-performance
algal symbionts. Coral Reefs 28:405–414
Carpenter KE, Abrar M, Aeby G, Aronson RB, Banks S, Bruckner A,
Chiriboga A, Cortes J, Delbeek JC, DeVantier L, Edgar GJ,
Edwards AJ, Fenner D, Guzman HM, Hoeksema BW,
Hodgson G, Johan O, Licuanan WY, Livingstone SR, Lovell ER,
Moore JA, Obura DO, Ochavillo D, Polidoro BA, Precht WF,
Quibilan MC, Reboton C, Richards ZT, Rogers AD, Sanciangco J,
Sheppard A, Sheppard C, Smith J, Stuart S, Turak E, Veron JEN,
Wallace C, Weil E, Wood E (2008) One-third of reef-building
corals face elevated extinction risk from climate change and local
impacts. Science 321:560–563
Carroll SP, Hendry AP, Reznick DN, Fox CW (2007) Evolution on
ecological time-scales. Funct Ecol 21:387–393
Clausen CD, Roth AA (1975) Effect of temperature and temperature
adaptation on calcification rate in the hermatypic coral Pocillopora
damicornis. Mar Biol 33:93–100

D.J. Barshis
Coles S (1997) Reef corals occurring in a highly fluctuating temperature environment at Fahal Island, Gulf of Oman (Indian Ocean).
Coral Reefs 16:269–272
Coles SL, Brown BE (2003) Coral bleaching – capacity for
acclimatization and adaptation, vol 46, Advances in Marine Biology. Academic, London, pp 183–223
Coles SL, Riegl BM (2013) Thermal tolerances of reef corals in the
Gulf: a review of the potential for increasing coral survival and
adaptation to climate change through assisted translocation. Mar
Pollut Bull 72:323–332
Coles SL, Jokiel PL, Lewis CR (1976) Thermal tolerance in tropical
versus subtropical Pacific reef corals. Pac Sci 30:159–166
Craig P, Birkeland C, Belliveau S (2001) High temperatures tolerated
by a diverse assemblage of shallow-water corals in American
Samoa. Coral Reefs 20:185–189
Crook ED, Cohen AL, Rebolledo-Vieyra M, Hernandez L, Paytan A
(2013) Reduced calcification and lack of acclimatization by coral
colonies growing in areas of persistent natural acidification. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:11044–11049
Crozier LG, Hutchings JA (2014) Plastic and evolutionary responses to
climate change in fish. Evol Appl 7:68–87
DeWitt TJ, Sih A, Wilson DS (1998) Costs and limits of phenotypic
plasticity. Trends Ecol Evol 13:77–81
Doney SC, Ruckelshaus M, Duffy JE, Barry JP, Chan F, English CA,
Galindo HM, Grebmeier JM, Hollowed AB, Knowlton N,
Polovina J, Rabalais NN, Sydeman WJ, Talley LD (2011) Climate
change impacts on marine ecosystems. Ann Rev Mar Sci 4:11–37
Donner SD, Skirving WJ, Little CM, Oppenheimer M, HoeghGuldberg OVE (2005) Global assessment of coral bleaching and
required rates of adaptation under climate change. Glob Chang Biol
11:2251–2265
Dustan P (1982) Depth-dependent photoadaption by zooxanthellae of
reef coral Montastrea annularis. Mar Biol 68:253–264
Edmunds PJ (2014) Is acclimation beneficial to scleractinian corals,
Porites spp.? Mar Biol 161:1531–1542
Edmunds PJ, Carpenter RC, Comeau S (2013) Understanding the
threats of ocean acidification to coral reefs. Oceanography
26:149–152
Fabricius KE, Mieog JC, Colin PL, Idip D, van Oppen MJH (2004)
Identity and diversity of coral endosymbionts (zooxanthellae) from
three Palauan reefs with contrasting bleaching, temperature and
shading histories. Mol Ecol 13:2445–2458
Fabricius KE, Langdon C, Uthicke S, Humphrey C, Noonan S,
De’ath G, Okazaki R, Muehllehner N, Glas MS, Lough JM (2011)
Losers and winners in coral reefs acclimatized to elevated carbon
dioxide concentrations. Nat Clim Chang 1:165–169
Fine M, Gildor H, Genin A (2013) A coral reef refuge in the Red Sea.
Glob Chang Biol 19:3640–3647
Garant D, Forde SE, Hendry AP (2007) The multifarious effects of
dispersal and gene flow on contemporary adaptation. Funct Ecol
21:434–443
Guest JR, Baird AH, Maynard JA, Muttaqin E, Edwards AJ, Campbell
SJ, Yewdall K, Affendi YA, Chou LM (2012) Contrasting patterns
of coral bleaching susceptibility in 2010 suggest an adaptive
response to thermal stress. PLoS ONE 7:e33353
Hagedorn M, van Oppen MJ, Carter V, Henley M, Abrego D, PuillStephan E, Negri A, Heyward A, MacFarlane D, Spindler R (2012)
First frozen repository for the great barrier reef coral created.
Cryobiology 65:157–158
Hoegh-Guldberg O (1999) Climate change, coral bleaching and the
future of the world’s coral reefs. Mar Freshw Res 50:839–866
Hoegh-Guldberg O, Mumby PJ, Hooten AJ, Steneck RS, Greenfield P,
Gomez E, Harvell CD, Sale PF, Edwards AJ, Caldeira K,
Knowlton N, Eakin CM, Iglesias-Prieto R, Muthiga N, Bradbury
RH, Dubi A, Hatziolos ME (2007) Coral reefs under rapid climate
change and ocean acidification. Science 318:1737–1742

7

Genomic Potential for Coral Survival of Climate Change

Hoegh-Guldberg O, Hughes L, McIntyre S, Lindenmayer DB,
Parmesan C, Possingham HP, Thomas CD (2008) Assisted colonization and rapid climate change. Science 321:345–346
Hoffmann AA, Sgro CM (2011) Climate change and evolutionary
adaptation. Nature 470:479–485
Holt RD (1990) The microevolutionary consequences of climate
change. Trends Ecol Evol 5:311–315
Howells EJ, Beltran VH, Larsen NW, Bay LK, Willis BL, Van Oppen
MJH (2012) Coral thermal tolerance shaped by local adaptation of
photosymbionts. Nat Clim Chang 2:116–120
Howells EJ, Berkelmans R, Van Oppen MJH, Willis BL, Bay LK
(2013) Historical thermal regimes define limits to coral
acclimatization. Ecology 94:1078–1088
Hughes TP, Baird AH, Bellwood DR, Card M, Connolly SR, Folke C,
Grosberg R, Hoegh-Guldberg O, Jackson JBC, Kleypas J, Lough
JM, Marshall P, Nystrom M, Palumbi SR, Pandolfi JM, Rosen B,
Roughgarden J (2003) Climate change, human impacts, and the
resilience of coral reefs. Science 301:929–933
Jarrold MD, Calosi P, Verberk WCEP, Rastrick SPS, Atfield A, Spicer
JI (2013) Physiological plasticity preserves the metabolic relationship of the intertidal non-calcifying anthozoan-Symbiodinium symbiosis under ocean acidification. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 449:200–206
Jokiel PL (2004) Temperature stress and coral bleaching. In:
Rosenberg E, Loya Y (eds) Coral health and disease. Springer,
Heidelberg, pp 401–425
Jokiel PL, Coles SL (1990) Response of Hawaiian and other IndoPacific reef corals to elevated temperature. Coral Reefs 8:155–162
Jones AM, Berkelmans R, van Oppen MJH, Mieog JC, Sinclair W
(2008) A community change in the algal endosymbionts of a
scleractinian coral following a natural bleaching event: field evidence of acclimatization. Proc R Soc Lond Ser B Biol Sci
275:1359–1365
Kelly MW, Hofmann GE, Hoffmann A (2013) Adaptation and the
physiology of ocean acidification. Funct Ecol 27:980–990
Kenkel CD, Goodbody-Gringley G, Caillaud D, Davies SW, Bartels E,
Matz MV (2013a) Evidence for a host role in thermotolerance
divergence between populations of the mustard hill coral (Porites
astreoides) from different reef environments. Mol Ecol
22:4335–4348
Kenkel CD, Meyer E, Matz MV (2013b) Gene expression under
chronic heat stress in populations of the mustard hill coral (Porites
astreoides) from different thermal environments. Mol Ecol
22:4322–4334
Ladner JT, Barshis DJ, Palumbi SR (2012) Protein evolution in two
co-occurring types of Symbiodinium: an exploration into the genetic
basis of thermal tolerance in Symbiodinium clade D. BMC Evol
Biol 12:217
Leroi AM, Bennett AF, Lenski RE (1994) Temperature acclimation and
competitive fitness: an experimental test of the beneficial acclimation assumption. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91:1917–1921
Logan CA, Dunne JP, Eakin CM, Donner SD (2014) Incorporating
adaptive responses into future projections of coral bleaching. Glob
Chang Biol 20:125–139
Lundgren P, Vera JC, Peplow L, Manel S, Van Oppen MJH (2013)
Genotype – environment correlations in corals from the Great
Barrier Reef. BMC Genet 14:9
Mass T, Einbinder S, Brokovich E, Shashar N, Vago R, Erez J,
Dubinsky Z (2007) Photoacclimation of Stylophora pistillata to
light extremes: metabolism and calcification. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
334:93–102
Mayfield AB, Fan TY, Chen CS (2013). Physiological acclimation to
elevated temperature in a reef-building coral from an upwelling
environment. Coral Reefs 32:909–921
Maynard JA, Anthony KRN, Marshall PA, Masiri I (2008) Major
bleaching events can lead to increased thermal tolerance in corals.
Mar Biol 155:173–182

145
Meyer E, Davies S, Wang S, Willis BL, Abrego D, Juenger TE, Matz
MV (2009) Genetic variation in responses to a settlement cue and
elevated temperature in the reef-building coral Acropora millepora.
Mar Ecol Prog Ser 392:81–92
Middlebrook R, Hoegh-Guldberg O, Leggat W (2008) The effect of
thermal history on the susceptibility of reef-building corals to thermal stress. J Exp Biol 211:1050–1056
Moya A, Huisman L, Ball E, Hayward D, Grasso L, Chua C, Woo H,
Gattuso J-P, Foret S, Miller DJ (2012) Whole transcriptome analysis of the coral Acropora millepora reveals complex responses to
CO2-driven acidification during the initiation of calcification. Mol
Ecol 21:2440–2454
Oliver TA, Palumbi SR (2009) Distributions of stress-resistant coral
symbionts match environmental patterns at local but not regional
scales. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 378:93–103
Oliver TA, Palumbi SR (2011a) Do fluctuating temperature
environments elevate coral thermal tolerance? Coral Reefs
30:429–440
Oliver TA, Palumbi SR (2011b) Many corals host thermally resistant
symbionts in high-temperature habitat. Coral Reefs 30:241–250
Palumbi SR, Barshis DJ, Traylor-Knowles N, Bay RA (2014)
Mechanisms of reef coral resistance to future climate change. Science 344:895–898
Pandolfi JM, Connolly SR, Marshall DJ, Cohen AL (2011) Projecting
coral reef futures under global warming and ocean acidification.
Science 333:418–422
Parkinson JE, Baums IB (2014) The extended phenotypes of marine
symbioses: ecological and evolutionary consequences of intraspecific genetic diversity in coral-algal associations. Front Microbiol
5:445
Parmesan C (2006) Ecological and evolutionary responses to recent
climate change. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 37:637–669
Prosser CL (1991) Environmental and metabolic animal physiology:
comparative animal physiology. Wiley-Liss, New York
Putnam HM, Stat M, Pochon X, Gates RD (2012) Endosymbiotic
flexibility associates with environmental sensitivity in scleractinian
corals. Proc Roy Soc B Biol Sci 279:4352–4361
Relya RA (2002) Costs of phenotypic plasticity. Am Nat 159:272–282
Riegl BM, Purkis SJ, Al-Cibahy AS, Abdel-Moati MA, HoeghGuldberg O (2011) Present limits to heat-adaptability in corals
and population-level responses to climate extremes. PLoS ONE 6:
e24802
Riegl BM, Purkis SJ, Al-Cibahy AS, Al-Harthi S, Grandcourt E,
Al-Sulaiti K, Baldwin J, Abdel-Moati AM (2012). Coral bleaching
and mortality thresholds in the SE Gulf: highest in the world. In:
Coral reefs of the Gulf: adaptation to climatic extremes. Springer,
Dordrecht/New York
Rodolfo-Metalpa R, Hoogenboom MO, Rottier C, Ramos-Espla A,
Baker AC, Fine M, Ferrier-Pages C (2014) Thermally tolerant
corals have limited capacity to acclimatize to future warming.
Glob Chang Biol 20:3036–3049
Shamberger KEF, Cohen AL, Golbuu Y, McCorkle DC, Lentz SJ,
Barkley HC (2014) Diverse coral communities in naturally acidified
waters of a Western Pacific reef. Geophys Res Lett 41:499–504
Shinzato C, Shoguchi E, Kawashima T, Hamada M, Hisata K,
Tanaka M, Fujie M, Fujiwara M, Koyanagi R, Ikuta T,
Fujiyama A, Miller DJ, Satoh N (2011) Using the Acropora
digitifera genome to understand coral responses to environmental
change. Nature 476:320–323
Shoguchi E, Shinzato C, Kawashima T, Gyoja F, Mungpakdee S,
Koyanagi R, Takeuchi T, Hisata K, Tanaka M, Fujiwara M,
Hamada M, Seidi A, Fujie M, Usami T, Goto H, Yamasaki S,
Arakaki N, Suzuki Y, Sugano S, Toyoda A, Kuroki Y,
Fujiyama A, Medina M, Coffroth MA, Bhattacharya D, Satoh N
(2013) Draft assembly of the Symbiodinium minutum nuclear

146
genome reveals dinoflagellate gene structure. Curr Biol
23:1399–1408
Smith L, Barshis D, Birkeland C (2007) Phenotypic plasticity for
skeletal growth, density and calcification of Porites lobata in
response to habitat type. Coral Reefs 26:559–567
Smith-Keune C, van Oppen M (2006) Genetic structure of a reefbuilding coral from thermally distinct environments on the Great
Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs 25:493–502
Sotka EE, Thacker RW (2005) Do some corals like it hot? Trends Ecol
Evol 20:59–62

D.J. Barshis
Stat M, Gates RD (2011) Clade D Symbiodinium in scleractinian corals:
a “Nugget” of hope, a selfish opportunist, an ominous sign, or all of
the above? J Mar Biol 2011:1–9
Stat M, Carter D, Hoegh-Guldberg O (2006) The evolutionary history
of Symbiodinium and scleractinian hosts–symbiosis, diversity, and
the effect of climate change. Perspect Plant Ecol Evol Syst 8:23–43
Stat M, Loh WKW, Hoegh-Guldberg O, Carter DA (2008) Symbiont
acquisition strategy drives host-symbiont associations in the southern Great Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs 27:763–772
Stillman JH (2003) Acclimation capacity underlies susceptibility to
climate change. Science 301:65–65

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms
Esther C. Peters

Abstract

All coral reef organisms are susceptible to diseases, as are terrestrial organisms, but
studying these diseases can be more difficult and much remains to be learned. Although
health impairments of corals were first recognized only in the early 1970s, increasing
numbers of infectious and non-infectious diseases, causing morbidity and mortality in
numerous species of tropical marine organisms, have now been identified in diverse species
of algae, plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates. Causes of diseases include biotic, as well as
abiotic, factors, but identifying a primary pathogen has been reported in only a few cases,
and some of those results have been questioned as additional diagnostic tools have been
applied. The multitude of stressors affecting reef organisms, particularly along heavily
urbanized coastlines, as well as introductions of species to distant reefs by global transport,
are contributing to concerns about extinction risks and loss of biodiversity. This chapter
presents an overview of diseases of reef organisms, how diseases have adversely affected
coral reefs, and new developments in disease diagnoses. The application of concepts from
the field of conservation medicine are aiding our understanding of diseases and their
impacts on organisms of these shallow to mesophotic ecosystems.
Keywords

Parasite  Pathogen  Noninfectious  Infectious  Plant  Invertebrate  Vertebrate 
Population dynamics

8.1

Introduction

Most people picture reefs, and their associated fauna and
flora, as vigorous, flourishing, and healthy, just as we used to
see forests, meadows, and even deserts, despite the
differences in organisms and physical conditions. Closely
tied to this was the realization that increasing human
populations were changing these terrestrial ecosystems
with agriculture, the growth of big cities bringing people
into closer proximities and encroaching on wildlife,

E.C. Peters (*)
Department of Environmental Science & Policy, George Mason
University, 4400 University Drive, MS 5F2, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
e-mail: epeters2@gmu.edu

fragmentation of habitat into smaller disconnected parcels,
and the development of machines to “improve our lives” by
industries that have required the extraction of minerals and
oil, deforestation, and release of chemicals foreign to the
environment (Deem et al. 2001). Many anthropogenic
disturbances of terrestrial resources have similarly been
recognized in the oceans and produce medium to high
impacts on coral reefs (Richmond 1993; Halpern
et al. 2008); these will be discussed in Chaps. 9 and 11.
This chapter will discuss the nature of health impairments
now recognized to be affecting reef organisms, which often
are the direct or indirect result of anthropogenic disturbances
and also contribute to disturbances, as well as affect the
recovery of coral reef ecosystems. It has only been since
1970 that we have found corals and other reef organisms to

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_8

147

148

E.C. Peters

Box 8.1
“The study of the causes of things must be preceded by
the study of things caused.”
J. Hughlings Jackson, British neurologist (1835–1911)

be susceptible to diseases caused by pathogens and parasites,
as well as to those conditions caused or aggravated by
exposures to anthropogenic pollutants and habitat degradation. Perhaps the demise of tropical reefs was delayed only
by the more recent colonization of islands and coastlines in
the New World and human populations were kept under
control by the profusion of their own and zoonotic
diseases—e.g., malaria, smallpox, yellow fever, shigellosis,
leishmaniasis, schistosomiasis, onchocerciasis, lymphatic
filariasis, trypanosomiasis, cholera, dengue fever—mediated
by nutritional deficiencies and travel (Armelagos
et al. 2005). Examination of peer-reviewed journal articles
indicates a recent increase in disease outbreaks in many reef
ecosystems and organisms (Harvell et al. 2004; Ward and
Lafferty 2004). However, anthropogenic impacts related to
overfishing are thought to have begun hundreds of years ago
and the reductions in populations of fish and shellfish species
may reduce disease transmission in these organisms while
increasing the susceptibility of other organisms to diseases
(Jackson et al. 2001; Lafferty 2004; Dinsdale and Rohwer
2011).
In these and other studies on diseases of coral reef
organisms, multiple physical and chemical stressors are often
identified and teasing out their roles in the development of
disease with respect to biotic pathogens can be difficult (Ban
et al. 2014). Scientists have been busy documenting “things
caused” (Box 8.1)—a variety of health impairments in
organisms of reef ecosystems—and are now making advances
in identifying the “causes of things,” the etiologic agents of the
diseases, lurking amid the myriad and dynamic natural and
anthropogenic stressors present in the reef environment.

8.2

What Is a Disease?

Disease is defined as any impairment (interruption, cessation, proliferation, or other disorder) of vital body functions,
systems, or organs. Diseases have at least two of these
features: (1) an identifiable group of signs (observed
anomalies indicative of disease in a non-human organism)
or symptoms (subjective evidence of disease that a human
can explain to another human), and/or (2) a recognized
etiologic or causal agent, and/or (3) consistent gross or
microscopic structural alterations (e.g., developmental
disorders, changes in cellular composition or morphology,
tumors). The terms “disease,” and “syndrome” (the latter

referring to all the signs or symptoms that comprise the
disease) are often included in the name of a recognized
functional impairment, and it is not necessary to know the
causal agent to use either term when identifying a functional
impairment of an organism. The term “health” is defined as
the state of an organism when it functions optimally without
evidence of disease or abnormality. Although many refer to
“ecosystem [coral reef or other] health,” the appropriateness
of this is much debated, because ecosystems are dynamic,
can exist in multiple stable states, and clear criteria cannot be
determined to identify optimal functioning among different
ecosystems, which also lack homeostatic mechanisms (Suter
1993; Lancaster 2000; Lackey 2003; Hudson et al. 2006).
These are generalized behavioral, physiological, and biochemical responses that may be invoked by an organism
over the short or long term, allowing it to adapt to a range
of changing conditions while maintaining a preferred state,
level (homeostasis), or rate of some process (homeorhesis)
(Stebbing, 1981; McNamara and Buchanan 2005; Sokolova
et al. 2012). The counteractive capacity of these adaptive
responses will allow an organism to maintain its health while
being subjected to changing conditions, leading to resistance
to the stressor(s).
Any virus, microorganism, or other substance that causes
disease is a pathogen, an etiologic agent. Interactions of a
pathogen with a host (the organism that may develop disease by being affected by an abiotic pathogen or infected by
a biotic pathogen) are both always affected by the environment. This is the paradigm of disease (Work et al. 2008b).
Abiotic diseases are those structural and functional body
impairments that only result from exposure to abiotic environmental stresses such as changes in physical conditions
(salinity, temperature, light intensity or wavelength, sedimentation, oxygen concentrations, currents) or exposures
to biotoxins or toxic chemicals (heavy metals, oils,
pesticides)—the “other substance” referred to in the above
definition of a pathogen (Rougee et al. 2006; Downs
et al. 2012). Biotic diseases are those in which the etiologic
agent is a living organism such as a microbial, unicellular, or
metazoan parasite. If a parasite causes disease and death of
the host, then it is known as a pathogen. A variety of
organisms normally live in interspecific associations
known as symbioses on or within the tissues of other
organisms (Amadjian and Paracer 1986). Such associations
can range from mutualistic symbioses (beneficial to both
organism and host) to parasitic symbioses where the organism derives a nutritional benefit from the host. For example,
some symbioses of microorganisms enable their hosts to live
in potentially toxic environments or to subsist on nutritionally limited diets. The totality of these associations is now
referred to as the holobiont (Rohwer et al. 2002). Infectious
agents, those that are spread from host to host, include
viruses, bacteria, fungi, protozoans (also known as
microparasites), and metazoans such as helminths and

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

149

Fig. 8.1 In the “optimum
envelope” of health (center oval),
exposure to stressors is limited to
pre-adapted levels in which the
organism can retain optimal
functioning through its
homeostatic mechanisms and
immune system; exposure to
higher or lower levels of stressors
than it is adapted can lead to the
development of non-infectious
disease or increase its
susceptibility to invasion by an
infectious agent and subsequent
illness; death of cells, tissues, or
the diseased host can occur as the
result of irreversible damage to its
vital functions, organs, or systems
caused by the primary pathogen(s)
or associated secondary pathogens

arthropods (macroparasites). Zoonotic diseases are those
that normally affect animals but can spread to humans. Infectious agents can exist in other organisms (reservoir hosts or
vectors) or elsewhere in the environment, to be transmitted to
the species they can adversely affect. The interactions of
pathogens with hosts within the environments they inhabit
and potential outcomes are illustrated in Fig. 8.1.
Exposure to potentially pathogenic levels of abiotic and
biotic agents—levels higher or lower than in the range that
supports optimal function—may not result in disease.
Organisms, including plants, possess a variety of defenses
for protection from invasion (non-self recognition) and cellular damage, including innate and (in the case of
vertebrates) adaptive, immune systems. These defenses
include a surface epithelium of tightly joined cells (e.g.,
epidermis), the secretion of mucus, ciliary action, production
of antibiotic compounds or noxious chemicals that repel or
kill parasites, a variety of amoeboid cells that engulf or
surround parasites and produce toxicants to destroy them,
and in addition to these in vertebrates, the lymphocytes
(T, B, and null cells). The degree of vulnerability or susceptibility of an animal to penetration by a pathogen or successful establishment of a parasite resulting in disease may vary
between and within species and individuals based on their
genetics or may be altered as a result of changes in environmental conditions, nutritional state, developmental stage,
and other factors—anything that might impair the optimal
functioning of those cells or the products of those cells
(Martin et al. 2010). Resistance to infection is characterized
by those physiological alterations or responses that occur
naturally or develop in the course of invasion by pathogens.

Pathogens cause diseases by acting on the molecules of
the organism’s cells and tissues, producing microscopic or
grossly visible morphological changes (structural) that indicate biochemical changes (functional). Key metabolic processes are attacked, such as aerobic respiration, cell
membrane integrity, and the synthesis of proteins, nucleic
acids, lipids, and carbohydrates necessary for the organism.
A pathologic change in tissue—not normal in structure or
function—either external or internal, detected grossly or
microscopically, is known as a lesion, a sign of disease.
The mechanisms by which changing environmental
conditions, toxicants, toxins, or microorganisms cause disease are varied (see any general pathology textbook) and
will also differ with the species and individual affected.
Many interactions between pathogens and their hosts occur
without clinical signs of disease, until there is a change in
host-parasite ecology (Daszak et al. 2001). Pathogens may
cause reversible injuries in organisms, with recovery
achieved by metabolic responses limiting damage and
restoring normal function (homeostasis). Other associations
induce changes in host behavior that may enhance transmission of the parasite. The butterflyfish Chaetodon
multicinctus preferentially feeds on the “pink pimples” of
calcified, pigmented lesions induced in the polyps of Porites
spp. by the encysted metacercarial stage of the trematode
Podocotyloides stenometra. The polyps cannot retract into
the altered skeleton so the fish consume more coral tissue
than when feeding on normal polyps; however, few
infections of the juvenile trematodes developed in the fish
and measurable effects on host condition and liver energy
reserves were not detected, despite the large numbers of

150

metacercarial cysts ingested (Aeby 2002). In other cases
they may damage the host’s reproductive capabilities (parasitic castration) or seriously affect the functioning of vital
organs. Infectious host-specific diseases caused by microbial
pathogens may weaken or disable individuals so they are
more susceptible to predation or stressful environmental
conditions.
However, diseases may also occur as epizootics (similar
to epidemics in humans), causing disease and mortalities in
large numbers of organisms of a single species, due to
introducing a new pathogen into a susceptible population,
increasing numbers or virulence of pathogenic
microorganisms, or lowering the resistance of the host population. Susceptibility and the relative resistance of the host
to a biotic pathogen can also change with the size of the
population and the genetic constitution of the
microorganisms present, but little is known about the regulation of symbiont populations by the host. Furthermore, as
parasites and other pathogens influence the abundance of
host populations, they exert strong selective pressures on
the genetically-based variability of an individual host’s
resistance or its ability to recover from infection within the
population. Thus, the nature of the association may be
altered over time (Tompkins et al. 2011). In order to adapt,
the host will expend energy for survival, growth, and reproduction. However, as the number of stressors and/or their
level of intensity increases, energy expenditures will
increase but growth and reproduction will slow or cease.
The ability of the organism to deal with stress decreases or
disappears as the result of exhaustion of critical biochemical
and physiological functions, until finally, disease appears.
Death of the organism will result if vital functions are
destroyed, i.e., the condition is irreversible.
Although the causal agent of a disease in a tropical
marine organism may appear to be either biotic or abiotic,
both types of diseases are often closely interrelated. For
example, some cases of coral bleaching are caused by certain
species of bacteria only when water temperatures are elevated (Kushmaro et al. 2001). Therefore, determining the
primary cause of a disease may be difficult. In some cases, a
pathogenic microorganism that has infected a host may not
harm its host unless the host is stressed by some other biotic
or abiotic disease factor (a “stress-provoked latent infection”). Conversely, an abiotic disease can become complicated by secondary infections from normally harmless
microorganisms. Lesser et al. (2007) proposed that corals
were primarily adversely affected by “opportunistic bacterial infections secondary to exposure to physiological stress
that resulted in reduced host resistance and unchecked
growth of bacteria normally benign and non-pathogenic.”
In the tropics, opportunistic pathogens may replicate rapidly
and reach the peak of their growth curve in only a few hours.
Some studies have identified specific primary pathogens,

E.C. Peters

particularly when biotic diseases develop in specific hosts,
such as with viruses. However, the interactions of physiological environmental stressors with host homeostatic
mechanisms and immunity complicate the interpretation of
causal agents and more data are needed, particularly
experiments to demonstrate pathogenesis of agents on
hosts, rather than just identifications of associations (Work
et al. 2008b). Koch’s Postulates or other strength-of-evidence analyses (the application of causal considerations)
can be used to help identify the roles of biotic and abiotic
stressors in diseases (Susser 1991; USEPA 2000).
Multiple disciplines and tools are needed to identify the
pathogen(s) causing a health impairment. Detecting disease
in organisms who can’t communicate with us requires careful surveillance to evaluate appearance and behavior to
understand when they are ADR (“ain’t doin’ right”), and
assess whether changes may be within the normal limits of
an organism’s life cycle (related to hormonal, seasonal,
reproductive, aging, or nutritional factors). Examination of
ecological factors is important, what are the abiotic stressors
to which the organism(s) has(have) been exposed, key
features of the reef where disease is being found, possible
microhabitat distinctions, any fluctuations in conditions?
Although motile organisms may be able to avoid or limit
their contact with pathogens, toxic agents, or adverse physicochemical conditions, sedentary invertebrates generally
cannot, but they may produce planktonic larvae to escape.
Thus, determining where the organism might have been
(e.g., in a crevice, seagrass bed, mangrove forest, marina)
is also valuable. After forming a preliminary diagnosis,
collection of appropriate samples, both from the affected
organism (whole or tissues) and its environment (water,
sediment, food, adjacent organisms) and laboratory analyses
(behavior, biochemistry, histology, microbiology, immune
system responses) are performed to confirm that diagnosis.
Timing of sampling to detect the causal agent is critical,
because the primary pathogen’s presence and effects on the
host can be subsequently missed as other bacteria and fungi,
for example, multiply and degrade already damaged tissue.
After evaluating these results, additional, modified
examinations or tests may be necessary, until a final diagnosis can be made (Woebeser 2007). Histology, the study of
microscopic anatomical structure from tissue samples using
light or electron microscopy, can provide a wealth of information about the functioning of an organism and should be
applied in every disease study. Pathological cell and tissue
changes have been recognized in several categories (degeneration: necrosis or bleaching; growth: atrophy, hypertrophy, proliferation; inflammation: defense, repair, infectious
agents, parasites). But morphologic changes may not
completely identify an etiologic agent, requiring the application of methods from microbiology, molecular biology,
analytical chemistry, biochemistry, or physiology, to

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

succeed (e.g., Work et al. 2008b; Pollock et al. 2011; Work
and Meteyer 2014).
In summary, diseases occur as the result of interactions
between a susceptible host, a virulent pathogen, and
prevailing environmental conditions. Diseases caused by
infectious microorganisms, parasites, and non-infectious
(nutritional, environmental, or genetic) disorders have been
reported from most phyla of marine plants and animals.
However, most of our information on diseases of marine
organisms has come from studies of commercially important
temperate fish and shellfish species. These studies have
received extensive funding and were conducted by multidisciplinary pathobiology teams. For tropical species, many
reports in the literature are descriptions of “parasites”
where the true nature of the organism’s association with
the host has not been experimentally determined. There are
also a number of reports where the etiologic agent of mass
mortalities has not been identified because the disease was
not recognized until most of the population was affected and
there were few survivors available for study (e.g., the
Diadema antillarum mass mortalities of 1983).
Among the arguments for using the term “health” in
relation to an ecosystem, Rapport et al. (1985) and Rapport
(1999) noted that a “healthy ecosystem” would possess the
features of relatively rapid recovery when stressed;
disturbances or stressors that are present support the maintenance of the ecosystem; maximum biodiversity of native
species, productivity, and size of dominant species; sustainable reproduction rates of the native species; minimal
pathology among the species; and genetic diversity. Such
ecosystems might exist in the time frames of minutes to
millennia. What we do know is that ecosystems can change
from one type to another and during the period of change we
will see alterations in processes and functions at different
levels of biological organization as the “optimum envelope”
of levels of biotic and abiotic factors shift; diseases may
occur. Humans have been responsible for ecosystem degradation that directly and indirectly affects the health of
organisms—including humans, particularly with zoonotic
diseases. The presence of pathology (diseases) in multiple
organisms in an ecosystem indicates it is unstable. What we
don’t know is the direction of the change, for better or worse.

8.3

Survey of Reef Organism Diseases

This chapter presents some of the most noteworthy diseases
of coral-reef organisms that have been studied during the last
four decades, but it is not an extensive review, since
research, particularly on coral diseases, has increased
greatly. As noted in Fig. 8.2, diseases in reef-associated
flora and fauna have increased during this time. Anecdotal
reports and empirical evidence from long-term surveys on

151

reefs around the world (e.g., Williams and BunkleyWilliams 2000; Santavy et al. 2001; Porter et al. 2002;
Lang 2003; Bruno et al. 2007) indicate that this increase is
real and that more organisms are being affected by each
disease. We remain uncertain, however, about how long
some diseases might have been present on reefs but not
observed. For example, awareness of sea turtle fibropapillomatosis increased in the mid-1980s as scientists and
veterinarians found many affected turtles and began
conducting focused studies to determine the prevalence
and cause of the disease, especially in the Hawaiian Islands
and Caribbean Sea. However, researchers discovered a publication describing this disease in a green turtle in the
New York Aquarium as well as three out of 200 green turtles
examined at the turtle fishery docks in Key West, Florida, in
the late 1930s (Davidson 2001). Another potential factor is
the increase in the number of scientists and veterinarians
studying these diseases. The reader should consult recent
publications and Web sites to further understand the nature
and etiology of diseases in tropical marine organisms in the
Anthropocene.

8.3.1

Reef Plants

Little is known about biotic and abiotic diseases of marine
algae and seagrasses in tropical waters. The turtle grass,
Thalassia testudinum, in the environmentally stressed
Florida Bay, has been affected by a marine slime mold,
genus Labyrinthula since the 1980s (seagrass wasting disease). This pathogen caused blackened, necrotic lesions on
the seagrass blades, reduced the photosynthetic production
of oxygen in the plant (Durako and Kuss 1994), and resulted
in massive die-offs of this important species (Robblee
et al. 1991; Thayer et al. 1994); however, low prevalences
of the infections occur and multiple environmental factors,
but not predation, may be controlling the disease (Bowles
and Bell 2004).
Littler and Littler (1994, 1995) reported the appearance,
first in 1992, of coralline lethal orange disease (CLOD),
affecting encrusting coralline algae on reefs in the Cook
Islands, Fiji, Solomon Islands, and Papua New Guinea.
The pathogen was bright orange and spread across the
algal surface, leaving behind the bleached carbonate skeletal
remains of the coralline algae. When the pathogen reached
the margin of the algal thallus, it formed upright filaments
and globules, similar to those formed by terrestrial slime
molds. Microscopic examination revealed motile gliding
rods of a colonial bacterium in a mucilaginous matrix.
Experimental studies confirmed that the pathogen globules
were highly infectious to a variety of coralline algal species.
Littler and Littler (1998) discovered a black fungus covering
living thallus tissue of encrusting coralline algae on reefs of

152
Fig. 8.2 Time-line showing
approximate dates of reports of
new diseases affecting coral-reef
organisms during the past three
decades, question marks on right
signify uncertainty in how long
some of these diseases might have
been present, but at such low
prevalence that they were not
noticed

E.C. Peters

Emergence of Reports on Diseases of Reef Organisms
????

1970
Black-band disease

1938?

White-band disease, white plague

1980

Fish mass mortalities, Diadema mass mortality,
giant clam mass mortalities
Cnidaria/Porifera bleaching
Sea turtle fibropapillomatosis

1990

Coralline lethal orange disease, red-band disease,
white-band disease type II, yellow-blotch disease,
yellow-band disease, white plague type II, coralline
lethal disease, patchy necrosis/white pox, fish slime
blotch disease, dark spots disease, sea fan
aspergillosis, Xestospongia disease

2000

Spiny lobster herpes-like virus, others….

American Samoa, coralline fungal disease (CFD). In the
Caribbean as well as the Indo-Pacific, crustose coralline
algae have been observed to lose the pink thallus tissue,
with a band of bare carbonate a few millimeters wide
remaining next to the thallus; this tissue loss has been
named coralline lethal disease, CLD (Goreau et al. 1998).
Diaz-Pulido (2000) discovered loss of tissue from three
species of the crustose red alga Peyssonelia on reefs of the
Caribbean and Great Barrier Reef, Peyssonnelia yellowband syndrome (PYBS). A distinct yellow microbial mat
composed of gliding filaments of a procaryotic microorganism moved across the surface of the algal thallus, followed
by a white mat of the gliding bacterium Beggiatoa sp.,
destroying the tissue. Weil (2004) reported coralline white
band syndrome (CWBS¼CLD) causing tissue loss in three
species of coralline algae in the Caribbean. An investigation
of the condition of crustose coralline algae on reefs of U.S.affiliated Pacific islands by Vargas-Ángel (2010) revealed
five categories of grossly visual health impairments in coralline algae: CLOD, CWBS, CFD, coralline target phenomena
(CTP),
and
coralline
cyanophyte
disease
(CCD¼PYBS?). Usually found in low prevalences or not
detected at most sites, higher prevalences were seen on some
reefs with higher human population densities and development. These diseases are also reported from the Caribbean,
but little is known about the pathogens that seem to be
causing them, although Williams et al. (2014) has identified
the CFD etiologic agent as an unculturable fungus in the
subphylum Ustilaginomycetes (phylum Basidiomycota).
These diseases can affect the structure and function of
many reef sites, since the dead corallines no longer

contribute to productivity and carbonate accretion and
cementation processes. More importantly, the coralline
algae no longer secrete chemicals that attract coral larvae
to settle, and fleshy algae overgrow the dead coralline algae,
further inhibiting the settlement and growth of reef-building
corals.

8.3.2

Reef Invertebrates

Some of the more prominent members of the coral-reef
community and associated tropical marine habitats are the
sponges, scleractinian or stony corals, soft corals
(alcyonaceans), sea fans and sea whips (gorgonaceans),
polychaete worms, a wide variety of bivalve and gastropod
molluscs, octopus and squid, spiny lobsters and crabs, sea
urchins, sea stars, sea cucumbers, crinoids, and brittlestars.
Many species are cryptic, living within spaces of the reef
framework, burrowing into the calcium carbonate substrate,
or present on or even within other organisms in commensal
or mutualistic symbiotic relationships. While we understand
much about their ecological roles (see excellent review by
Glynn and Enochs 2011), studies of the nature and effects of
diseases on these organisms are relatively recent, with
reports few or unknown for some phyla (e.g., Annelida),
and far from completion.

8.3.2.1 Sponges
While scleractinian corals are usually the most noticeable
members of the reef community, at least in size if not
numbers, species in the phylum Porifera are numerous and

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

also important mediators of reef productivity (Wulff 2006a).
Observations on diseases affecting these organisms had been
limited until recently. Primarily the commercial species of
the genera Spongia and Hippospongia were affected by
widespread mortalities in the Caribbean in the late 1930s.
The timing and distribution of these mortalities followed the
major current patterns. Commercial sponge fisheries were
effectively eliminated, although some sponges did recover.
Affected sponges exhibited “bald patches” followed by “rotting” of tissue beneath the patches, with the entire sponge
degenerating within 1 week. The lesions always contained
long slender aseptate (without interior walls) filaments that
were believed to be a fungus. Studies suggested that bacteria
and changes in water temperature might be responsible, but
these observations were never confirmed (Peters 1993).
Healthy sponges contain a variety of mutualistic symbiotic bacteria (Webster and Taylor 2012) that may provide
nutrition for their sponge hosts or that use metabolic wastes
produced by the host. Thus, investigations of the causal
agent(s) of diseases in sponges may be complicated by the
presence of these microorganisms or by secondary invasions
from seawater populations of microorganisms. Sponges possess a variety of cellular defense mechanisms and many
sponges can also produce antimicrobial compounds to control pathogenic microorganisms; however, the relationships
of sponge-dwelling bacteria and other micro- and macroorganisms with host metabolism and health are poorly
understood. Rützler (1988) was the first to report a disease
in the mangrove demosponge Geodia papyracea from
Belize. Apparently, the normal cyanobacterial symbionts
of this sponge multiplied out of control, resulting in the
destruction of the host sponge tissue. Aplysina red band
syndrome (ARBS) is another cyanobacterial disease of the
Caribbean sponge A. cauliformis (Gochfeld et al. 2012), in
which a filamentous cyanobacterium (identity still
unknown) forms a band around the sponge and spreads
along it, killing the live sponge tissue.
Of more concern has been a sponge disease that has
affected many Xestospongia muta, the giant Caribbean barrel sponges (Fig. 8.3). Anecdotal reports of paling pigmentation, complete loss of pigmentation and crumbling of the
lower portions of these normally rock-hard sponges began to
appear on the Coral Health and Monitoring Program CoralList listserver in the late 1990s. Nagelkerken (2000)
described the death of the giant barrel sponge off Curaçao,
which had been a tourist attraction for years because its
diameter of almost 2.5 m could surround a diver. The same
disease signs appeared on this sponge and complete mortality occurred within a few weeks. He noted that the frequent
visits and touching by divers might have contributed to
spreading a pathogenic microorganism or damaging the
sponge and leaving it more susceptible to disease. Paling
of the entire sponge and patchy bleaching has also been

153

Fig. 8.3 Barrel sponge, Xestospongia muta, dying from sponge orange
band disease on Aquarius Reef, Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary, 2011; the cream-colored remnants of spongin fibers are soft and the
entire sponge will degrade and disappear

reported, even when corals were not bleaching. Sampling
and microbial community analyses of this sponge orange
band (SOB) disease and apparently healthy X. muta in the
upper Florida Keys and Bahamas by Angermeier
et al. (2011) revealed a shift from the stable cyanobacterial
consortium to a more heterogeneous mix of cyanobacteria,
but experimental infection with diseased sample plugs was
unsuccessful. They concluded that a specific pathogen was
not responsible for the disease.
Bacterial pathogens (Pseudomonas and Bacillus spp.)
were isolated from Ianthella basta, in Kimbe Bay, west
New Britain, Papua New Guinea. These sponges were
observed dying between 1996 and 2000 at only three sites
within 16–20 km of shore and these bacteria were not
isolated from healthy sponges, moreover, when inoculated
into healthy sponges the same disease signs appeared.
Cervino et al. (2006) noted that the closest relatives of
these bacteria included terrestrial pathogens used against

154

insects and fungi, and proposed that applications of similar
bacteria to agricultural land onshore may have contributed
virulence factors to potentially pathogenic marine bacteria
strains at these sites near river mouths off palm oil
plantations. However, Luter et al. (2010) could not find
any shifts in the microbial communities of apparently
healthy sponges and diseased I. basta collected from sites
in the central Torres Strait, but could not completely rule out
an infectious agent that might be in low abundance or the
high virulence of an existing microbial symbiont.
Bleaching has also occurred in tropical marine sponges
that contain photosynthesizing symbionts in their tissues,
particularly in the Caribbean during the recent coral
bleaching events (Chap. 5). Other sponge diseases have
been reported from Indo-Pacific reefs, as well as the Caribbean, with partial or complete loss of pigmentation and
tissue breakdown (Harvell et al. 1999; Wulff 2006b; Webster 2007; Angermeier et al. 2011; Webster and Taylor
2012). Study of these lesions is urgently needed to determine
what is happening and why.

8.3.2.2 Corals
The tropical zooxanthellate reef-building scleractinian
corals not only form the topography of a habitat, but also
contribute to its productivity, supporting diverse organisms
and protecting land masses as well. Since diseases of corals
were first recognized in the 1970s, research has increased
greatly as new diseases have been recognized and the number of corals afflicted or killed has also increased. Most of
the literature is concerned with scleractinian (hard coral)
diseases, but diseases of octocorals (soft or horny corals),
particularly the Caribbean sea fan’s mass mortalities since
the mid-1990s caused by the fungus Aspergillus sydowii,
have also been studied (e.g., Slattery et al. 2013;
Nagelkerken et al. 1997; Kim et al. 2000; Toledo-Hernández
et al. 2008). It is now impossible to review all of the
developments in this area within the space limitations of
this chapter. In addition, new discoveries are being made at
a rapid pace. This section will present the current status of a
few of these diseases. The reader is directed to books (e.g.,
Porter 2001; Rosenberg and Loya 2004; Raymundo
et al. 2008; Woodley et al. 2015), special issues of journals
(e.g., “Diseases of Aquatic Organisms” Volume 69), reviews
(e.g., Richardson 1998; Green and Bruckner 2000;
Richardson and Aronson 2000; Weil et al. 2000; Williams
and Bunkley-Williams 2000; Bruckner 2002; Sutherland
et al. 2004; Weil and Rogers 2011), and Web sites, for
example, the Global Coral Disease Database (United
Nations Environment Program-World Conservation Monitoring Centre: www.coraldisease.org) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)’s Coral Reef
Information System (www.coris.noaa.gov). The literature
cited within those sources will also provide a more complete
and current understanding of coral diseases.

E.C. Peters

Contributing to the interest in and research on coral
diseases was the organization of the Coral Disease and
Health Consortium (CDHC) in 2001, under the direction of
Dr. Cheryl Woodley as an activity of the U.S. Coral Reef
Task Force, with a workshop held in Charleston, South
Carolina, for reef scientists and managers, coral biologists,
ecologists, statisticians, toxicologists, biochemists, information technologists, invertebrate pathologists, veterinarians,
and medical doctors, to improve the communication and
understanding of diseases by interactions among all these
disciplines. Committees were formed, plans and procedures
were developed (http://www.cdhc.noaa.gov/). Coral Disease and Health: A National Research Plan (Woodley
et al. 2003) is available online (http://cdhc.noaa.gov/_docs/
FInal%20CDHC%20plan%2011_07%20correc.pdf)
and
several more workshops and training sessions have been
held to coordinate and inform additional field and laboratory
research efforts. The Coral Reef Targeted Research &
Capacity Building for Management (CRTR) Program, a
partnership between the Global Environmental Facility, the
World Bank, and NOAA, organized a Coral Disease Working Group and provided funding to support research by
teams of scientists on coral diseases in several localities
from 2004 to 2009 (http://www.gefcoral.org/). One of the
outcomes of these efforts has been the realization that gross
signs of disease in a coral observed in the field fall into one
(or more) of these four categories: microbial mat-associated
tissue loss, tissue loss, tissue discoloration, or growth anomaly (abnormal skeletal deposition pattern or rate of deposition that may include changes in the number of polyps). Any
of these may include abnormal polyp behavior. Tissue loss is
not required for a coral to be functionally impaired.
Black-band disease (BBD) was the first microbial mat
disease of corals observed on reefs off Belize and Bermuda,
but has since been found throughout the Caribbean as well as
the Indo-Pacific and Red Sea (Rützler et al. 1983; Antonius
1985; Ravindran et al. 1999; Dinsdale 2000; Barneah
et al. 2007). BBD has also been reported on milleporinids
(fire corals) and gorgonaceans. Not all coral species appear
to be susceptible to this disease. Massive brain corals
(Pseudodiploria
formerly
Diploria,
Colpophyllia,
Platygyra, Goniastrea) and star corals (Orbicella formerly
Montastraea spp.) are the most commonly affected members
of the families Mussidae and Merulinidae (formerly
Faviidae) (Budd et al. 2012), while elkhorn, staghorn, and
pillar corals in the Caribbean resist natural infections.
Acroporid, poritid, and pocilloporid species are also affected
on the Great Barrier Reef (Page and Willis 2006).
Figure 8.4 shows the characteristic appearance of this
disease. BBD results from the invasion of coral tissue by a
microbial consortium. This consortium is a black mat a few
millimeters to centimeters wide, composed of fine
cyanobacterial filaments pigmented by phycoerythrin that
also contains sulfate-reducing bacteria, sulfide-oxidizing

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

155

Fig. 8.4 Black-band disease destroying living coral tissue on a colony
of star coral, Orbicella faveolata, at Looe Key, Florida Keys National
Marine Sanctuary, during the mid-1980s outbreak; the diver on the left
is using a suction device to remove the microbial mat from the coral to

reduce tissue loss; spreading underwater epoxy along damaged tissue
margins and shading affected colonies are more recent treatments
(Photo courtesy of H.H. Hudson)

bacteria, other bacteria, and sometimes fungi and
protozoans. These microorganisms produce anoxia deep in
the band next to the tissue and hydrogen sulfide, as well as
microcystins (Richardson et al. 2007; Stanić et al. 2011),
which kill the coral tissue and allows the microorganisms to
use the organic compounds released by the dying coral cells
for their own growth and reproduction (Richardson
et al. 1997). The band or mat moves across the surface of
the coral at the rate of a few millimeters per day, leaving
behind bare coral skeleton that is eventually colonized by
filamentous algae. The cyanobacterium was identified as
Phormidium corallyticum, but recent molecular studies indicate that more than one species of cyanobacterium might be
involved among affected colonies within the Caribbean Sea
and between the Caribbean and Indo-Pacific Seas (FriasLopez et al. 2004) and the Red Sea (Barneah et al. 2007).
Different species of cyanobacteria, with greater amounts of
red pigmentation, may form the microbial mats in red-band
disease of scleractinian corals and sea fans; a yellow-band
disease reported from the Arabian Gulf (Korrubel and Riegl
1998) may have been BBD in sulfur-saturated seawater.
Healthy corals can become infected with BBD when in
contact with an infected colony, but injured colonies are
most susceptible. Aeby and Santavy (2006) found that a
coral-feeding butterflyfish could spread the disease during

predation or even when the coral was protected from predation in aquarium studies. Most studies have found that less
than 2 % of Caribbean and Great Barrier Reef corals are
infected with BBD on any given reef area, although there
have been outbreaks at several locations, including Looe
Key reef in Florida in the mid-1980s, when most corals
had lesions and pieces of microbial mats were dispersed
through the water. In addition, other stressors, such as
nutrients, light levels, higher water temperatures, and
bleaching, may increase the susceptibility of corals to infection with the microbial mats (Kuta and Richardson 2002). A
BBD epizootic affecting 10 % of Montipora spp. colonies
with mean percent tissue loss of 40 % at Pelorus Island,
Great Barrier Reef, was followed beginning in summer
2006 for 2.7 years. It was linked to seasonal increases in
water temperatures and light levels; previous Australian
surveys had reported background levels <1 % of susceptible
coral populations (Sato et al. 2009).
About the same time that BBD was reported, acroporid
(elkhorn and staghorn) corals off St. Croix, U.S. Virgin
Islands, exhibited tissue sloughing, which started at the
base of the branches and moved toward the branch tip at
the rate of a few millimeters per day. In contrast to BBD,
however, no consistent assemblage of microorganisms could
be found at the junction separating the sloughing brown-

156

E.C. Peters

Fig. 8.5 Elkhorn coral,
Acropora palmata, afflicted with
the characteristic basal tissue
sloughing of white-band disease
at Grecian Rocks, Florida Keys
National Marine Sanctuary
(Reproduced from Couch and
Fournie 1993)

pigmented tissue from bare coral skeleton. This disease was
termed white-band disease (WBD), because the sloughing
left a broad band of bare skeleton up to several centimeters
wide on the colony that was eventually colonized by filamentous algae (Fig. 8.5). These disease signs can be distinguished from predator damage (e.g., fish, gastropod, or
worm feeding scars) and have since been observed on
acroporid species throughout the Caribbean, the Red Sea,
and off the Philippines. Acute tissue loss on many species
from the bases or in patches has also been observed on reefs
around the world, and variably named WBD or white plague
(WP); irregularly shaped patchy tissue loss from elkhorn
coral is termed white pox, patchy necrosis, or white patch
disease (WPD); acute tissue loss from tabular acroporids in
the Indo-Pacific in a wedge-shaped or central pattern is
called white syndrome (WS); and other variations in tissue
loss based on pattern, species affected, and rate of tissue loss
(from 0.5 to 10 cm per day linear), resulting in partial to
complete mortality, have been recognized: shut-down reaction, WBD type II, white plague types II and III, rapid tissue
loss, stress-related necrosis (Dustan 1977; Patterson
et al. 2002; Bythell et al. 2004; Williams and Miller 2005;
Ainsworth et al. 2007b). Inconsistent application of the
names and descriptive terminology has led to confusion in
the literature (Rogers 2010), and research on etiologies has
not consistently linked particular signs with pathogens.
Unusual aggregates of Gram-negative rod-shaped bacteria were found scattered in the calicoblastic (skeletonproducing) epidermis that lined the gastrovascular canals
of the porous skeleton in WBD-affected acroporids from
St. Croix and Bonaire, Netherlands Antilles (Peters
et al. 1983). The bacterial aggregates were also found in
apparently healthy colonies at St. Croix. Five years later, up

to 95 % of the elkhorn corals there had died. The role of this
microorganism in the development of disease has not been
determined; bacterial cultures or other isolation procedures
were not conducted. Bythell et al. (2002) did not find them in
their samples, and additional histopathological examinations
noted that they occurred in apparently healthy samples and
were not always found in diseased samples. Polson (2007)
identified Gram-negative Pseudomonas spp. bacteria in
aggregates from some—but, again, not all—acroporid
samples taken during a tissue loss outbreak in the Florida
Keys in summer 2003. Ritchie and Smith (1998) discovered
Vibrio carchariae associated with the bleaching margin
found on diseased staghorn coral with WBD type II, which
was tested experimentally in the field using cultures of the
Gram-negative V. (carchariae) harveyi by Gil-Agudelo
et al. (2006), almost all of Koch’s postulates were satisfied.
Both of these papers also noted that WBD type II could turn
into WBD type I and vice versa, lacking the bleaching tissue
along the tissue loss margin at times. Another Gramnegative bacterium was identified as the cause of WPD in
field experiments by Patterson et al. 2002, Serratia
marscesans. Extensive work revealed that isolates from
infected Acropora palmata were identical to a strain found
in human wastewater and caused the same tissue loss in
laboratory challenge experiments (Sutherland et al. 2011).
In WP, a new genus and species of Gram-negative
rod-shaped bacterium was identified as the causal agent
(Richardson et al. 1998; Denner et al. 2003). Bythell
et al. (2002), however, found a coccoid bacterium associated
with patchy loss of tissue on Montastraea (now Orbicella)
annularis.
Other reports have not found the same microbial
communities in WBD- and WPD-affected corals of the

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

same species (Kline and Vollmer 2011; Sweet and Bythell
2012; Lesser and Jarrett 2014), but some comparisons of
diseased and apparently healthy colonies of the same species’ microbiomes indicate differences that may lead to
discovery of the pathogen (Cook et al. 2013; Roder
et al. 2013). The causal agent of acroporid white syndrome
has been much debated, with some scientists finding tissue
loss only due to apoptosis (Ainsworth et al. 2007b) and
others identifying vibrio bacteria in the affected corals
(Sussman et al. 2008) or ciliates (Work and Aeby 2011;
Sweet and Bythell 2012). Cases of acute tissue loss on Red
Sea corals that appeared to have the WP disease signs had
cyanobacterial mat involvement deep in corallites
(Ainsworth et al. 2007a). Work and Aeby (2011) and Work
et al. (2012) documented several different types of potential
causal agents and host responses to them in Acropora and
Montipora white syndromes using histopathological
examinations, including ciliates, helminthes, and fungi,
along with fragmentation and necrosis; Ushijima
et al. (2012) discovered that Vibrio owensi initiated the
tissue loss lesions in the latter disease. Casas et al. (2004)
sampled apparently healthy and WBD-affected staghorn
corals on Panama reefs and identified, using molecular
techniques only, a Gram-negative Rickettsiales-like bacterium (90 % similarity to uncultured Rickettsiales with
BLASTN based on cloning and sequencing of bacterial
16S rDNAs). But since it was in all of these samples, as
well as in other coral species, they concluded it was not the
pathogen of WBD type I. Miller et al. (2014) reported that
histopathological examinations revealed the presence of a
suspect rickettsia-like microorganism infecting and killing
mucocytes of staghorn corals, which might be a chronic
primary infection reducing their ability to resist infections
by other microorganisms or increasing their susceptibility to
other secondary abiotic pathogens that explain the variable
patterns and rates of tissue loss. Other scientists have
detected virus-like particles in corals affected by tissue loss
(e.g., Vega Thurber and Correa 2011; Soffer et al. 2013;
Lawrence et al. 2014), but their role in disease is unknown.
Much remains to be learned about the nature of tissue
sloughing in corals, and how many conditions caused by
different pathogens or environmental stresses may actually
be represented by the same disease sign of rapid tissue loss.
Tissue discolorations, either a loss of color or a change in
color, focally or diffusely throughout a coral colony, indicate
that the symbiotic association of the dinoflagellate algae, or
zooxanthellae, may be impaired or that other
microorganisms may be present (Fig. 8.6). Bleaching, the
loss of the algae that normally give the coral tissue a brownish coloration, and/or the loss of their photosynthetic
pigments, indicates that this important food resource of the
tropical corals has been reduced. Chronic partial or widespread loss of zooxanthellae, for whatever reason, signals a

157

Fig. 8.6 Bleaching of tissue on a colony of Orbicella faveolata,
Panama, 1996; translucent tissue still covers the skeleton but the
zooxanthellae or their pigments are no longer present to color the tissue
brown; diverse patterns of bleaching from gradual systemic paling or
multifocal acute to chronic discoloration may occur and be
accompanied by tissue loss due to many biotic or abiotic factors or
combinations of such stressors

disturbance in the normal metabolism of the coral host and
can lead to delayed or reduced reproduction, tissue degeneration, reduced growth, and death of the affected tissue or
entire colony (Chaps. 5 and 11; Williams and BunkleyWilliams 2000; Weis 2008; Rogers and Muller 2012).
Bleaching of corals, gorgonaceans, alcyonaceans, and
anemones has been attributed to exposure to high light
levels, increased solar ultraviolet radiation, high turbidity
and sedimentation resulting in reduced light levels, temperature and salinity extremes, and other factors. The nature and
extent of bleaching vary between individuals and among
species at the same location during a bleaching event and
have been attributed to different physiological tolerances of
the strains (or species, clades) of zooxanthellae and the coral
hosts (Rowan et al. 1997; Jones et al. 2008). Discoveries by
scientists in Israel include new species of vibrio bacteria that
enter coral cells when water temperatures exceed 25  C and
cause lysis of the algae in temperate and tropical corals
(Kushmaro et al. 2001; Ben-Haim et al. 2003). A coccidian
(Phylum Apicomplexa), a protozoan known to cause disease
in other animals, has also been associated with patchy
bleaching in corals (Upton and Peters 1986).

158

Another discoloration condition that is widespread
throughout the Caribbean and causing partial mortalities of
star corals, Montastraea (now Orbicella) spp., and other
massive framework-building species is known as Caribbean
yellow band disease (CYBD), with high prevalences
recorded in Panama, Mona Island, the Netherlands Antilles,
and the Florida Keys. Signs of this disease are focal to
multifocal pale irregularly shaped patches of yellowish
lightened tissue or a margin of yellowish lightened tissue a
few cm wide adjacent to sediment patches on the colony
(Santavy et al. 1999; Weil et al. 2000; Garzon-Ferreira
et al. 2001). Similar lesions have been found on several
Indo-Pacific coral species, especially Fungia. Microscopically, fewer zooxanthellae, with less pigment, reduced
mitotic indices, and obvious cellular damage, were present
within the lightened tissue compared to normally pigmented
areas on the same colony (Cervino et al. 2001); microbiologically, several Vibrio spp. have been found in all of these
lesions (Cervino et al. 2008).
Instead of showing paling of tissue, several species of
corals,
particularly
the
Caribbean
Siderastrea,
Stephanocoenia, and Orbicella spp., develop darker and
often differently colored patches or marginal bands of tissue,
which are referred to as dark spots disease or syndrome
(DSD or DSS) (Sutherland et al. 2004). Affected areas may
stop accreting skeleton with the result that they form
depressions on the colony surface, and the dark tissue dies,
causing partial mortality in all species. DSS may be a significant source of mortality in some Orbicella and
Stephanocoenia colonies; however, the lesions can disappear in Siderastrea siderea colonies over time, suggesting
they might be a temporary stress response (see review in
Porter et al. 2011). Gross and histopathological observations
indicated that in addition to zooxanthellae degeneration,
endolithic organisms were present in S. siderea skeletons
where the darkened tissue lesions occurred (Galloway
et al. 2007; Renegar et al. 2008). Microbial communities
from apparently healthy colonies and lesions have been
examined using cultured and non-cultured (molecular)
analyses, with varying results (reviewed in Kellogg
et al. 2014). Although vibrios were associated with the
lesions, they were also present in healthy tissue;
cyanobacteria and an unclassified vibrio were present only
in diseased tissue, but they concluded that their data did not
show it to be a bacterial disease; they could not identify an
isolated suspect fungal sequence. Sweet et al. (2013) had
similar results in a study of Stephanocoenia DSS, but also
identified a fungus similar to a plant pathogen (Rhytisma
acerinum).
Neither
of
these
studies
included
histopathological examinations. A preliminary look at the
histopathology of Orbicella DSS, indicates that suspect
thraustochytrids on the colony’s epidermis (KramarskyWinter et al. 2006) are being killed, then the darker tissue
of the coral is seen, and the surface body wall atrophies

E.C. Peters

(EC Peters, unpubl observ); but molecular and other
analyses still need to be done.
Corals also harbor a variety of protozoan and metazoan
microorganisms, some of which may be parasites. One relationship has been examined in Hawaiian corals (Porites
compressa) containing the metacercarial stage of a digenetic
trematode, Podocotyloides stenometra. The host for the final
stage of this parasite is a coral-feeding butterflyfish,
Chaetodon multicinctus (Aeby 2002). Parasite-infected
coral polyps develop into pink, swollen calcified nodules,
reducing the ability of the polyps to retract into their calices.
Parasite encystment resulted in reduced growth rates of
parasitized corals. Fish fed preferentially on infected polyps,
and as a result the altered polyp appearance provided both an
enhancement of the parasite’s transmission rate and parasite
removal from the coral. Healthy polyps then grew back over
the feeding scars. Thus, this phenomenon may act as a host
strategy of parasite defense.
Anomalous calcification patterns in scleractinian corals
may be caused by parasites or commensals. Other examples
of enlarged corallites or tumors in the exoskeleton have been
attributed to cellular proliferative disorders, including neoplasia (reviewed in Peters et al. 1986). Whitened protuberant
calcified tumors have been found on branching acroporid
corals in the Caribbean and Indo-Pacific. These skeletal
masses have proliferating gastrovascular canals and
associated calicodermis (calicoblastic epidermis), the
calicoblasts drive the deposition of the aragonite exoskeleton of the coral. As the calicoblastic epithelioma grows,
porous skeleton formed by proliferation of gastrovascular
canals lined by basal body wall tissue is formed more rapidly
than it is in the surrounding tissue, resulting in degeneration
of normal polyp structures and loss of zooxanthellae from
gastrodermal cells. Mucocytes normally in the epidermis of
the coral disappear from the epidermis covering the tumor as
the tumor mass grows larger. Having lost the mucous secretory capabilities of the epidermis, the coral is unable to shed
sediments and the tissue becomes ulcerated and invaded
with filamentous algae. Branches having tumors also exhibit
reduced skeletal accretion and growth. Both genetic and
environmental factors appear to affect the distribution of
tumor-bearing colonies (Peters et al. 1986; Coles and
Seapy 1998; Yamashiro et al. 2000).
Additional cases of cellular proliferative disorders generally termed growth anomalies (GAs) have been discovered
in coral species worldwide, often with bizarre development
of polyps as well as skeletal morphologies (e.g., Gateño
et al. 2003; Work et al. 2008a; Burns et al. 2011; Couch
et al. 2014). Aeby et al. (2011a) used 937 quantitative coral
disease surveys from around the tropical Pacific Ocean and
evaluated the prevalence of GAs in relation to several environmental parameters. Strongest correlation of GAs in
Acropora and Porites spp. was with coral colony densities
and higher regional human population sizes. Suspected

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

159

pathogens may include nutrient pollution, fungi (DomartCoulon et al. 2006), or an infectious agent. Kaczmarsky and
Richardson (2007) reported transmission of growth anomaly
lesions at the point of contact on two apparently healthy
small colonies of Porites (lutea or lobata) studied in aquaria
in the Philippines, and one arising without contact that was
in an aquarium with an affected coral.
Despite the wealth of data accumulating about all of the
coral diseases, it is clear that many questions remain. Multidisciplinary research needs to be conducted on the same
samples collected at the same time from the same locations,
and this must include epizootiology (epidemiology, distribution and abiotic factors), histopathology (light and electron
microscopy), microbiology, molecular biology, biochemistry, and analytical chemistry of environmental and tissue
samples. Microbiological or molecular studies of suspected
pathogens are not of much value unless histopathological
examinations are performed at the same time to provide the
necessary “phenotypic anchoring” to describe the condition
(¼ structure) of the host’s tissue, detect the presence of
microorganisms and microparasites, evaluate how well the
host was functioning at the time of sample collection, and
aid in understanding pathogenesis and immunity.

8.3.2.3 Molluscs
Diverse species of molluscs live on coral reefs or in adjacent
seagrass beds, but few studies have been conducted on these
animals, except for the commercially important giant and
fluted clams (Tridacna spp.), queen conch (Strombus gigas),
and pearl oysters (Pinctada spp.). Diseases of temperate
molluscs are caused by viruses, bacteria, fungi, and protozoan and metazoan parasites; nutritional, developmental,
and neoplastic disorders are also known. Thus, it is probable
that similar diseases are present in tropical molluscs, particularly where reefs are also stressed by abiotic factors.
Giant clams from the Great Barrier Reef were found to
contain large numbers of the protozoan Perkinsus
sp. (Fig. 8.7). It has been suggested that this microorganism,
in conjunction with cooler water temperatures, was responsible for observed mortalities affecting up to a third of the
giant clams at Lizard Island from 1984 to 1987. However,
the protozoan was also found at low levels of infection and
not associated with mortalities in other bivalves on the reef
(84 species from the families Spondylidae, Arcidae, and
Chamidae, as well as the Tridacnidae were examined).
These results indicate that there may be species-specific
host susceptibilities among the bivalves, several different
species of Perkinsus, or variations in the prevalence of
pathogenic strains of Perkinsus (Goggin and Lester 1987).
A temperate relative of this protozoan, Perkinsus marinus,
has been responsible for extensive mortalities of oysters
along the east coast of the United States. The relationship
of this pathogen to changes in environmental conditions,

Fig. 8.7 Divers sampling a dying Tridacna gigas from North Direction Reef, Great Barrier Reef, Australia during perkinsosis outbreak
(Photo courtesy of N. Quinn)

including salinity and temperature, has been investigated,
and careful monitoring and control measures have been
undertaken to protect these food resources (Fisher 1988).
Further histological studies of the giant clam mortalities
off Lizard Island revealed the presence of an unidentified
unicellular organism in some of the clams (Alder and Braley
1989), but many questions remain about the nature of this
epizootic. Perkinsus olseni and an exotic species of
Perkinsus have been associated with mortalities in ornamental Tridacna crocea shipped to the United States for aquaria
(Sheppard and Phillips 2008; Sheppard and Dungan 2009).
Studies of cultured T. gigas revealed that their newly settled
veliger larvae are also susceptible to known pathogenic
marine bacteria, particularly Aeromonas, Plesiomonas, Vibrio, Pseudomonas, Alteromonas, and Alcaligenes spp., with
variability in species/strains for initiating mortality (Sutton
and Garrick 1993).
A mass mortality of wild queen conch was reported from
the Hol Chan Marine Reserve, Ambergris Cay, Belize,
mid-September to mid-November 1991, but the cause was
not identified (Williams and Bunkley-Williams 2000).
Cárdenas et al. (2005, 2007) discovered an apicomplexan
infecting the digestive gland of S. gigas at Alacranes Reef,

160

Mexico, and San Andres Island, Colombia, incidentally during a study on their reproduction, collecting 30 specimens
monthly for 1 year at each site. Heavy infections were
characterized by 75–100 % of digestive tubule cryptic and
secretory epithelial cells showing trophozoites, sporocysts,
and gamonts containing macrogametes or microgametes and
discharged sporocysts present in stomachs. Both populations
were affected, the intensity of infections varied from heavy
to few infected tubules with the month sampled, but no trend
was evident. Although morbidity was not observed, the
infections were present in conch throughout the year, and
reduced fecundity was associated with the infections.
The commercial market for mother-of-pearl oysters,
Pinctada margaritifera, in French Polynesia was severely
damaged in 1995 by a virus that killed up to a million oysters
and culture of Pinctada spp. in the Indo-Pacific has been
affected by several other diseases associated with viruses,
Perkinsus sp., or other protistan, bacterial, and metazoan
agents (Jones 2007). Larval trematodes of the family
Bucephalidae cause parasitic castration or destruction of
gonadal tissue in marine bivalves; such infections occur in
Pinctada spp. and in a burrowing tridacnid clam from the
Great Barrier Reef (Shelley et al. 1988). Bott et al. (2005)
found digenean trematode parasites from the families
Bucephalidae, Gorgoderidae, and Monorchiidae (in low
prevalences, overall 2.3 %) in 12 of 47 species of bivalves
from Queensland, Australia, waters, including Heron Island
and Lizard Island on the Great Barrier Reef some were new
host records. Molluscs possess cellular and humoral defense
mechanisms that help to control pathogens but investigations
of these immune responses have not been performed on their
counterparts in subtropical and tropical marine habitats.

8.3.2.4 Crustaceans
Most reef crustaceans are small and inconspicuous or cryptic. Examples include banded coral shrimps (Stenopus spp.),
cleaner shrimps (Periclimenes spp.) associated with
anemones, burrowing mantis shrimps (Gonodactylus spp.,
Callianassa spp.), snapping shrimps that hide in corals or
sponges (Alpheus spp.), and a variety of decorator crabs,
coral crabs, hermit crabs, and the arrow crab (Stenorhynchus
seticornis). The spiny lobsters (Panulirus spp.) and slipper
or Spanish lobsters (Scyllarides spp.) are the objects of
important subsistence and commercial fisheries in tropical
marine waters. However, reports of disease in most of these
species are lacking.
Temperate lobsters (Homarus spp.), penaeid shrimp, and
various edible crabs are known to be susceptible to a variety
of pathogens and parasites, as well as abiotic diseases related
to poor nutrition and water quality (Sindermann 1990;
Stentiford 2011, introduction to special issue on crustacean
diseases). Exposure to pollutants and other environmental
stressors are known to cause damage to gills (black gill

E.C. Peters

disease) and exoskeletons (shell disease) and reduce the
quality of lobster and crab fisheries. Both of these diseases
involve ulcerations of tissue with necrosis and bacterial
invasion. In shell disease, chitinoclastic microorganisms
are responsible for eroding the shell, which may have been
damaged by mechanical, chemical, or microbial action,
followed by secondary infection of the underlying tissue by
facultative pathogens (Shields 2011). Again, most of the
research has been performed on commercial species, particularly those held in culture facilities, with a few reports of
shell disease, pathogenic microorganisms, and parasites in
tropical commercially fished crustaceans.
Crustaceans possess fixed and mobile phagocytic cells in
the gills, the pericardial sinus, and at the bases of
appendages. They produce bactericidins, agglutinins, and
lysins to deal with pathogens and parasites. Bactericidins
of the West Indian spiny lobster (Panulirus argus) have been
examined (see review in Sindermann 1990), and found to be
partially nonspecific. Bactericidin activity was enhanced
against other Gram-negative bacteria following injections
of formalin-killed bacteria. A major concern of the global
cultured penaeid shrimp industry has been viruses, particularly white spot syndrome virus (WSSV), and the possibility
that some viruses from shrimp pond culture have been
released into wild populations through effluent discharges
or viruses from wild crustaceans have been introduced into
ponds through untreated influent. A survey using sensitive
nested PCR screening by Chakraborty et al. (2002) found
that multiple species of apparently healthy wild marine
shrimps, crabs, and squilla harbored WSSV off the east
and west coasts of India, although whether the virus causes
mortalities in the wild crustaceans has not been reported.
Shields and Behringer (2004) discovered a viral disease
with mean prevalence of 6–17 % of sampled juvenile
P. argus from sites surveyed in western Florida Bay and
along the reef tract in the Florida Keys during different
seasons and years (1999–2000). Affected spiny lobsters
were lethargic or suffered tremors, could not right themselves, were shunned by other lobsters, and had milky hemolymph that did not clot. Hemocytes (hyalinocytes and
semigranulocytes) and connective tissue cells had
emarginated condensed chromatin, hypertrophied nuclei,
and faint eosinophilic Cowdry-type A inclusions. The
inclusions were found to be composed of unenveloped,
nonoccluded, herpes-like DNA virus (HLV-PA, PaV1)
virions. Injections of raw hemolymph from infected animals
into healthy lobsters resulted in morbidity and mortality
within 80 days post injection; the virus has now been
found in lobsters from the U.S. Virgin Islands, Mexico,
and Belize and juveniles are most susceptible (Shields
2011). This disease is of great concern to the commercial
fishery for spiny lobster in the Caribbean. Behringer
et al. (2012) also discovered that traps baited with sick

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

161

Fig. 8.8 Progressive stages in
the death of tropical western
Atlantic long-spined sea urchins,
Diadema antillarum, during the
mass mortalities

lobsters attracted fewer lobsters than those baited with
apparently healthy lobsters (11 % of the latter tested positive
for the virus). Shields (2011) noted that spiny lobsters should
be screened for this virus and other infectious agents (bacteria, fungi, protozoans, helminthes, and even other
crustaceans) to help prevent their spread as culture of this
species increases.

8.3.2.5 Echinoderms
The echinoderms are represented by such diverse animals as
crinoids, sea cucumbers, sea stars, sea urchins, and brittle
stars, and all are found in tropical marine habitats. Their
influence on the structure and function of coral reef
ecosystems can be substantial, particularly in food webs
and bioerosion (Birkeland 1989). While bacterial and protozoal diseases of temperate sea urchins and sea stars have
received much attention from invertebrate pathobiologists,
there have been few studies on the etiologies of diseases and
mass mortalities in tropical echinoderms, including the most
extensive epizootic ever reported for a marine invertebrate.
Two species of echinoids were observed dying in 1981
around Hawaii. Echinothrix calamaris displayed drooping
spines, loss of spines, and sloughing of the tissue covering
the test, beginning on the island of Hawaii, then a few
months later at Molokai, Maui, Oahu, and Kauai. Similar
signs were observed on Diadema paucispinum on Hawaii,
but not on other sea urchin species (reviewed in Birkeland
1989). The first mortalities of the long-spined sea urchin
Diadema antillarum were seen on reefs off the Caribbean
coast of Panama in January 1983. Mortalities of only this
species subsequently occurred at other sites around the
Caribbean and Bermuda for 1 year, in a pattern that followed
major water currents from west to east, with a few
exceptions (Lessios 1988). Diseased urchins were initially
recognized by an accumulation of sediment on their spines
and sloughing of the spine epidermis, accompanied by
unusual behavior, moving out from their normal hiding
places in the reef into the open during daylight, where they
were preyed upon by fish. Pigment in the skin covering the
spine muscles, peristome, and anal cone then disappeared,
and the spines broke off. The tube feet that normally hold the
urchin to the sea bed weakened and could not fully retract.
Finally, patches of skin and spines sloughed off and the test
disintegrated (Fig. 8.8). Diseased urchins died within 4 days
to 6 weeks, depending on locality, although some urchins
apparently survived the disease and recovered from the

broken spines and skin lesions. Overall, adult populations
of this urchin were reduced by 85–100 % at sites throughout
the tropical western Atlantic Ocean, with juveniles being
rarely affected. Localized mortality events were reported
affecting the urchins Astropyga magnifica and Eucidaris
tribuloides, in the mid-1980s, in shallow waters of Puerto
Rico.
Although numerous studies were conducted on the ecology of the long-spined urchin die-offs in 1983 and on later
isolated mortalities of remaining populations of
D. antillarum off St. Croix, Grand Cayman, and Jamaica,
few samples were obtained for histological or
microbiological investigations. Gram-positive anaerobic
spore-forming rods of the bacterial genus Clostridium were
isolated from two urchins showing similar signs of the disease that died while in a flow-through seawater aquarium in
Miami in 1983. Laboratory experiments with cultures of
these bacteria caused death of healthy urchins in 10 h to
6 days, depending on water temperature. Microscopic examination of fixed tissues from apparently healthy and diseased
St. Croix urchins collected post-1983 revealed Grampositive micrococci in mucoid cells of the glandular crypts
of the esophagus and in connective tissue and muscle
bundles of the peristome, spines, and ampullae. However,
bacterial samples were not taken in this study (see Peters
1993 for review). A mass mortality of large D. antillarum
that occurred in the Florida Keys in April 1991 (Forcucci
1994) provided samples during the event for bacteriological,
virological, and histopathological studies, but results proved
inconclusive and differed from the earlier observations; the
Lower Keys population densities decreased by 88–100 %
6 months later and Middle Keys and Upper Keys reef sites
had densities <0.01/m2 by the summer of 1991, the same as
after the 1983 event.
A species-specific waterborne pathogen, perhaps
introduced to the Caribbean from the ballast water of ships
traversing the Panama Canal and discharged at the Caribbean entrance and at Barbados, was suspected to be the
causal agent of the D. antillarum epizootic in 1983, since
no other species were affected and no adverse changes in
environmental conditions were noted at any of the sites
(Lessios 1988; Jackson et al. 2014). Perhaps this pathogen
is still present and affecting the recovery of the species,
although some sites report increasing densities, at others
larval recruits disappear and few, scattered adult urchins
are found, which probably affects their gamete fertilization

162

E.C. Peters

success (Edmunds and Carpenter 2001; Miller et al. 2003).
Re-occurring outbreaks of disease in other echinoid species
have been noted. Echinoderms possess cellular and humoral
defense mechanisms in the coelomic fluid and associated
tissues that can protect them from invasion by potential
pathogens. However, they also usually contain mutualistic
bacteria in the gut or other organs. Recent research on
immune responses of D. antillarum, Echinometra lucunter,
E. viridis, and T. ventricosus on reefs of St. Croix, USVI,
revealed that long-spined urchins released lower levels of
humoral immune molecules when challenged with lipopolysaccharide or several bacteria species compared with the
other urchin species (Beck et al. 2009). This suggests that
D. antillarum may have some molecular, gene-mediated
defect in its immunity that contributed to its susceptibility
to the suspect waterborne, perhaps bacterial, pathogen; however, more research is needed on its populations throughout
the Caribbean to determine the significance of these data.
The coral-eating Indo-Pacific crown-of-thorns seastar
Acanthaster planci has an unusual bacterium living in its
body wall, mucus secretions, and pyloric caecum. When the
sea star is held in aquaria, these bacteria become facultative
pathogens and leave the animal vulnerable to secondary
infections by Vibrio spp. and other bacteria. Mass mortalities
of juvenile A. planci that occurred near Fiji over 3 years were
not caused by bacteria, however, but apparently resulted
from sporozoan parasites infecting the digestive tract
(reviewed in Birkeland and Lucas 1990). Similarly, a wide
variety of metazoans have been observed to associate with
echinoderms, usually without harming their hosts. In tropical
marine species, however, Emson et al. (1985) reported
severe damage to brittlestars that were heavily parasitized
by copepods. Williams and Wolf-Waters (1990) observed
emaciation and lack of gonad development in a Caribbean
basketstar in which the stomach was heavily infected by a
normally ectoparasitic copepod. Additional investigations of
these organisms may reveal new biotic pathogens.

8.3.3

Reef Vertebrates

Although numerous examples of viral and bacterial diseases
and epizootics have been reported in temperate marine
fishes, particularly commercially gathered species and
those species used in aquaculture, few studies have examined their counterparts in tropical species. Besides fishes, sea
turtles are globally important tropical marine vertebrates and
sea snakes may also be encountered on Indo-Pacific reefs.
Some information on the normal physiology, biochemistry,
behavior, and diseases has accumulated from research on
those tropical marine species popular in aquariums and
oceanariums (Stoskopf 1993) and in aquaculture
(Glazebrook and Campbell 1990a). Studies on captive fishes

and turtles have confirmed their sensitivity to adverse
changes in environmental conditions and the importance of
appropriate water quality and proper nutrition in maintaining
their health (Roberts 1989). Diseases which occur under
these artificial conditions tell us little about what occurs on
coral reefs and there have been few published field
observations.

8.3.3.1 Fishes
Panek (2005) provided a detailed review of the literature for
coral reef fish species in the tropical western Atlantic Ocean
and Gulf of Mexico, but noted that much remains to be
learned about distributions of parasites and pathogens in
relation to their hosts, the roles of cleaner fish in limiting
parasite harm, mechanisms of pathogen transmission, and
environmental issues.
Injured or weakened reef species, such as damselfishes,
squirrelfishes, soldierfishes, and angelfishes, may become
infected
with
marine
bacteria.
Gram-negative
Photobacterium spp., Vibrio alginolyticus, V. anguillarum,
and Gram-positive Streptococcus spp. have been isolated
from fishes with skin ulcerations, septicemias,
exophthalmias or popeye, and other lesions. Thousands of
demersal reef fish washed ashore on beaches of Barbados,
Grenada, Saint Vincent, the Grenadines, and Tobago from
July to September 1999; the bacterium Streptococcus iniae
was isolated from a few moribund fish (Ferguson
et al. 2000). Keirstead et al. (2013) isolated S. iniae from
moribund and dead fishes found off St. Kitts and Nevis, West
Indies, in January–February 2000. Species affected included
snappers (Lutjanus campechanus, Ocyurus chrysurus),
parrotfish (Sparisoma aurofrenatum, Scarus taeniopterus)
and red hind (Epinephelus guttatus). Panek (2005) noted
that mycobacteriosis of tropical marine fishes has only
been reported from the Red Sea, affecting cage-reared and
nearby wild rabbitfish (Siganus rivulatus). Lymphocystis
disease, caused by an iridovirus, is characterized by giant
cell “tumors” and has been reported from Australia, Hawaii,
the Pacific coast of Panama, Indochina, the South Pacific,
and the Caribbean. Other viral diseases, including viral
erythrocytic necrosis (VEN) caused by another apparent
iridovirus, an infectious pancreatic necrosis-like virus
(IPN), and a rhabdovirus infection, have been found in
captive tropical marine species such as angelfishes, wrasses,
and blennies. However, little work has been done on viruses
isolated from these fishes (Stoskopf 1993). Captive tropical
marine fishes are also susceptible to fungal infections such as
Ichthyophonus hoferi.
A wide variety of protozoan and metazoan parasites are
known from examination of field-caught and captive tropical
marine fishes. They include ectoparasitic flagellates
(Amyloodinium and Crepidoodinium pathogens of gills and
skin), trypanosomes, hemoflagellates of the genus

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

163

Fig. 8.9 Neurofibromas
developing on a bicolor
damselfish, Pomacentrus
partitus, Molasses Reef, Florida;
a single, unpigmented, nodular
tumor appears on the upper back
under the dorsal fin and several
small pigmented tumors are
apparent near the eyes, on the
head

Trypanoplasma, various genera of ciliates, sporozoans (phylum Apicomplexa), microsporidians, myxosporidians
(genera Ceratomyxa, Myxidium, or Leptotheca have been
found in gallbladders of marine tropical fish), turbellarians,
nematodes, digenetic and monogenetic trematodes,
aspidogastrids, cestodes, leeches, copepods, and isopods.
The trematodes, cestodes, and nematodes require one or
more intermediate hosts to complete their life cycle. Many
of these parasites do not cause overt disease or mortalities
among wild fish (e.g., Bunkley-Williams and Williams
1994; Aeby 2002; Work et al. 2004b) although they may
be found in potentially pathogenic numbers during mass
mortalities; however, losses of captive fish have been
attributed to ectoparasitic infestations, especially “coral
fish disease” or “velvet disease” caused by Amyloodinium
spp. The cleaner fishes and shrimps in tropical marine
habitats apparently keep the levels of most pathogens and
parasites quite low in wild fish populations, although this has
not been demonstrated experimentally.
A few tumors (neoplasms) have been reported in tropical
fishes, including hemangiosarcoma, iridophoroma, fibroma,
nasal papilloma, reticulum cell sarcoma, and fibropapilloma
(Panek 2005). Of particular interest are the neurofibromas,
neurofibrosarcomas, and chromatophoromas of the bicolor
damselfish, Pomacentrus partitus (Schmale 1991; Schmale
et al. 2002). Damselfish neurofibromatosis (DNF), which is
similar to the disease in humans known as von
Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis, is characterized by the
appearance of conspicuous hyperpigmented spots on the
skin and fins that arise from multicentric peripheral nervesheath (Schwann cell) tumors that vary in degree of pigmentation (due to chromatophores, including melanophores).
The tumors (Fig. 8.9) were highly malignant, spreading
throughout the animal and eventually causing its death as
the result of destruction of vital organs or as secondary

infections develop. Affected bicolor damselfish have been
found only on reefs off South Florida at prevalences of up to
23.8 %. Disease rates remained relatively stable for each reef
site examined over a 9-year period. The distribution of
tumorous fish and the results of laboratory transmission
experiments suggested that an infectious agent, such as a
virus, is involved. The virus could be transmitted during the
frequent aggressive interactions that occur among neighboring individuals defending their territories. After much work,
Schmale et al. (2002) reported identifying an unusual virus
characterized by extrachromosomal DNAs (eDNA)—damselfish virus-like agent (DVLA)—from cell lines derived
from tumors. Infected cells produced tumors when injected
into healthy fish; a similar pattern of eDNA was found in
those tumors as well as tumors from spontaneously diseased
fish, thus, DVLA is probably the etiologic agent of this
disease. Damselfish neurofibromatosis is being developed
as an animal model to study neurofibromatosis and possible
treatments for humans. Other species of damselfish and other
tropical reef species such as snappers in the Florida Keys
have also been found to be afflicted with neurofibromas or
neurofibrosarcomas (Panek 2005) and chromatophoromas
were found in two species of Hawaiian butterflyfish (Okihiro
1988).
The limited observations of disease in fishes in the wild
may be the result of predation. Any condition that weakens a
fish or changes its normal behavior, or causes its death,
would make it susceptible prey. Isolated cases of diseased
fish may thus be overlooked. However, there have been mass
mortalities of tropical marine fish, with records from the
tropical western Atlantic Ocean in 1946; some of these
may have been due to exposure to red tide toxins (Landsberg
1995). Mass mortalities of mullet in the mid-1970s near
Miami, Florida, were believed to result from infection of
their brains with a newly described bacterium that caused

164

twirling and other signs of neurologic disease (Udey
et al. 1977). A Caribbean-wide massive fish kill occurred
in August and September of 1980, following Hurricane
Allen. Tons of dead and dying fishes washed onto beaches.
Wild and captive fish exhibited odd behavior suggesting that
fishes surviving the mortalities were “sick” for several
months. The cause was never identified. Millions of herrings
(Harengula spp.) died at eight locations around the Caribbean during the 1980s (Williams and Buckley-Williams
1990). These mass mortalities were disjunct over time and
geographic location, and examinations of moribund fish did
not reveal any bacterial infections or other conditions that
might have been responsible. Landsberg (1995) reported
results of histopathologic examinations of several affected
herbivorous reef angelfish, identifying a ciliate parasite,
Brooklynella hostilis, as well as bacteria and other
microorganisms, as possible etiologic agents of this slime
blotch disease first noticed in 1993 along the Florida reef
tract. She speculated that biotoxins from dinoflagellates in
angelfish food might have contributed to immunosuppression and infections, leading to the mortalities. Williams and
Bunkley-Williams (2000) noted that further work linked the
ciliate to the disease and it might have caused other
moralities of reef fish in the Caribbean.

8.3.3.2 Sea Snakes
Little is known about diseases of the poisonous sea snakes.
External parasites include ticks on the skin of laticaudids and
a turbellarian on Pelamis sp. from the Gulf of Panama.
Foraminiferans, hydrozoans, serpulid polychaetes, bivalve
molluscs, bryozoans, and barnacles have been recorded as
fouling organisms on sea snakes. Most external symbionts
are probably dislodged, however, as the result of frequent
shedding of the skin and knotting behavior in these
organisms (Zann et al. 1975). Endoparasites include chigger
mites in the lungs of the semiterrestrial Laticauda spp.,
nematodes, and trematodes (Heatwole 1987; see also Culotta
and Pickwell 1993).
8.3.3.3 Sea Turtles
The green (Chelonia mydas), loggerhead (Caretta caretta),
and hawksbill (Eretmochelys inbricata) turtles are frequently
found on coral reefs and associated habitats, where they feed
on seagrasses, macroinvertebrates, and sponges, respectively.
Most observations of diseases in sea turtles have also been
conducted on oceanarium- and aquaculture-reared animals,
with reports consisting primarily of systemic bacterial
diseases, metazoan parasites, nutritional disorders, and skin
tumors. In one survey of 22 wild turtles obtained from the
Torres Strait off Townsville, Queensland, Australia,
Glazebrook and Campbell (1990b) found a great number
and diversity of parasites. Two species of flukes (Class
Digenea: Order Spirorchiidae) were found in the heart and

E.C. Peters

major associated arteries and their eggs were found in other
organs and tissues. The presence of the flukes was associated
with clinical signs of disease, and muscle wasting, bronchopneumonia, and septicemia-toxemia were present in some of
the afflicted turtles. Cardiovascular flukes have also been
found in wild turtles in the United States, India, Puerto
Rico, and elsewhere in Australia. Seven species of flukes
were found in the gastrointestinal tracts of nine wild turtles,
but there were no signs of pathological changes. The green sea
turtle leech can extensively damage the tissues of its host, but
Bunkley-Williams et al. (2008) identified it as infecting a
posthatchling juvenile hawksbill sea turtle, and also described
sea turtle leech erosion disease caused by superinfection of
the loggerhead sea turtle leech in a hawksbill sea turtle.
The most studied disease of sea turtles affects wild green,
hawksbill, loggerhead, and the other species of sea turtles
from the tropical Atlantic and Pacific Oceans (Balazs and
Pooley 1991; Williams et al. 1994). Sea turtle fibropapillomatosis (Fig. 8.10) appears as irregular lobulated tumors
(neoplasms), up to 30 cm or more in diameter, on the skin,
scales, scutes, eyes, and surrounding tissues, and fibromas
also develop internally (Flint et al. 2010). The tumors may
interfere with vision, breathing, feeding, and swimming. In
the 1980s and 1990s, the condition seemed to be afflicting
increasing numbers of turtles and spread geographically.
The eggs of parasitic trematode worms occur often, but not
always, in dermal capillaries within the tumors. A herpesvirus has been identified in the tumor tissue; however, culture
of these virus isolates has not been successful (Lackovich
et al. 1999; Lu et al. 2000a). One study was able to cause the
tumors by inoculation of cell-free filtrates of tumor
homogenates, but their protected status made further experimental evaluation of their etiology difficult. A biotoxin,
okadaic acid, produced by dinoflagellates that could be present on turtle grass might also promote the development of
these tumors (Landsberg et al. 1999; Davidson 2001). Kang
et al. (2008) used in-situ hybridization on tissue sections
from fibropapillomas and fibromas of Puerto Rican green
turtles to show that the fibropapilloma-associated turtle herpesvirus (FPTHV) was present only in the nuclei of epithelial cells of the tumors, not the underlying dermis fibroblasts.
Although the ability of the tumors to cause debilitation in the
turtles varies, immunosuppression, with development of
systemic bacterial infections consisting primarily of vibrios,
probably leads to turtle morbidity and mortality (Work
et al. 2004a). The geographic distribution of affected turtles
suggests that a combination of abiotic and biotic factors are
necessary for the development of this disease.
Other novel viruses have been detected in diseased sea
turtles, including herpesviruses (Stacy et al. 2008),
papillomaviruses (Manire et al. 2008), and a tornovirus
(Ng et al. 2009). The application of new molecular techniques
to obtain and sequence DNA or RNA from a variety of

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

165

Fig. 8.10 A green sea turtle,
Chelonia mydas, with large
fibropapillomas on its neck and
flippers, collected at El Tuque,
near Ponce, Puerto Rico (Photo
courtesy of L. Bunkley-Williams)

cells may lead to the discovery of other pathogens in the sea
turtles.

8.4

Ecological Implications

Early investigations of the structure and function of coral
reefs and associated soft-bottom habitats (mangrove and
seagrass communities) generally failed to consider the role
of pathogens and parasites in population and community
development and alterations. Until the 1970s, diseases of
tropical marine organisms were virtually unknown. However, whether caused by abiotic stressors or parasites, they
are normal in nature. In a review on this topic, Hudson
et al. (2006) noted that research has shown parasites and
biotic pathogens comprise perhaps half of the biomass of
ecosystems, shape community structure and promote ecosystem functioning, and drive biodiversity and productivity.
Revisiting the host-pathogen-environment paradigm, we
understand that parasites will be affected by anthropogenic
changes as well as their hosts, but perhaps in different ways,
some surviving better than others, some having the ability to
infect new hosts rather than die out, and some better able to
change and adapt to new conditions at different stages in
their life cycles. We consider them to be problems, and yet
host population control is essential so organisms do not
exceed the carrying capacity of the ecosystem. The difference is that enzootic (or endemic) levels of disease agents,
producing low levels of morbidity or mortality, are not
alarming, whereas epizootic (epidemic) levels or outbreaks
get our attention. In areas where organisms are adapted to
changing conditions, such as temperate zones, the autumnal
reduction in light and temperature causes deciduous plants to
stop photosynthesis, and their leaves become susceptible to
infections with viruses, bacteria, and fungi that will break
down the tissue, recycling it into nutrients on the forest floor,

while protecting the plant from winter storm (wind and
snow) effects. When such infections occur during the spring
or summer, damaging the leaves so they cannot support the
plant, then the agent is causing disease. Despite our aversion
to pathogens, developed from long observations of
morbidities and mortalities caused by them and dislike of
suffering (our own or others), they are necessary for proper
ecosystem functioning (Gomez et al. 2012).
Improvements in recognizing and diagnosing diseases
and identifying pathogens have probably contributed to the
increase in reports of emerging infectious diseases (EIDs) in
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems (Gire et al. 2012), because
disease agents likely have been circulating undetected in
ecosystems for years as subclinical infections. With
continuing human population growth, urban development,
deforestation, point and nonpoint source pollution, and
increasing carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere,
we have witnessed ecosystem alterations and increasing loss
of organisms to abiotic and biotic stressors impairing their
health (Vicente 1989; Harvell et al. 1999, 2004, 2007; Selig
et al. 2006; Altizer et al. 2013; Ban et al. 2014). Other
chapters in this book examine the changes occurring when
populations of reef organisms are altered as a result of
predation or exposure to adverse environmental conditions.
The same principles and effects apply when populations are
affected by biotic diseases. This section will review some of
the impacts that diseases have on the tropical marine environment, as aptly summarized by the German marine ecologist Otto Kinne in Box 8.2, and additional concerns.
As discussed in other chapters, the demise of even one
species of coral-reef organism may have serious
repercussions for the structure, composition, processes, and
function of a particular community and the reef ecosystem.
Diseases of scleractinian corals and coralline algae are perhaps the most important factor in changing the structure and
function of coral reef communities because loss of live tissue

166

Box 8.2
“Diseases affect basic phenomena of life in oceans and
coastal waters: for example, life span, life cycle, abundance,
distribution,
metabolic
performance,
nutritional requirements, growth, reproduction, competition, evolution, as well as organismic tolerances to
natural and man-made environmental stress. In short,
diseases are a major denominator of population
dynamics.” (Kinne 1980, p. 1)

cover not only reduces the number of polyps producing
gametes for potential new recruits, but also opens up new
hard substratum space for settlement of benthic organisms.
However, Kuta and Richardson (1997) found that, in agreement with other studies, BBD caused extensive tissue loss in
reef framework coral species, but few benthic fauna
colonized the bared skeletal areas in 5 years of observations,
and of those, only one was a reef-framework coral species,
which could contribute to a shift in community structure
over time. Edmunds (2000) followed tagged coral colonies
for 11 years on a shallow reef off St. John, U.S. Virgin
Islands and reported similar, but very low, rates of recruitment by scleractinians to coral skeletons remaining after
being killed by BBD or Hurricane Hugo. This study was
undertaken in a bay with a fully protected watershed and
relatively pristine reefs, and the only increase in infection
rates and loss of tissue occurred during late summer when
seawater temperatures were at their peak.
The other coral tissue loss diseases have affected large
areas of reef throughout the Caribbean and Florida Keys and
now threaten corals in the Red Sea and Indo-Pacific oceans.
The population reductions in branching acroporid corals as a
result of WBD, with bioerosion of the remaining
exoskeletons, changed reef structure (Gladfelter 1982).
Aronson and Precht (2001) reported that WBD caused significant mortality of acroporid corals throughout the Caribbean during the past three decades, resulting in changes to
the framework of these reefs. The mass mortality of
A. cervicornis from disease or other causes in the central
shelf lagoon of the Belize Barrier Reef during a 10-year
period around 1990 was discovered by coring into the substratum. It was the first widespread change in species composition in this region for more than 3,000 years. Agaricia
tenuifolia replaced the staghorn, but bleached and then was
replaced by Porites porites. These species do not provide the
same high relief habitat and framework as acroporids, and
the associated organisms differ as well. In the Florida Keys,
changes in corals and other organisms have been
documented (Porter et al. 2002; Alevizon and Porter 2014;

E.C. Peters

and others), some associated with disease outbreaks and loss
of acroporids, but with high variability among reef sites and
uncertainties in understanding the causes (Brandt et al. 2012;
Miller et al. 2014). Similar structural modifications are
occurring on Indo-Pacific reefs with the loss of the large
table acroporids (Hobbs and Frisch 2010) and montiporids
(Work et al. 2012) to WS, montiporids to atramentous
necrosis (Jones et al. 2004), and many other partial to complete mortalities resulting from diverse diseases in numerous
species (see regional reviews by multiple authors in
Rosenberg and Loya 2004). Which species are lost before
others will affect community structure and function as well
(Ostfeld and LoGiudice 2003).
Although community alterations have been observed
more often on coral reefs, diseases may also affect a variety
of relationships and processes in soft-bottom benthic
communities on reefs and in seagrass beds and mangroves.
In addition to predation and competition, bioturbation, sedimentation, primary and secondary production, and other
phenomena may be changed with the loss of one or more
micro- or macro-organisms to biotic or abiotic diseases.
During the mass mortality of turtlegrass Thalassia
testudinum in Florida Bay, more than 23,000 ha were
affected, with 4,000 ha of seagrass beds completely lost,
especially in protected basins. Many reef organisms are
associated with seagrass habitats. They are used by larvae
and juveniles as refugia from predators. Soft-bottom
invertebrates used as prey may suffer from the loss of the
seagrass and they can also be affected by pathogens and
parasites, as documented in a review by Sousa (1991). Elevated water temperature, the recent local decline in frequency of hurricanes, elevated salinity, and chronic
sediment hypoxia were noted as other factors that may
have contributed to the Florida Bay die-off (Roblee
et al. 1991), stressors that could also have directly or indirectly affected the other organisms living in this ecosystem.
Parasites and their hosts are embedded in food webs
(Hudson et al. 2006). Not only may these organisms affect
host responses to environmental stresses, thereby altering
population size and geographic distribution, but they can
also influence biodiversity and productivity and alter intraand interspecific interactions of species (Rohde 1993). The
dramatic phase shift that occurred following the year-long
mass mortality of Diadema antillarum adversely affected
reefs throughout the tropical western Atlantic, as macroalgae
grew with reduced herbivore control, preventing recruitment
of corals and other benthic organisms (Lessios et al. 1988).
Acroporid corals damaged by Hurricane Allen off Jamaica
initially survived as fragments, then apparently succumbed
to WBD and macroalgal growth after the D. antillarum mass
mortality, changing the pattern of predation by coral snails
and shifting the roles of other predators there (Knowlton

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

et al. 1990). Marked reductions in multiple species of
sponges (51.3 % of species and 42.6 % of total sponge
volume), as documented on a shallow reef at Bocas del
Toro, Panama, over 14 years and possibly occurring elsewhere in the Caribbean and the Florida Keys, resulted in the
loss of several essential ecosystem services, particularly
water clarity, nutrient regeneration, and shelter from
predators for many species (Wulff 2006b).
Extensive loss of topographic relief has affected fish
populations as protective niches and important habitats
have been altered. The decline of coral reef fisheries
among western Atlantic coral reefs may be related to such
structural changes from the loss of acroporids and other coral
species, although overfishing has probably contributed to
losses of fish species diversity and numbers as well (Rogers
1985; Jackson et al. 2001) argued that human impacts on
marine ecosystems, including the phase shifts experienced
during the last 20 years on coral reefs in the Caribbean and
community changes on other reefs, can be traced back to the
continuous fishing activities of humans. Overfishing of large
vertebrates and shellfish, to the extent that they are now
missing from most coastal ecosystems, resulted from aboriginal, then European, colonization and exploitation, leading
to disease in lower trophic levels. Populations of their prey
either became so dense that transmission of pathogenic
microorganisms was facilitated (e.g., in Diadema), or
predators of microbes (e.g., suspension feeders) have been
removed, facilitating their population explosion now as
eutrophication of coastal marine ecosystems increases.
Jackson et al. (2014) noted that limiting the blame to climate
change as the culprit of disease outbreaks will not lead to
appropriate remedies and advocated protection for herbivorous fishes to deal with the macroalgae biomass on many
reefs, which has been shown to contribute to coral diseases
and reef degradation since the 1980s.
Dinsdale and Rohwer (2011) examined this situation on
many degraded coral reefs, where top predators have been
“fished down the food chain,” and observed that with
increased nutrients supporting phytoplankton and
macroalgae, the primary productivity that would normally
be transferred through herbivores to the predators through
the trophic cascade has instead accumulated as particulate
and dissolved organic matter, supporting a different,
enriched heterotrophic microbial community. Although the
top predators’ prey are more abundant, the prey’s food
sources have increased in abundance and cannot be controlled as before. Potentially pathogenic microbes have
been identified on algae (Nugues et al. 2004), as well as in
the water column, supporting more bioeroders and sponges
that may serve as reservoirs of microorganisms implicated in
coral diseases (Ein-Gil et al. 2009; Negandhi et al. 2010;
reviewed in Webster and Taylor 2012). Bowles and Bell
(2004) noted that overfishing of sea turtles was not related

167

to seagrass wasting disease. The numerous other reef
organisms that are now being “fished” for food, construction
materials, home aquaria, home decorations, and other commercial or socioeconomic reasons are also contributing to
the defaunation of coral reef ecosystems, loss of habitat, and
disturbances to marine food webs, which will change parasite-host relationships and reduce the ability of organisms to
tolerate infections. Another aspect of sorting out the impacts
of population reductions on diseases brings us back to the
food webs. Diseases can alter the reproductive potential of a
population by direct effects on gonad development (e.g.,
parasitic castration), or indirectly by altering male-to-female
ratios and mating or spawning behavior, not to mention
reducing population densities and the distribution of
individuals that will impair successful reproduction (e.g.,
Allee effect) (McCallum et al. 2004). What has not been
explored are indirect effects on nutrition by reduced intake
and absorption of nutrients due to loss of prey or
zooxanthellae (contributing nutrients to corals, sponges,
anemones) that would also reduce gamete production. And
in turn, reducing seasonal releases of gametes and larvae that
served as food for other reef organisms. When 90–100 % of
Diadema antillarum died, how did their loss change food
webs that had been dependent on their spawning?
Porter and Tougas (2001, Figure 5 and text) proposed a
model of coral disease in which changing environmental
conditions are responsible for altering the interactions
between hosts and pathogens, as immune systems become
compromised because of various stressors. They noted that
inclusion of environmental quality was necessary to explain
the simultaneous increase in the diseases, species affected,
and rates of mortality over large geographic areas, and
hypothesized that the incidence of disease would be higher
near polluted population centers. This has certainly been
shown in widely separated studies on coral diseases, such
as in the U.S. Virgin Islands (Kaczmarsky 2005), the
Philippines (Kaczmarsky 2006), Abrolhos Bank, Brazil
(Francini-Filho et al. 2008), southeast Florida (Dustan
et al. 2008), Hawaiian Islands (Aeby et al. 2011a; Couch
et al. 2014), and the Great Barrier Reef (Lamb and Willis
2011), as well as coralline algae diseases of Indo-Pacific
reefs (Vargas-Angel 2010) at sites where domestic sewage,
agricultural, industrial, and stormwater discharges flow onto
reefs. In other cases, diseases do not correlate with the level
of human influence (Quéré et al. 2014, coralline algae
diseases in Curaçao; Gochfeld et al. 2012, Aplysina red
band syndrome not altered with nutrient enrichment), but
these seem to be rare exceptions. Field and laboratory
experiments have demonstrated pollution impacts on coral
reef organisms. For example, nutrients, organic matter,
crude oil, copper sulfate, dextrose, potassium phosphate,
and sediment have increased morbidity and mortality in
exposed corals, but the addition of antibiotics (in lab

168

experiments) has prevented disease (e.g., Mitchell and Chet
1975; Hodgson 1990; Kuta and Richardson 2002; Bruno
et al. 2003; Kline et al. 2006; Voss and Richardson 2006;
Brandt et al. 2013), indicating that microbial population
control, and its potential for producing anoxia and toxins,
is important in addition to the toxicity of the contaminant. In
addition, hosts and parasites may have different responses to
altered environmental conditions. Increased water
temperatures have been found to support growth rates for
microbes while damaging plants or animals, with increases
in disease outbreaks (e.g., Ben-Haim et al. 2003; Selig
et al. 2006; Vargas-Ángel 2010; Muller and van Woesik
2014), but more work is needed on synergistic effects of
stressors. For example, Williams et al. (2014) found that the
fungal destruction of thallus tissue in CFD was reduced
when pCO2 and water temperature were elevated together,
although the coralline algae calcification was reduced by
these stressors, adversely affecting resistance to microboring organisms.
The first response of many aquatic organisms, particularly corals, when exposed to an irritant is increased production of mucus to form a protective barrier and limit the
exposure. The mucus in turn is used by bacteria and other
microorganisms for food. The ensuing breakdown of this
organic matter can lead to the release of bacterial toxins
and anoxia, resulting in disease if the affected organism
cannot escape. Different species of corals can produce different kinds and quantities of antimicrobial compounds to
control different kinds of surface bacteria (Koh 1997). Sea
fans use chemicals to inhibit tissue infection by fungi and
cellular defenses to sequester the hyphae (Kim et al. 2000;
Petes et al. 2003). Energy for production of mucus or antimicrobial compounds that support a protective microbial
community (mechanisms reviewed in Krediet et al. 2014),
as well as cellular and humoral immune responses, can be
limited in animals when nutritional sources are scarce or
metabolic processes are altered by exposure to temperature
extremes or pollutants, leaving them susceptible to attack by
latent, facultative, or opportunistic pathogens (Hayes and
Goreau 1998; Lesser et al. 2007; Mao-Jones et al. 2010).
Furthermore, secretion of mucus is suppressed following
prolonged exposure to elevated temperatures or pollutants.
Metabolism, production of detoxification enzymes, and
other physiological and biochemical operations are also
altered by exposures to anthropogenic pollutants and
changes in water quality (Couch and Fournie 1993), which
may also affect prey, resulting in structural and functional
changes in tissues leading to morbidity and mortality of
resident invertebrate and fish populations.
A study of corals and octocorals from Biscayne National
Park, off southeast Florida (USA) in the 1970s revealed high
levels of organochlorine pesticides and heavy metals, similar
to those levels used in toxicity tests that led to bleaching and

E.C. Peters

mortality of the same reef-building species of corals in the
laboratory. One-third of coral colonies sampled from this
site exhibited lesions and possibly pathogenic
microorganisms were found in their tissues, although the
presence of the lesions could not be linked to contaminants
in this study (Glynn et al. 1989). Similar studies of corals off
Australia (Lewis et al. 2009) and elsewhere have detected
uptake of pesticides and heavy metals into tissues; however,
the presence of biotic or abiotic diseases in contaminated
corals from these sites has not been documented. High tissue
burdens of such chemicals resulting from chronic exposures
may increase the susceptibility of the organisms to biotic
disease agents when additional physical or chemical stresses
are encountered. Fish diseases are also increasing in tropical
bays and mangrove areas where man-made solid and other
wastes are disposed. Observations on commercial fish
catches in Biscayne Bay, off Miami, Florida, over 10 years
(1970–1982) revealed a variety of surficial lesions and
abnormalities, including ulcerations, fin and integumental
hemorrhages, fin erosion, eye abnormalities, scoliosis,
scale disorientation, parasitoses, emaciation, and tumors,
especially in bottom-feeding fishes. Excessive nutrients
from sewage; petroleum hydrocarbons from marinas,
shipping, port facilities, and industries; and toxic chemicals,
pesticides, and polychlorinated biphenyls leaching from
landfills, rivers, and canals contributed to the decline in
water quality of Biscayne Bay (Skinner and Kandrashoff
1988). Because many young stages of reef fishes use inshore
waters that may contain toxic chemicals and high levels of
nutrients from sewage disposal and stormwater runoff, as
well as heavy sedimentation and turbidity, they may also be
susceptible to diseases caused by microbial pathogens and
parasites. The role of these diseases in limiting reef fish
populations, however, is unknown because appropriate studies have not been conducted. Infectious diseases have
decreased in some fish populations as intense fishing has
reduced host numbers (Ward and Lafferty 2004), limiting
contact and exposure and making disease transmission inefficient. This is the “host-density threshold,” another important aspect of disease ecology.
Fishing top predators can indirectly favor disease transmission in prey populations, however, as prey end up in
denser aggregations (Lafferty 2004). In 1982,
D. antillarum populations were thick on Caribbean reefs,
improving the likelihood of infecting another individual.
Perhaps their predators were reduced for some reason and
perhaps they were starving, which could have further
compromised their weak immune systems (McNamara and
Buchanan 2005). However, in communities with high biodiversity of potential parasite hosts, a dilution effect has been
noted, reducing the risk of vector-borne diseases (Ostfeld
and LoGiudice 2003). Loss of biodiversity increases disease
transmission by changing the abundance of the host or

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

vector; by changing the behavior of the host, vector, or
parasite; or by changing the condition of the host or vector,
although more biodiverse communities may contribute
novel pathogens (Aeby 2002; Keesing et al. 2010). These
concepts have not been explored much in relation to
parasites and diseases of coral reef organisms; however,
Wood et al. (2014) compared fished and unfished reefs in
the Northern Line Islands of the Pacific and found that
fishing decreased parasite species, with directly transmitted
parasites significantly more affected than those that
alternated among hosts, but the effects varied depending on
the host species and their sensitivity to fishing impacts. Aeby
et al. (2011b) compared Acropora WS-affected corals on a
reef in the species-poor northwestern Hawaiian Islands with
species-rich reefs off American Samoa. They observed high
mortality in the monospecific stand of Acropora on the
Hawaiian reef, whereas the disease could not easily spread
among different Acropora spp. on the American Samoa
reefs, because they differed in their apparent susceptibility
to infection and disease severity. Perhaps that was true also
of the formerly magnificent monospecific thickets of Caribbean acroporids, facilitating transmission of the agent(s)
responsible for WBD, particularly where thickets had been
formed by fragmentation of a highly susceptible genotype.
Bruno et al. (2007) found that high (>50 %) coral cover on
Australian reefs correlated with increased prevalence of WS
following exposure to warm temperatures.
Differences in susceptibility to certain diseases as a result
of individual or species attributes (genetic or otherwise) are
also influential in changing the composition of reef
communities (e.g., Koh 1997; Dinsdale 2000; Weil
et al. 2000). For example, at some locations, diseased corals
show a clumped distribution (Bruckner et al. 1997;
Richardson 1998; Sato et al. 2009; Porter et al. 2011),
whereas in other areas, diseases have a random distribution
(e.g., Edmunds 1991), and exhibit localized adaptation in
host infectivity (Grosholz and Ruiz 1997). Muller and
Woesik (2012) examined the spatial patterns of yellowband disease, dark-spot disease, and white-plague disease
and suggested that when diseases are not clustered they do
not follow a contagious model, rather environmental
thresholds are first exceeded that increase corals’ susceptibility or the environmental changes create a favorable environment for already present biotic pathogens and increase
their virulence (e.g., Remily and Richardson 2006). Garcı́a
et al. (2002) found differences in disease susceptibility not
only among coral species in the Parque Nacional
Archipiélago de los Roques off Venezuela, but also among
different size classes. For example, WP and CYBD was
more likely to affect large (older) colonies (0.9–10.8 m2)
and BBD small colonies (0.01–0.09 m2). Muller and van
Woesik (2014) found that white pox was more likely to
adversely affect older A. palmata colonies after temperature

169

stress. An analysis of constitutive levels of immune-related
processes against prevalence and number of diseases affecting different Caribbean coral species revealed that those
species studied belonging to older lineages (Siderastreidae,
Poritidae, Meandrinidae) tended to resist diseases better than
recently divergent lineages (Montastraeidae and
Merulinidae, but not Mussidae) (Pinzon et al. 2014), with
similar indications in Indo-Pacific species (Palmer
et al. 2010). Whether vectors are involved in the spread of
pathogenic microorganisms, how they interact with tolerant
or susceptible hosts, and whether their own genetics and
physiological mechanisms make them susceptible or tolerant
to environmental stressors or biotic pathogens, probably also
influences the prevalence and intensity of disease outbreaks
(Lu et al. 2000b; Panek 2005; Williams and Miller 2005;
Aeby and Santavy 2006; Råberg 2014), as well as each
organism’s holobiont (Mydlarz et al. 2010).
If the complexity of disease ecology within an ocean
basin were not enough, another concern is that organisms
are being transported out of their home habitat and
introduced into similar or new habitats many miles away,
often in different regions or even oceans, as the result of
global shipping, oceanarium, aquaculture, marine laboratory, and tropical aquarium trade activities. In addition to
attaching to the hull of a vessel, larval organisms and potential microbial pathogens can be picked up with ballast water
and deposited offshore or in another harbor. Commercial
shipments of live organisms contain not only the desired
(or target) organisms or their eggs and larvae, but also
other organisms that may be parasites or pathogens in the
water or seaweed in which they were originally packed and
within the target organisms. If placed in flow-through
systems, without proper quarantine or treatment of the
discharged water, these animals will be released to the sea.
Releases of unwanted fish or other animals by tropical
aquarists have also led to introductions in foreign lands. If
conditions are suitable for survival and reproduction, the
species may become established at the new site. Some
introduced species have positive effects in their new environment. But the vast majority of documented introductions
have adversely affected existing commercial and recreational fisheries as the result of competition, predation, and
the introduction of parasites and pathogens (e.g., Carlton and
Geller 1993; Chakraborty et al. 2002; Padilla and Williams
2004; Sheppard and Dungan 2009), a phenomenon termed
“pathogen pollution.” A number of countries developed
regulations and procedures to restrict such introductions,
including permit and certification requirements; culture
using filtered, recirculating sea-water; quarantine
procedures; and destruction of diseased stocks (DeVoe
1992), as well as new ballast-water regulations (Gollasch
et al. 2007). Controlling individual behavior can be difficult
(e.g., the aquarist who dumps unwanted organisms in the

170

ocean; Padilla and Williams 2004). However, Jackson
et al. (2014) surmised that the massive losses of Caribbean
acroporids and long-spined urchins may have resulted from
the “enormous increases in ballast water discharge from bulk
carrier shipping since the 1960s” (p. 21) and the fact that
millions of years of isolation from the Indo-Pacific may have
made them particularly vulnerable to introductions of novel
pathogenic microorganisms or ones that had developed
increased virulence. For already introduced organisms,
such as two species of lionfish (Pterois) that are now
established (since 1985) and multiplying in the Caribbean
Sea and tropical western Atlantic Ocean where they are
consuming native fishes (Schofield 2009), perhaps native
pathogens and parasites will eventually control them (Albins
and Hixon 2013).
Pathogen, nutrient, and toxicant pollution can also be
dispersed globally by air. The numerous diseases observed
throughout the Caribbean caused scientists at the
U.S. Geological Survey to wonder whether disease incidence might be related to dust from the Sahara/Sahel Region
of Africa that blows across the Atlantic and is increasing due
to drought conditions there. Studies of air samples revealed
the presence of viable bacteria and molds apparently
shielded from damaging UV radiation by the dust particles.
One species of soil fungus found in samples is Aspergillis
sydowii, identified as the causal agent of the disease aspergillosis in sea fans. Other potentially pathogenic
microorganisms have been found in the dust; human cases
of respiratory diseases increase on Caribbean islands and
elsewhere when dust sweeps into the area (Shinn
et al. 2000; Griffin 2007). Furthermore, Hayes et al. (2001)
speculated that increased deposition of the iron-rich dust
throughout the region since the 1970s, along with local and
global climate changes and pollution loading, has probably
altered the ability of coastal ecosystems to limit the multiplication of potentially pathogenic microorganisms,
resulting in disease outbreaks in marine organisms in these
nutrient-enriched areas. Examining multiple environmental
and anthropogenic factors on a small scale (e.g., microhabitat) to large scale (e.g., satellite data of sea surface
temperatures) will be important in research on diseases of
reef organisms (Bruckner 2002).
The complexity of disease, as it is now understood four
decades after the first reports of coral diseases, has
incorporated a larger role for anthropogenic alterations in
the environment, particularly climate change as shallowwater ocean temperatures have warmed and elevated pCO2
is altering ocean pH. When culture techniques were developed for bacteria, Robert Koch established criteria (Koch’s
postulates) more than 100 years ago for determining the
causal agents of human diseases. Associations of suspected
pathogens have been reported in the literature, and some
scientists have claimed that they have identified a

E.C. Peters

microorganism or polymicrobial infectious agent by applying Koch’s postulates, but experimental tests of Koch’s
postulates are challenging. Some agents cannot be cultured
outside of the host and viruses require special cell lines in
which to grow them so they have not been cultured in the
laboratory (e.g., herpesvirus of sea turtle fibropapillomatosis, Rickettsiales-like organism of staghorn coral).
They may also require interactions with other biotic or
environmental factors to become virulent (Lackovich
et al. 1999; USEPA 2000). Thus, the procedures used to
identify pathogenic microorganisms are changing. Molecular tools can now be used to examine DNA sequences and
tease out potentially pathogenic microorganisms in comparison to unaffected hosts (e.g., Ritchie et al. 2001; Lesser
et al. 2007; Work et al. 2008b; Sutherland et al. 2011;
Wilson et al. 2012; Roder et al. 2013; Sweet et al. 2013,
2014; Williams et al. 2014). However, diseases can also
result from abiotic, nutritional, or genetic factors. While
molecular approaches are providing key insights into the
microbiomes of affected species, it is crucial that this
research be done in conjunction with histopathological
examinations and physiological tests to understand which
target cells or organs are being damaged and how pathogenesis occurs. In addition, analytical chemistry is needed to
determine whether affected species contain critical body
residues of chemical contaminants or biotoxins, which may
actually be the pathogen(s) and cause the microbiome to
shift to cellular degraders using molecules from the dying
cells for their substrates. And, of course, numerous other
environmental variables must be considered. The use of
tools that integrate stressor exposures and effects, such as
biomarkers, may help to identify causal mechanisms for
subcellular damage underlying observed effects at the population or community levels (Woodley et al. 2000; Morgan
et al. 2001; Richardson et al. 2001); however, the normal
ranges for the various parameters must be carefully examined first and laboratory models using cell cultures or whole
organisms are needed (Adams 1990; Huggett et al. 1992;
Scully et al. 2001). Knowledge of the variability of normal
and abnormal structure and function in most tropical marine
organisms, both within and between individuals and species,
is still lacking. Comparisons that would be useful indicators
of environmental stress are few. The study of bleaching in
corals and other organisms containing photosynthetic
symbionts has increased to the point that algal densities
and photosynthetic pigment fluorescence may be useful
indicators, as well as molecular biomarkers.
In addition, scientists in tropical marine environments
should be aware of the possibility that diseases and
mortalities observed locally may actually be major
epizootics or mass mortalities that cover large areas of
coral reefs or coastal habitats or even regions. D. Faulkner
describes a “healthy” patch reef near Eleuthera in the

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

Bahamas as having numerous D. antillarum and other species of urchins, but surprisingly noticed a patch reef not
more than 100 m away that appeared “unhealthy” even
“bleak,” with large dead colonies and algae present,
completely lacking urchins. He also could not find
D. antillarum on Hen and Chickens Reef in the upper Florida
Keys reef tract in 1975, and it, too, had dead and dying
corals. Although the cause of the reef demise in Florida
was suspected to be cold water one winter, he wondered if
the lack of urchins had prevented the corals from coming
back, as well as whether something had killed the urchins
first, resulting in the dying reefs—this was prior to the mass
mortality event (Faulkner and Chesher 1979). Could a waterborne pathogen have been present in the Caribbean prior to
1982? What has prevented their return in many areas, particularly the Florida Keys, and where they have returned, are
those urchins still susceptible to whatever killed them before
(Edmunds and Carpenter 2001; Beck et al. 2009)? Of course,
other abiotic and biotic factors may have affected the urchins
at these reefs and the sequence of events is unknown. Experience thus far suggests that more extensive networks of
scientists need to be developed to track such events and to
locate expertise to investigate the role of biotic and abiotic
diseases. Both observers in the field and specialists in
laboratories are required to respond quickly and gather
samples and essential data.
To promote the transdisciplinary and collaborative
investigations of the linkages among the health of humans,
other animals, and plants (ecosystem health) with environmental changes, the field of conservation medicine developed during the 1990s–2000s (Aguirre et al. 2012). Drawing
on data obtained from innovative monitoring strategies, ecological,
chemical,
physiological,
microbiological,
histopathological, social science, and other types of
research, patterns of shared causes, interrelationships, and
the significance of the diseases or mass mortality events can
be established to address the conservation of biodiversity. A
similar early effort was the Caribbean Aquatic Animal
Health Project at the University of Puerto Rico to develop
the Marine Ecological Disturbance Information Center
(MEDIC) to track reports of major marine ecological
disasters (MMEDs) affecting Caribbean aquatic organisms
and to alert appropriate experts when field and laboratory
studies were required (Williams and Buckley-Williams
1990). Building on this effort, we have seen increased
collaborations among experts in different disciplines
(CDHC and Targeted Coral Reef Research), more consistency in disease investigations, stakeholder notifications
about morbidity and mortality events, incorporation of quarantine or some sort of treatment protocol to prevent spread of
disease—particularly from a culture facility to field and vice

171

versa—McCallum et al. 2004), and the realization that
human health can be compromised not only by impacts of
disease on ecosystem services, but also by direct exposures
to zoonotic pathogens. For example, Keirstead et al. (2013)
determined antibiotic susceptibility (minimal inhibitory
concentrations to various antibiotics) of S. iniae to treat
fish handlers if they were infected with the bacterium during
the 2008 mass mortality of wild reef fish off St. Kitts, Nevis.
Other pathogenic microorganisms in tropical marine waters
could also infect humans, indicating the need to develop a
One Health approach as advocated in conservation medicine. Terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem health linkages must
be included (the watersheds, ridges-to-reefs concept).
In summary, investigations of the nature and role of
diseases in coral reef organisms have identified diverse
agents responsible for morbidities and mortalities. Based
on observations of commercially important invertebrates
and vertebrates from temperate seas, more diseases and
diverse parasites no doubt remain to be discovered, and
will also need to be studied. Long-term changes in water
quality, such as elevated levels of nutrients, are of particular
concern for attached or sedentary invertebrates, since they
cannot escape. Loss of important members of a food web
will ultimately affect higher predators, as will the loss of
those organisms that perform important functions in an
ecosystem, such as decomposition, bioturbation, or nutrient
recycling, and the loss of organisms that provide protection
and specialized habitats. As water conditions and habitats
change due to human actions and globalization, with intense
mixing and introductions of species to new locations driving
exposures and responses to potentially pathogenic agents,
multiple factors and scenarios need to be considered. Population losses thought to be tied to overfishing or natural predation may have been the result of disease; diseases may result
from population losses that reduce biodiversity and increase
malnutrition. Pathogens and parasites exert tremendous
pressures on individuals, populations, and communities in
their interactions with the host and environmental conditions,
and must be taken into consideration in any discussion of the
dynamics of coral reefs and associated tropical marine
habitats, and in the conservation of reef biodiversity. The
contributions of humans to the stressors experienced by reef
organisms is unprecedented in this unique period of earth’s
history, and the Anthropocene is not only changing
ecosystems, but how we must think about them.
Acknowledgements I thank the many people who have supported and
contributed to the study of diseases of coral reef organisms, particularly
Paul P. Yevich and his graduate students and colleagues who fostered
my developing curiosity about pathology, and all those who continue
efforts to understand the nature of diseases and their impacts on the
coral reef ecosystems of the world.

172

References
Adams SM (ed) (1990) Biological indicators of stress in fish. American
Fisheries Society symposium series 8. American Fisheries Society,
Bethesda
Aeby GS (2002) Trade-offs for the butterflyfish, Chaetodon
multicinctus, when feeding on coral prey infected with trematode
metacercariae. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 52:158–165
Aeby GS, Santavy DL (2006) Factors affecting susceptibility of the
coral Montastraea faveolata to black-band disease. Mar Ecol Prog
Ser 318:103–110
Aeby GS, Williams GJ, Franklin EC et al (2011a) Growth anomalies on
the coral genera Acropora and Porites are strongly associated with
host density and human population size across the Indo-Pacific.
PLoS One 6(2):e16887. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016887
Aeby GS, Williams GJ, Franklin EC et al (2011b) Patterns of coral
disease across the Hawaiian Archipelago: relating disease to environment. PLoS One 6(5):e20370. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020370
Aguirre AA, Tabor GM, Ostfeld RS (2012) Conservation medicine:
ontogeny of an emerging discipline. In: Aguirre AA, Ostfeld RS,
Daszak P (eds) New directions in conservation medicine: applied
cases of ecological health. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Ainsworth TD, Kramasky-Winter E, Loya Y et al (2007a) Coral disease
diagnostics: what’s between a plague and a band? Appl Environ
Microbiol 73(3):981–992
Ainsworth TD, Kvennefors EC, Blackall LL et al (2007b) Disease and
cell death in white syndrome of acroporid corals on the Great
Barrier Reef. Mar Biol 151:19–29
Albins MA, Hixon MA (2013) Worst case scenario: potential long-term
effects of invasive predatory lionfish (Pterois volitans) on Atlantic and
Caribbean coral-reef communities. Environ Biol Fish 96:1151–1157
Alder J, Braley R (1989) Serious mortality in populations of giant
clams on reefs surrounding Lizard Island, Great Barrier Reef.
Aust J Mar Freshwat Res 40:205–213
Alevizon WS, Porter JW (2014) Coral loss and fish guild stability on a
Caribbean coral reef: 1974–2000. Environ Biol Fish. doi:10.1007/
s10641-014-0337-5
Altizer S, Ostfeld RS, Johnson PTJ et al (2013) Climate change and
infectious diseases: from evidence to a predictive framework. Science 341:514–519
Amadjian V, Paracer S (1986) Symbiosis: an introduction to biological
associations. University Press of New England, Hanover
Angermeier H, Kamke J, Abdelmohsen UR et al (2011) The pathology
of sponge orange band disease affecting the Caribbean barrel
sponge Xestospongia muta. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 75(2):218–230
Antonius A (1985) Coral diseases in the Indo-Pacific: a first record. Mar
Ecol 6(3):197–218
Armelagos GJ, Brown PJ, Turner B (2005) Evolutionary, historical and
political economic perspectives on health and disease. Soc Sci Med
61:755–765
Aronson RB, Precht WF (2001) White-band disease and the changing
face of Caribbean coral reefs. Hydrobiologia 460:25–38
Balazs GH, Pooley SG (eds) (1991) Research plan for marine turtle
fibropapilloma. Nat Mar Fish Serv Tech Mem, NOAA-TM-NMFSSWFSC-156. US Dept Comm, NOAA, Washington
Ban SS, Graham NAJ, Connolly SR (2014) Evidence for multiple
stressor interactions and effects on coral reefs. Glob Chang Biol
20:681–697
Barneah O, Ben-Dov E, Kramarsky-Winter E et al (2007) Characterization of black band disease in Red Sea stony corals. Environ
Microbiol 9(8):1995–2006
Beck G, Miller R, Ebersole J (2009) Significance of immunological
responses in the blackspined sea urchin, Diadema antillarum, to
Caribbean-wide mass mortality. Proceedings of 11th International
Coral Reef Symposium, pp 221–225

E.C. Peters
Behringer DC, Butler MJ IV, Moss M et al (2012) PaV1 infection in the
Florida spiny lobster (Panulirus argus) fishery and its effects on trap
function and disease transmission. Can J Fish Aquat Sci 69:136–144
Ben-Haim Y, Zicherman-Keren M, Rosenberg E (2003) Temperatureregulated bleaching and lysis of the coral Pocillopora damicornis
by the novel pathogen Vibrio coralliilyticus. Appl Environ
Microbiol 69:4236–4242
Birkeland C (1989) The influence of echinoderms on coral-reef
communities. In: Jangoux M, Lawrence JM (eds) Echinoderm studies. AA Balkema, Rotterdam, pp 1–79
Birkeland C, Lucas JS (1990) Acanthaster planci: major management
problem of coral reefs. CRC Press, Boca Raton
Bott NJ, Healy JM, Cribb TH (2005) Patterns of digenean parasitism of
bivalves from the Great Barrier Reef and associated waters. Mar
Freshw Res 56(4):387–394
Bowles JW, Bell SS (2004) Simulated herbivory and the dynamics of
disease in Thalassia testudinum. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 283:127–132
Brandt ME, Ruttenberg BI, Waara R et al (2012) Dynamics of an acute
coral disease outbreak associated with the macroalgae Dictyota spp.
in Dry Tortugas National Park, Florida, USA. Bull Mar Sci 88
(4):1035–1050
Brandt ME, Smith TB, Correa AMS, Vega-Thurber R (2013) Disturbance
driven colony fragmentation as a driver of a coral disease outbreak.
PLoS ONE 8(2), e57164. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0057164
Bruckner AW (2002) Priorities for effective management of coral
diseases. NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-OPR-22. US
Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Marine Fisheries Service, Silver Spring
Bruckner AW, Bruckner RJ, Williams EH Jr (1997) Spread of a blackband disease epizootic through the coral reef system in St. Ann’s
Bay, Jamaica. Bull Mar Sci 61:918–928
Bruno JF, Petes LE, Harvell CD et al (2003) Nutrient enrichment can
increase the severity of coral diseases. Ecol Lett 6:1056–1061
Bruno JF, Selig ER, Casey KS et al (2007) Thermal stress and coral
cover as drivers of coral disease outbreaks. PLoS Biol 5(6):e124.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050124
Budd AF, Fukami H, Smith ND et al (2012) Taxonomic classification
of the reef coral family Mussidae (Cnidaria:Anthozoa:Scleractinia).
Zool J Linn Soc-Lond 166:465–529
Bunkley-Williams L, Williams EH Jr (1994) Diseases caused by
Trichodina spheroidesi and Cryptocaryon irritans (Ciliophora) in
wild coral reef fishes. J Aquat Anim Health 6(4):360–361
Bunkley-Williams L, Williams EH Jr, Horrocks JA et al (2008) New
leeches and diseases for the hawksbill sea turtle and the West Indies.
Comp Parasitol 75(2):263–270
Burns JHR, Rozet NK, Takabayashi M (2011) Morphology, severity,
and distribution of growth anomalies in the coral, Montipora
capitata, at Wai‘ōpae, Hawai‘i. Coral Reefs 30:819–826
Bythell JC, Barer MR, Cooney RP et al (2002) Histopathological
methods for the investigation of microbial communities associated
with disease lesions in reef corals. Lett Appl Microbiol 34:359–364
Bythell JC, Pantos O, Richardson L (2004) White plague, white band,
and other “white” diseases. In: Rosenberg E, Loya Y (eds) Coral
health and disease. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 351–365
Cárdenas EB, Frenkiel L, Aranda DA (2005) One more threat for the
queen conch Strombus gigas? Coccidian (Apicomplexa) infection
of the S. gigas digestive gland: preliminary results. Gulf Caribb Fish
Inst 58:421–426
Cárdenas EB, Frenkiel L, Zarate AZ et al (2007) Coccidian
(Apicomplexa) infecting Strombus gigas Linné 1758 digestive
gland. J Shellfish Res 26(2):319–321
Carlton JT, Geller JB (1993) Ecological roulette: the global transport of
nonindigenous marine organisms. Science 261:78–82
Casas V, Kline DI, Wegley L et al (2004) Widespread association of a
Rickettsiales-like bacterium with reef-building corals. Environ
Microbiol 6:1137–1148

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

Cervino J, Goreau TJ, Nagelkerken I et al (2001) Yellow band and dark
spot syndromes in Caribbean corals: distribution, rate of spread,
cytology, and effects on abundance and division rate of
zooxanthellae. Hydrobiologia 460:53–63
Cervino JM, Winiarski-Cervino K, Polson SW (2006) Identification of
bacteria associated with a disease affecting the marine sponge,
Ianthella basta, in New Britain, Papua New Guinea. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 324:139–150
Cervino JM, Thompson FL, Gomez-Gil B et al (2008) The Vibrio core
group induces yellow band disease in Caribbean and Indo-Pacific
reef-building corals. J Appl Microbiol 105(5):1658–1671
Chakraborty A, Otta SK, Joseph B et al (2002) Prevalence of white spot
syndrome virus in wild crustaceans along the coast of India. Curr
Sci 82(11):1392–1397
Coles SL, Seapy DG (1998) Ultra-violet absorbing compounds and
tumorous growths on acroporid corals from Bandar Khayran, Gulf
of Oman, Indian Ocean. Coral Reefs 17:195–198
Cook GM, Rothenberger JP, Sikaroodi M et al (2013) A comparison of
culture-dependent and culture-independent techniques used to characterize bacterial communities on healthy and white plaguediseased corals of the Montastraea annularis species complex.
Coral Reefs 32:375–388
Couch JA, Fournie JW (eds) (1993) Pathobiology of marine and estuarine organisms. CRC Press, Boca Raton
Couch CS, Garriques JD, Barnett C, Preskitt L, Cotton S, Giddens J,
Walsh W (2014) Spatial and temporal patterns of coral health and
disease along leeward Hawai’I Island. Coral Reefs 33(3):693–704
Culotta WA, Pickwell GV (1993) The venomous sea snakes: a comprehensive bibliography. Krieger Publishing Company, Malabar
Daszak P, Cunningham AA, Hyatt AD (2001) Anthropogenic environmental change and the emergence of infectious diseases in wildlife.
Acta Trop 78:103–116
Davidson OG (2001) Fire in the turtle house: the green sea turtle and the
fate of the ocean. Public Affairs, New York
Deem SL, Karesh WB, Weisman W (2001) Putting theory into practice:
wildlife health in conservation. Conserv Biol 15(5):1224–1233
Denner EBM, Smith G, Busse H-J et al (2003) Aurantimonas
coralicida gen. nov. sp. nov. the causative agent of white plague
type II on Caribbean scleractinian corals. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
53:1155–1163
Devoe MR (1992) Introductions and transfers of marine species:
achieving a balance between economic development and resource
protection. South Carolina Sea Grant Consortium, Charleston
Diaz-Pulido G (2000) Microbial degradation of the crustose red alga
Peyssonnelia spp. on reefs of the Caribbean and Great Barrier Reef.
Proc 9th Int Coral Reef Symp 2:1257–1260
Dinsdale EA (2000) Abundance of black-band disease on corals from
one location on the Great Barrier Reef: a comparison with abundance
in the Caribbean region. Proc 9th Int Coral Reef Symp 2:1239–1243
Dinsdale EA, Rohwer F (2011) Fish or germs? Microbial dynamics
associated with changing trophic structures on coral reefs. In:
Dubinsky Z, Stambler N (eds) Coral reefs: an ecosystem in transition. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 231–240
Domart-Coulon IJ, Traylor-Knowles N, Peters E et al (2006) Comprehensive characterization of skeletal tissue growth anomalies of the
finger coral Porites compressa. Coral Reefs 25(4):531–543
Downs CE, Ostrander GK, Rougee L et al (2012) The use of cellular
diagnostics for identifying sub-lethal stress in reef corals. Ecotoxicology 21(3):768–782
Durako MJ, Kuss KM (1994) Effects of Labyrinthula infection on the
photosynthetic capacity of Thalassia testudinum. Bull Mar Sci 54
(3):727–732
Dustan P (1977) Vitality of reef coral populations off Key Largo,
Florida: recruitment and mortality. Environ Geol 2:51–58
Dustan P, Fauth JE, Pante E et al (2008) Using cellular diagnostics to
link land-based sources of pollution with coral reef degradation in
South Florida. Proc 11th Int Coral Reef Symp, pp 495–499

173
Edmunds PJ (1991) Extent and effect of black band disease on a
Caribbean reef. Coral Reefs 10:l61–l65
Edmunds P (2000) Recruitment of scleractinians onto the skeletons of
corals killed by black band disease. Coral Reefs 19:69–74
Edmunds P, Carpenter R (2001) Recovery of Diadema antillarum
reduces macroalgal cover and increases abundance of juvenile
corals on a Caribbean reef. Proc Natl Acad Sci 98:5067–5072
Ein-Gil N, Ilan M, Carmeli S et al (2009) Presence of Aspergillus
sydowii, a pathogen of gorgonian sea fans in the marine sponge
Spongia obscura. ISME J 3:752–755
Emson RH, Mladenov PV, Wilkie IC (1985) Studies of the biology of
the West Indian copepod Ophiopsyllis reductus (Siphonostomatoida: Cancerillidae) parasitic upon the brittlestar
Ophiocomella ophiactoides. J Nat Hist 19:151–l7
Faulkner D, Chesher R (1979) Living corals. Clarkson N Potter,
New York
Ferguson HW, St. John VS, Roach CJ et al (2000) Caribbean reef fish
mortality associated with Streptococcus iniae. Vet Rec
147:662–664
Fisher WS (ed) (1988) Disease processes in marine bivalve molluscs.
Am Fish Soc Spec Pub 18
Flint M, Limpus CJ, Patterson-Kane JC, Murray PJ, Mills PC (2010)
Corneal fibropapillomatosis in green sea turtles (Chelonia mydas) in
Australia. J Comp Pathol 142:341–346
Forcucci D (1994) Population density, recruitment and 1991 mortality
event of Diadema antillarum in the Florida Keys. Bull Mar Sci 54
(3):917–928
Francini-Filho RB, Moura RL, Thompson FL et al (2008) Diseases
leading to accelerated decline of reef corals in the largest South
Atlantic reef complex (Abrolhos Bank, eastern Brazil). Mar Pollut
Bull 56:1008–1014
Frias-Lopez J, Klaus JS, Bonheyo GT, Fouke BW (2004) Bacterial
community associated with black band disease in corals. Appl
Environ Microbiol 70(10):5955–5962
Galloway SB, Work TM, Bochsler VS et al (2007) Coral disease and
health workshop: coral histopathology II. NOAA Tech Mem NOS
NCCOS 56 and CRCP 4. National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Silver Spring
Garcı́a A, Cr
oquer A, Pauls SM (2002) Relacı́on entre la incidencia de
enfermedades y la estructura de tallas y especies en corales del
Parque Nacional y Archipielago de los Roques, Venezuela.
Interciencia 27(9):448–453
Garz
on-Ferreira J, Gil-Agudelo DL, Barrios LM et al (2001) Stony
coral diseases observed in southwestern Caribbean reefs.
Hydrobiologia 460:65–69
Gateño D, Le
on A, Barki Y et al (2003) Skeletal tumor formations in
the massive coral Pavona clavus. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 258:97–108
Gil-Agudelo DL, Smith GW, Weil E (2006) The white band disease
type II pathogen in Puerto Rico. Rev Biol Trop 54:59–67
Gire SK, Stremlau M, Andersen KG et al (2012) Emerging disease or
diagnosis? Science 338:750–752
Gladfelter WG (1982) White-band disease in Acropora palmata:
implications for the structure and growth of shallow reefs. Bull
Mar Sci 32:639–643
Glazebrook JS, Campbell RSF (1990a) A survey of the diseases of
marine turtles in northern Australia. 1. Farmed turtles. Dis Aquat
Org 9:83–95
Glazebrook JS, Campbell RSF (1990b) A survey of the diseases of
marine turtles in northern Australia. 11. Oceanarium-reared and
wild turtles. Dis Aquat Org 9:97–104
Glynn PW, Enochs IC (2011) Invertebrates and their roles in coral reef
ecosystems. In: Dubinsky Z, Stambler N (eds) Coral reefs: an
ecosystem in transition. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 273–325
Glynn PW, Szmant AM, Corcoran EF et al (1989) Condition of coral
reef cnidarians from the northern Florida reef tract: pesticides,
heavy metals, and histopathological examination. Mar Pollut Bull
20:568–576

174
Gochfeld DJ, Easson CG, Freeman CJ et al (2012) Disease and nutrient
enrichment as potential stressors on the Caribbean sponge Aplysina
cauliformis and its bacterial symbionts. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
456:101–111
Goggin CL, Lester RJG (1987) Occurrence of Perkinsus species
(Protozoa, Apicomplexa) in bivalves from the Great Barrier Reef.
Dis Aquat Org 3:113–117
Gollasch S, David M, Voigt M, Dragsund E, Hewitt C, Fukuyo Y (2007)
Critical review of the IMO international convention on the management of ships’ ballast water and sediments. Harmful Algae 6:585–600
Gomez A, Nichols ES, Perkins SL (2012) Parasite conservation, conservation medicine, and ecosystem health. In: Aguirre AA, Ostfeld
RS, Daszak P (eds) New directions in conservation medicine:
applied cases of ecological health. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp 67–81
Goreau TJ, Cervino J, Goreau M et al (1998) Rapid spread of diseases
in Caribbean coral reefs. Rev Trop Biol 46(Suppl 5):157–171
Green EP, Bruckner AW (2000) The significance of coral disease
epizootiology for coral reef conservation. Biol Conserv 96:347–361
Griffin DW (2007) Atmospheric movement of microorganisms in
clouds of desert dust and implications for human health. Clin
Microbiol Rev 20(3):459–477
Grosholz ED, Ruiz GM (1997) Evidence for regional adaptation of
black band disease at Carrie Bow Cay, Belize. Proc 8th Int Coral
Reef Symp 1:579–582
Halpern BS, Walbridge S, Selkoe KA et al (2008) A global map of
human impact on marine ecosystems. Science 319:948–952
Harvell CD, Kim K, Burkholder JM et al (1999) Emerging marine
diseases – climate links and anthropogenic factors. Science
285:1505–1510
Harvell CD, Aronson R, Baron N et al (2004) The rising tide of ocean
diseases: unsolved problems and research priorities. Front Ecol
Environ 2(7):375–382
Harvell D, Jordán-Dahlgren E, Merkel S et al (2007) Coral diseases,
environmental drivers, and the balance between coral and microbial
associates. Oceanography 20(1):172–195
Hayes RL, Goreau NI (1998) The significance of emerging diseases in
the tropical coral reef ecosystem. Rev Trop Biol 46(Suppl
5):173–185
Hayes ML, Bonaventura J, Mitchell TP et al (2001) How are climate
and marine biological outbreaks functionally linked? Hydrobiologia
460:213–220
Heatwole H (1987) Sea snakes. The New South Wales University
Press, Sydney
Hobbs JP, Frisch AJ (2010) Coral disease in the Indian Ocean: taxonomic susceptibility, spatial distribution and the role of host density
on the prevalence of white syndrome. Dis Aquat Org 89(1):1–8
Hodgson G (1990) Tetracycline reduces sedimentation damage to
corals. Mar Biol 104:493–496
Hudson PJ, Dobson AP, Lafferty KD (2006) Is a healthy ecosystem rich
in parasites? Trends Ecol Evol 21(7):381–385
Huggett RJ, Immerses RA, Mehrle PM Jr et al (1992) Biomarkers:
biochemical, physiological, and histological markers of anthropogenic stress. Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton
Jackson JBC, Kirby MX, Berger WH et al (2001) Historical overfishing
and the recent collapse of coastal ecosystems. Science 293:629–638
Jackson JBC, Donovan M, Cramer K et al (eds) (2014) Status and
trends of Caribbean coral reefs: 1970–2012. Global Coral Reef
Monitoring Network, IUCN, Gland
Jones JB (2007) Review of pearl oyster mortalities and disease
problems. In: Bondad-Reantaso MG, McGladdery SE, Berthe FCJ
(eds) Pearl oyster health management: a manual. FAO Fish Technical Paper, No. 503, Rome, pp 61–70
Jones RJ, Bowyer J, Hoegh-Guldberg O et al (2004) Dynamics of a
temperature-related coral disease outbreak. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
281:63–77

E.C. Peters
Jones AM, Berkelmans R, van Oppen MJH et al (2008) A community
change in the algal endosymbionts of a scleractinian coral following
a natural bleaching event: field evidence of acclimatization. Proc R
Soc B 275(1641):1359–1365
Kaczmarsky LT (2005) Is there a relationship between proximity to
sewage effluent and the prevalence of coral disease? Carib J Sci 41
(1):124–137
Kaczmarsky LT (2006) Coral disease dynamics in the central
Philippines. Dis Aquat Org 69:9–21
Kaczmarsky L, Richardson LL (2007) Transmission of growth
anomalies between Indo-Pacific Porites corals. J Invertebr Pathol
94(3):218–221
Kang KI, Torres-Velez FJ, Zhang J et al (2008) Localization of
fibropapilloma-associated turtle herpesvirus in green turtles
(Chelonia mydas) by in-situ hybridization. J Comp Pathol
139:218–225
Keesing F, Belden LK, Daszak P et al (2010) Impacts of biodiversity on
the emergence and transmission of infectious diseases. Nature
468:647–652
Keirstead ND, Brake JW, Griffin MJ et al (2013) Fatal septicemia
caused by the zoonotic bacterium Streptococcus iniae during an
outbreak in Caribbean reef fish. Vet Pathol. doi:10.1177/030098
5813505876
Kellogg CA, Piceno YM, Tom LM et al (2014) Comparing bacterial
community composition of healthy and dark spot-affected
Siderastrea siderea in Florida and the Caribbean. PLoS One 9
(10):e108767. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108767
Kim K, Kim PD, Alker AP (2000) Chemical resistance of gorgonian
corals against fungal infections. Mar Biol 137:393–403
Kinne O (1980) Introduction to the treatise and to volume I. In: Kinne O
(ed) Diseases of marine animals, vol I. Wiley, Chichester, pp 1–11
Kline DI, Vollmer SV (2011) White band disease (type I) of Caribbean
acroporid corals is caused by pathogenic bacteria. Sci Rep 1:1.
doi:10.1038/srep7
Kline DI, Kuntz NM, Breitbart M et al (2006) Role of elevated organic
carbon levels and microbial activity in coral mortality. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 314:119–125
Knowlton N, Lang JC, Keller BD (1990) Case study of natural population collapse: post-hurricane predation on Jamaican staghorn corals.
Smithson Contrib Mar Sci 31:1–25
Koh EGL (1997) Do scleractinian corals engage in chemical warfare
against microbes? J Chem Ecol 23(2):379–398
Korrubel JL, Riegl BR (1998) A new disease from the southern Arabian
Gulf. Coral Reefs 17:22
Kramarsky-Winter E, Harel M, Siboni N et al (2006) Identification of a
protist-coral association and its possible ecological role. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 317:67–73
Krediet CJ, Ritchie KB, Paul VJ et al (2014) Coral-associated microorganisms and their roles in promoting coral health and thwarting
diseases. Proc R Soc B 280(1755):20122328. doi:10.1098/rspb.
2012.2328
Kushmaro A, Banin E, Loya Y et al (2001) Vibrio shiloi sp. nov., the
causative agent of bleaching of the coral Oculina patagonica. Int J
Syst Evol Microbiol 51:1383–1388
Kuta KG, Richardson LL (1997) Black band disease and the fate of
diseased coral colonies in the Florida Keys. Proc 8th Int Coral Reef
Symp 1:575–578
Kuta KG, Richardson LL (2002) Ecological aspects of black band
disease of corals: relationships between disease incidence and environmental factors. Coral Reefs 21:393–398
Lackey RT (2003) Appropriate use of ecosystem health and normative
science in ecological policy. In: Rapport DJ, Lasley WL, Rolston
DE et al (eds) Managing for healthy ecosystems. Lewis Publishers,
Boca Raton, pp 175–186
Lackovich JK, Brown DR, Homer BL et al (1999) Association of
herpesvirus with fibropapillomatosis of the green turtle Chelonia

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

mydas and the loggerhead turtle Caretta caretta in Florida. Dis
Aquat Org 37:89–97
Lafferty KD (2004) Fishing for lobsters indirectly increases epidemics
in sea urchins. Ecol Appl 14(5):1566–1573
Lamb JB, Willis BL (2011) Using coral disease prevalence to assess the
effects of concentrating tourism activities on offshore reefs in a
tropical marine park. Conserv Biol 25(5):1044–1052
Lancaster J (2000) The ridiculous notion of assessing ecological health
and identifying the useful concepts underneath. Hum Ecol Risk
Assess 6(2):213–222
Landsberg JH (1995) Tropical reef-fish disease outbreaks and mass
mortalities in Florida, USA: what is the role of dietary biological
toxins. Dis Aquat Org 22:83–100
Landsberg JH, Balazs GH, Steidinger KA et al (1999) The potential
role of natural tumour promotors in marine turtle fibropapillomatosis. J Aquat Anim Health 11:199–210
Lang JC (ed) (2003) Status of coral reefs in the Western Atlantic:
results of initial surveys, Atlantic and Gulf Rapid Reef Assessment
(AGRRA) Program. Atoll Res Bull 496:1–630
Lawrence SA, Davey JE, Aeby GS et al (2014) Quantification of viruslike particles suggests viral infection in corals affected by Porites
tissue loss. Coral Reefs 33:687–691
Lesser MP, Jarett JK (2014) Culture-dependent and cultureindependent analyses reveal no prokaryotic community shifts or
recovery of Serratia marcescens in Acropora palmata with white
pox disease. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 88(3):457–467
Lesser MP, Bythell JC, Gates RD et al (2007) Are infectious diseases
really killing corals? Alternative interpretations of the experimental
and ecological data. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 346:36–44
Lessios H (1988) Mass mortality of Diadema antillarum in the Caribbean: what have we learned? Ann Rev Ecol Syst 19:371–393
Lewis SE, Brodie JE, Bainbridge ZT et al (2009) Herbicides: a new
threat to the Great Barrier Reef. Environ Pollut 157:2470–2484
Littler MM, Littler DS (1994) A pathogen of reef-building coralline
algae discovered in the South Pacific. Coral Reefs 13:202
Littler MM, Littler DS (1995) Impact of CLOD pathogen on Pacific
coral reefs. Science 267:1356–1360
Littler MM, Littler DS (1998) An undescribed fungal pathogen of reefforming crustose coralline algae discovered in American Samoa.
Coral Reefs 17:144
Lu Y, Wang Y, Yu Q (2000a) Detection of herpesviral sequences in
tissues of green turtles with fibropapilloma by polymerase chain
reaction. Arch Virol 145:1885–1893
Lu Y, Yu Q, Zamzow JP, Wang Y et al (2000b) Detection of green
turtle herpesviral sequence in saddleback wrasse Thalossoma
duperrey: a possible mode of transmission of green turtle
fibropapilloma. J Aquat Anim Health 12:58–63
Luter HM, Whalan S, Webster NS (2010) Exploring the role of
microorganisms in the disease-like syndrome affecting the sponge
Ianthella basta. Appl Environ Microbiol 76(17):5736–5744
Manire CA, Stacy BA, Kinsel MJ et al (2008) Proliferative dermatitis in
a loggerhead turtle, Caretta caretta, and a green turtle, Chelonia
mydas, associated with novel papillomaviruses. Vet Microbiol
130:227–237
Mao-Jones J, Ritchie KB, Jones LE et al (2010) How microbial community composition regulates coral disease development. PLoS
Biol 8(3):e1000345. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000345
Martin LB, Hopkins WA, Mydlarz LD et al (2010) The effects of
anthropogenic global changes on immune functions and disease
resistance. Ann NY Acad Sci 1195:129–148
McCallum HI, Kuris A, Harvell CD et al (2004) Does terrestrial
epidemiology apply to marine systems? Trends Ecol Evol 19
(11):586–591

175
McNamara JM, Buchanan KL (2005) Stress, resource allocation, and
mortality. Behav Ecol 16:1008–1017
Miller R, Adams A, Ogden N et al (2003) Diadema antillarum 17 years
after mass mortality: is recovery beginning on St. Croix? Coral
Reefs 22:181–187
Miller MW, Lohr KE, Cameron CM et al (2014) Disease dynamics and
potential mitigation among restored and wild staghorn coral,
Acropora cervicornis. PeerJ 2:e541. doi:10.7717/peerj.541
Mitchell R, Chet I (1975) Bacterial attack of corals in polluted seawater. Microb Ecol 2:227–233
Morgan MB, Vogelien DL, Snell TW (2001) Assessing coral stress
responses using molecular biomarkers of gene transcription. Environ Toxicol Chem 20:537–543
Muller E, van Woesik R (2012) Caribbean coral diseases: primary
transmission or secondary infection? Glob Chang Biol 18:3529–3535
Muller E, van Woesik R (2014) Genetic susceptibility, colony size, and
water temperature drive white-pox disease on the coral Acropora
palmata. PLoS One 9(11):e110759. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0110759
Mydlarz L, McGinty ES, Harvell CD (2010) What are the physiological
and immunological responses of coral to climate warming and
disease? J Exp Biol 213:934–945
Nagelkerken I (2000) Barrel sponge bows out. Reef Encount 28:14–15
Nagelkerken I, Buchan K, Smith GW et al (1997) Widespread disease
in Caribbean sea fans: II. Patterns of infection and tissue loss. Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 160:255–263
Negandhi K, Blackwelder PL, Ereskovsky AV et al (2010) Florida reef
sponges harbor coral disease-associated microbes. Symbiosis
51:117–129
Ng TFF, Manire C, Borrowman K et al (2009) Discovery of a novel
single-stranded DNA virus from a sea turtle fibropapilloma by using
viral metagenomics. J Virol 83(6):2500–2509
Nugues MM, Smith GW, van Hooidonk RJ et al (2004) Algal contact as
a trigger for coral disease. Ecol Lett 7:919–923
Okihiro MS (1988) Chromatophoromas in two species of Hawaiian
butterflyfish, Chaetodon multicinctus and C. miliaris. Vet Pathol
25:422–431
Ostfeld RS, LoGiudice KL (2003) Community disassembly, biodiversity, and the erosion of an ecosystem service. Ecology
81:1421–1427
Padilla DK, Williams SL (2004) Beyond ballast water: aquarium and
ornamental trades as sources of invasive species in aquatic
ecosystems. Front Ecol Environ 2:131–138
Page C, Willis B (2006) Distribution, host range and large-scale spatial
variability in black band disease prevalence on the Great Barrier
Reef, Australia. Dis Aquat Org 69:41–51
Palmer CV, Bythell JC, Willis BL (2010) Levels of immunity
parameters underpin bleaching and disease susceptibility of reef
corals. FASEB J 24:1935–1946
Panek FM (2005) Epizootics and disease of coral reef fish in the
tropical western Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. Rev Fish Sci 13
(1):1–21
Patterson KL, Porter JW, Ritchie KB et al (2002) The etiology of white
pox, a lethal disease of the Caribbean elkhorn coral, Acropora
palmata. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99(13):8725–8730
Peters EC (1993) Diseases of other invertebrate phyla: Porifera,
Cnidaria, Ctenophora, Annelida, Echinodermata. In: Couch JA,
Fournie JW (eds) Pathobiology of marine and estuarine organisms.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp 393–449
Peters EC, Yevich PP, Oprandy JJ (1983) Possible causal agent of
“white band disease” in Caribbean acroporid corals. J Invertebr
Pathol 41:394–396

176
Peters EC, Halas JC, McCarty HB (1986) Neoplasia in Acropora
palmata, with a review of reports on anomalies of growth and
form in the stony corals. J Natl Cancer Inst 76:895–912
Petes LE, Harvell CD, Peters EC et al (2003) Pathogens compromise
reproduction and induce melanization in Caribbean sea fans. Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 264:167–171
Pinzon CJH, Beach-Letendre J, Weil E et al (2014) Relationship
between phylogeny and immunity suggests older Caribbean coral
lineages are more resistant to disease. PLoS One 9(8):e104787.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0104787
Pollock FJ, Morris PJ, Willis BL, Bourne DG (2011) The urgent need
for robust coral disease diagnostics. PLoS Pathog 7(10):e1002183.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002183
Polson SW (2007) Comparative analysis of microbial community
structure associated with acroporid corals during a disease outbreak
in the Florida Reef Tract. PhD dissertation, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston
Porter JW (ed) (2001) The ecology and etiology of newly emerging
marine diseases. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht
Porter JW, Tougas JI (2001) Reef ecosystems: threats to their biodiversity. In: Levin SA (ed) Encyclopedia of biodiversity, vol 5. Academic Press, New York, pp 73–95
Porter JW, Kosmynin V, Patterson KL et al (2002) Detection of coral
reef change by the Florida Keys Coral Reef Monitoring Project. In:
Porter JW, Porter KG (eds) The Everglades, Florida Bay, and coral
reefs of the Florida Keys: an ecosystem sourcebook. CRC Press,
Boca Raton, pp 749–769
Porter JW, Torres C, Sutherland KP et al (2011) Prevalence, severity,
lethality, and recovery of dark spots syndrome among three
Floridian reef-building corals. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 408:79–87
Quéré G, Steneck RS, Nugues MM (2014) Spatiotemporal and speciesspecific patterns of diseases affecting crustose coralline algae in
Curaçao. Coral Reefs. doi:10.1007/s00338-014-1225-3
Råberg L (2014) How to live with the enemy: understanding tolerance
to parasites. PLoS Biol 12(11):e1001989. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.
1001989
Rapport DJ (1999) Epidemiology and ecosystem health: natural
bridges. Ecosyst Health 3:174–180
Rapport DJ, Regier HA, Hutchinson TC (1985) Ecosystem behavior
under stress. Am Nat 125(5):617–640
Ravindran J, Raghukumar C, Raghukumar S (1999) Disease and stressinduced mortality of corals in Indian Reefs and observations on
bleaching of corals in the Andamans. Curr Sci 76(2):233–237
Raymundo L, Couch CS, Harvell CD (2008) Coral disease handbook:
guidelines for assessment, monitoring & management. Coral Reef
Targeted Research and Capacity Building for Management Program. University of Queensland, St. Lucia
Remily ER, Richardson LL (2006) Ecological physiology of a coral
pathogen and the coral reef environment. Microb Ecol 51:345–352
Renegar DA, Blackwelder PL, Miller JD et al (2008) Ultrastructural
and histological analysis of dark spot syndrome in Siderastrea
siderea and Agaricia agaricites. Proc 11th Int Coral Reef Symp,
p 185–189
Richardson LL (1998) Coral diseases: what is really known? Trends
Ecol Evol 13:438–443
Richardson LL, Aronson RB (2000) Infectious diseases of reef corals.
Proc 9th Int Coral Reef Symp 2:1225–1230
Richardson LL, Kuta KG, Schnell S et al (1997) Ecology of the black
band disease microbial consortium. Proc 8th Int Coral Reef Symp
1:597–600
Richardson LL, Goldberg W, Kuta KG et al (1998) Florida’s mystery
coral-killer identified. Nature 392:557–558
Richardson LL, Smith GW, Ritchie KB et al (2001) Integrating
microbiological, microsensor, molecular, and physiologic
techniques in the study of coral disease pathogenesis.
Hydrobiologia 460:71–89

E.C. Peters
Richardson LL, Sekar R, Myers JL et al (2007) The presence of the
cyanobacterial toxin microcystin in the black band disease of corals.
FEMS Microbiol Lett. doi:10.1111/j.1574-6968.2007.00751.x
Richmond RH (1993) Coral reefs: present problems and future
concerns resulting from anthropogenic disturbance. Am Zool 33
(6):524–536
Ritchie KB, Smith GW (1998) Type II white-band disease. Rev Trop
Biol 46(Suppl 5):199–203
Ritchie KB, Polson SW, Smith GW (2001) Microbial disease causation
in marine invertebrates: problems, practices, and future prospects.
Hydrobiologia 460:131–139
Robblee MB, Barber TR, Carlson PR Jr et al (1991) Mass mortality of
the tropical seagrass Thalassia testudinum in Florida Bay (USA).
Mar Ecol Prog Ser 71(3):297–299
Roberts RJ (ed) (1989) Fish pathology. Bailliere Tindall, London
Roder C, Arif C, Bayer T et al (2013) Bacterial profiling of white
plague disease in a comparative coral species framework. ISMEJ
8:31–39 doi:10.1038/ismej.2013.127
Rogers CS (1985) Degradation of Caribbean and western Atlantic coral
reefs and decline of associated fisheries. Proc 5th Int Coral Reef
Cong 6:491–496
Rogers CS (2010) Words matter: recommendations for clarifying coral
disease nomenclature and terminology. Dis Aquat Org 91:167–175
Rogers CS, Muller E (2012) Bleaching, disease and recovery in the
threatened scleractinian coral Acropora palmata in St. John, US
Virgin Islands: 2003–2010. Coral Reefs 31(3):807–819
Rohde K (1993) Ecology of marine parasites. CAB International,
Wallingford
Rohwer F, Seguritan V, Azam F et al (2002) Diversity and distribution
of coral-associated bacteria. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 243:1–10
Rosenberg E, Loya Y (eds) (2004) Coral health and disease. Springer,
Berlin
Rougee L, Downs CA, Richmond RH et al (2006) Alteration of normal
cellular profiles in the scleractinian coral (Pocillopora damicornis)
following laboratory exposure to fuel oil. Environ Toxicol Chem
25:3181–3187
Rowan R, Knowlton N, Baker A et al (1997) Landscape ecology of
algal symbionts creates variation in episodes of coral bleaching.
Nature 388:285–289
Rützler K (1988) Mangrove sponge disease induced by cyanobacterial
symbionts: failure of a primitive immune system? Dis Aquat Org
5:143–149
Rützler K, Santavy DL, Antonius A (1983) The black band disease of
Atlantic reef corals III. Distribution, ecology and development.
PSZNI Mar Ecol 4:329–335
Santavy DL, Peters EC, Quirolo C et al (1999) Yellow-blotch disease
outbreak on reefs of the San Blas Islands, Panama. Coral Reefs
18:97
Santavy DL, Mueller E, Peters EC et al (2001) Quantitative assessment
of coral diseases in the Florida Keys: strategy and methodology.
Hydrobiologia 460:39–52
Sato Y, Bourne DG, Willis BL (2009) Dynamics of seasonal outbreaks
of black band disease in an assemblage of Montipora species at
Pelorus Island (Great Barrier Reef, Australia). Proc R Soc B
276:2795–2803
Schmale MC (1991) Prevalence and distribution patterns of tumors in
bicolor damselfish (Pomacentrus partitus) on South Florida reefs.
Mar Biol 109:203–212
Schmale MC, Gibbs PDL, Campbell CE (2002) A virus-like agent
associated with neurofibromatosis in damselfish. Dis Aquat Org
49:107–115
Schofield PJ (2009) Geographic extent and chronology of the invasion
of non-native lionfish (Pterois volitans and P. miles) in the Western
North Atlantic and Caribbean Sea. Aquat Invasions 4:473–479
Scully EP, Prappas J, Ostrander GK (2001) Laboratory models for the
study of coral pathologies. Hydrobiologia 460:91–95

8

Diseases of Coral Reef Organisms

Selig ER, Harvell CD, Bruno JF et al (2006) Analyzing the relationship
between ocean temperature anomalies and coral disease outbreaks
at broad spatial scales. Coast Estuar Stud 61:111–128
Shelley CC, Glazebrook JS, Turak E et al (1988) Trematode (Digenea:
Bucephalidae) infection in the burrowing clam Tridacna crocea
from the Great Barrier Reef. Dis Aquat Org 4:143–147
Sheppard BJ, Dungan CF (2009) Exotic Perkinsus sp. protozoa in an
imported Vietnamese ornamental clam (Tridacna crocea)
maintained in a home aquarium. J Zoo Wildl Med 40(1):140–146
Sheppard BJ, Phillips AC (2008) Perkinsus olseni detected in Vietnamese aquacultured reef clams Tridacna crocea imported to the USA,
following a mortality event. Dis Aquat Org 79(3):229–235
Shields JD (2011) Diseases of spiny lobsters: a review. J Invertebr
Pathol 106(1):79–91
Shields JD, Behringer DC Jr (2004) A new pathogenic virus in the
Caribbean spiny lobster Panulirus argus from the Florida Keys. Dis
Aquat Org 59:109–118
Shinn EA, Smith GW, Prospero JM et al (2000) African dust and the
demise of Caribbean coral reefs. Geophys Res Lett 27:3029–3032
Sindermann CJ (1990) Principal diseases of marine fish and shellfish,
vol. 2: diseases of marine shellfish. Academic, San Diego
Skinner RH, Kandrashoff W (1988) Abnormalities and diseases
observed in commercial fish catches from Biscayne Bay, Florida.
Water Resour Bull 24(5):961–966
Slattery M, Renegar DA, Gochfeld DJ (2013) Direct and indirect
effects of a new disease of alcyonacean soft corals. Coral Reefs
32(3):879–889
Soffer N, Brandt ME, Correa AMS et al (2013) Potential role of viruses
in white plague coral disease. ISMEJ 8(2):271–283
Sokolova IM, Frederich M, Bagwe R et al (2012) Energy homeostasis
as an integrative tool for assessing the limits of stress tolerance in
aquatic invertebrates. Mar Environ Res 79:1–15
Sousa WP (1991) Can models of soft-sediment community structure be
complete without parasites? Am Zool 31:821–830
Stacy BA, Wellehan JFX, Foley AM et al (2008) Two herpesviruses
associated with disease in wild loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta
caretta). Vet Microbiol 126:63–73
Stanić D, Oehrle S, Gantar M et al (2011) Microcystin production and
ecological physiology of black band disease cyanobacteria. Environ
Microbiol 13(4):900–910
Stebbing ARD (1981) Stress, health and homeostasis. Mar Pollut Bull
12:326–329
Stentiford GD (2011) Diseases of commercially exploited crustaceans:
cross-cutting issues for global fisheries and aquaculture. J Invertebr
Pathol 106:3–5
Stoskopf MK (1993) Fish medicine. WB Saunders Co, Philadelphia
Susser M (1991) What is cause and how do we know one? A grammar
for pragmatic epidemiology. Am J Epidemiol 133:635–648
Sussman M, Willis BL, Victor S et al (2008) Coral pathogens identified
for white syndrome (WS) epizootics in the Indo-Pacific. PLoS One
3(6):e2393. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002393
Suter GW (1993) A critique of ecosystem health concepts and indices.
Environ Toxicol Chem 12:1533–1539
Sutherland KP, Porter JW, Torres C (2004) Disease and immunity in
Caribbean and Indo-Pacific zooxanthellate corals. Mar Ecol Prog
Ser 266:273–302
Sutherland KP, Shaban S, Joyner JL et al (2011) Human pathogen shown
to cause disease in the threatened elkhorn coral Acropora palmata.
PLoS One 6(8):e23468. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0023468
Sutton DC, Garrick R (1993) Bacterial disease of cultured giant clam
Tridacnas gigas larvae. Dis Aquat Org 16(1):47–53
Sweet M, Bythell J (2012) Ciliate and bacterial communities associated
with white syndrome and brown band disease in reef-building
corals. Environ Microbiol 14(8):2184–2199
Sweet M, Burn D, Croquer A et al (2013) Characterization of the bacterial
and fungal communities associated with different lesion sizes of dark

177
spot syndrome occurring in the coral Stephanocoenia intersepta.
PLoS One 8(4):e62580. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0062580
Sweet MJ, Croquer A, Bythell JC (2014) Experimental antibiotic treatment identifies potential pathogens of white band disease in the
endangered Caribbean coral Acropora cervicornis. Proc R Soc B
281:20140094
Thayer GW, Murphey PL, LaCroix MW (1994) Responses of plant
communities in western Florida Bay to the die-off of seagrasses.
Bull Mar Sci 54(3):718–726
Toledo-Hernández C, Zuluaga-Montero A, Bones-González A et al (2008)
Fungi in healthy and diseased sea fans (Gorgonia ventalina): is Aspergillus sydowii always the pathogen? Coral Reefs 27(3):707–714
Tompkins DM, Dunn AM, Smith MJ et al (2011) Wildlife diseases:
from individuals to ecosystems. J Anim Ecol 80:19–38
Udey L, Young RE, Sallman B (1977) Isolation and characterization of
an anaerobic bacterium, Eubacterium tarantella spp. nov.,
associated with striped mullet (Mugilcephalus) mortality in
Biscayne Bay, Florida. J Fish Res Board Can 34:402–409
Upton SJ, Peters EC (1986) A new and unusual species of Coccidium
(Apicomplexa, Agamococcidiorida) from Caribbean scleractinian
corals. J Invertebr Pathol 47:184–193
USEPA (2000) Stressor identification guidance document. EPA/822/B00/025. US Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water and
Office of Research and Development, Washington, DC
Ushijima B, Smith A, Aeby GS et al (2012) Vibrio owensii induces the
tissue loss disease Montipora white syndrome in the Hawaiian reef
coral Montipora capitata. PLoS One 7(10):e46717. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0046717
Vargas-Ángel B (2010) Crustose coralline algal diseases in the U.S.affiliated Pacific Islands. Coral Reefs 29:943–956
Vega Thurber RL, Correa AMS (2011) Viruses of reef-building
scleractinian corals. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 408(1):102–113
Vicente VP (1989) Regional commercial sponge extinctions in the
West Indies: are recent climatic changes responsible? Mar Ecol 10
(2):179–191
Voss JD, Richardson LL (2006) Nutrient enrichment enhances black
band disease progression in corals. Coral Reefs 25:569–576
Ward JR, Lafferty KD (2004) The elusive baseline of marine disease:
are diseases in ocean ecosystems increasing? PLoS Biol 2(4):e120.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020120
Webster NS (2007) Sponge disease: a global threat? Environ Microbiol
9(6):1363–1375
Webster NS, Taylor MW (2012) Marine sponges and their microbial
symbionts: love and other relationships. Environ Microbiol 14
(2):335–346
Weil E (2004) Coral reef diseases in the wider Caribbean. In:
Rosenberg E, Loya Y (eds) Coral health and disease. Springer,
Berlin, pp 35–68
Weil E, Rogers CS (2011) Coral reef diseases in the AtlanticCaribbean. In: Dubinsky Z, Stambler N (eds) Coral reefs: an ecosystem in transition. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 465–491
Weil E, Urreiztieta I, Garz
on-Ferreira J (2000) Geographic variability
in the incidence of coral and octocoral diseases in the wider Caribbean. Proc 9th Int Coral Reef Symp 2:1231–1237
Weis V (2008) Cellular mechanisms of cnidarian bleaching: stress
causes the collapse of symbiosis. J Exp Biol 211:3059–3066
Williams EH Jr, Buckley-Williams L (1990) The world-wide coral reef
bleaching cycle and related sources of coral mortality. Atoll Res
Bull 335:1–71
Williams EH Jr, Bunkley-Williams L (2000) Marine major ecological
disturbances of the Caribbean. Infect Dis Rev 2(3):110–127
Williams DE, Miller MM (2005) Coral disease outbreak: pattern,
prevalence and transmission in Acropora cervicornis. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 301:119–128
Williams EH Jr, Wolf-Waters TJ (1990) An abnormal incidence of the
commensal copepods, Doridocola astrophyticus Humes, associated

178
with injury of its host, the basketstar, Astrophyton muricatum
(Lamarck). Crustaceans 59(3):302
Williams EH Jr, Bunkley-Williams L, Peters EC et al (1994) An
epizootic of cutaneous fibropapillomas in green turtles Chelonia
mydas of the Caribbean: part of a panzootic? J Aquat Anim Health
6:70–78
Williams GJ, Price NN, Ushijima B et al (2014) Ocean warming and
acidification have complex interactive effects on the dynamics of a
marine fungal disease. Proc R Soc B 281(1778):20133069. doi:10.
1098/rspb.2013.3069
Wilson B, Aeby GS, Work TM et al (2012) Bacterial communities
associated with healthy and Acropora white syndrome-affected
corals from American Samoa. FEMS Microb Ecol 80:509–520
Wobeser GA (2007) Disease in wild animals, investigation and management. Springer, Heidelberg
Wood CL, Sandin SA, Zgliczynski B et al (2014) Fishing drives
declines in fish parasite diversity and has variable effects on parasite
abundance. Ecology 95(7):1929–1946
Woodley CM, Downs CA, Fauth JE et al (2000) A novel diagnostic
system to assess the physiological status of corals. Proc 9th Int
Coral Reef Symp 2:1267–1272
Woodley CM, Bruckner AW, Galloway SB et al (2003) Coral disease
and health: a national research plan. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Silver Spring, Maryland
Woodley CM, Downs CA, Bruckner A et al (eds) (2015) Diseases of
corals. Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken, in press
Work TM, Aeby GS (2011) Pathology of tissue loss (white syndrome)
in Acropora sp. corals from the Central Pacific. J Invertebr Pathol
107(2):127–131

E.C. Peters
Work TM, Meteyer C (2014) To understand coral disease, look at coral
cells. Ecohealth. doi:10.1007/s10393-014-0931-1
Work TM, Balazs GH, Rameyer RA et al (2004a) Retrospective
pathology survey of green turtles Chelonia mydas with fibropapillomatosis in the Hawaiian Islands, 1993–2003. Dis Aquat Org
62:163–176
Work TM, Rameyer RA, Takata G (2004b) Protozoal and
epitheliocystis-like infections in the introduced bluestripe snapper
Lutjanus kasmira in Hawaii. Dis Aquat Org 57:59–66
Work TM, Aeby GS, Coles SL (2008a) Distribution and morphology of
growth anomalies in Acropora from the Indo-Pacific. Dis Aquat Org
78:255–264
Work TM, Richardson LL, Reynolds TL et al (2008b) Biomedical and
veterinary science can increase our understanding of coral disease. J
Exp Mar Biol Ecol 362(2):63–70
Work TM, Russell R, Aeby GS (2012) Tissue loss (white syndrome) in
the coral Montipora capitata is a dynamic disease with multiple
host responses and potential causes. Proc R Soc B 279
(1746):4334–4341
Wulff J (2006a) Ecological interactions of marine sponges. Can J Zool
84:146–166
Wulff J (2006b) Rapid diversity and abundance decline in a Caribbean
coral reef sponge community. Biol Conserv 127:167–176
Yamashiro H, Oku H, Onaga K, Iwasaki H, Takara K (2000) Coral
tumors store reduced level of lipds. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol
265:171–179
Zann LP, Cuffey RJ, Kropach C (1975) Fouling organisms and parasite
associated with the skin of sea snakes. In: Dunson WA (ed) The
biology of sea snakes. University Park Press, Baltimore, pp 151–265

9

Geographic Differences in Ecological Processes
on Coral Reefs
Charles Birkeland

Abstract

Although basic ecological processes are generally consistent on a local scale, there are
geographic differences in geological processes, the physical environment, and dimensions
of the areas involved that change the nature of coral-reef systems. The structure of reefs is
affected by plate tectonics, e.g., there is a greater prevalence of atolls in the central Pacific
and Indian Oceans than in the Atlantic or eastern Pacific. The vast dimensions of the Pacific
Ocean produces a sharp gradient of decrease from west to east in species, generic, class, and
habitat diversity across the Pacific that is not so pronounced in the smaller western Atlantic
and Indian Oceans. Diseases are generally contained within distantly separated
archipelagoes in the Pacific but quickly spread across the relatively small and
interconnected greater Caribbean. The differences in sediment input into the oceans (2 %
west coasts of continents, 82 % east coasts) and the degree to which river output affects
biogeographic patterns (eastern vs western coasts of continents), show the overwhelming
global influences of trade winds and the Coriolis effect on coral reefs. The relative
prevalence of corals and other sessile photosymbiotic invertebrates compared to sessile
heterotrophic invertebrates can be affected on a geographic scale as well as locally by the
strength and dependability of nutrient input. Adult coral colonies can persevere in areas
with substantial nutrient input such as upwelling, but recruitment in these areas is extraordinarily difficult in competition with algae and heterotrophic invertebrates in areas with
abundant nutrients. The effects of disturbances and effects of altering the system, for
example by reducing the stock of grazers, can be substantially greater in areas of high
nutrient input.
Keywords

Trophic  Diversity  Nutrient  Coriolis  Upwelling

9.1

C. Birkeland (*)
Department of Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa,
Honolulu, HI 96822, USA
e-mail: charlesb@hawaii.edu

Large-Scale Dynamic Effects of Nutrient
Input

Human activities affecting river discharges of nutrients can
have international consequences on marine biota. For example, immediately following construction of the Aswan Dam
966 km (over 600 miles) inland from the coast on the Nile,
the multinational fisheries catch for the eastern Mediterranean Sea decreased to 3.7 % of its former levels because of
the reduction in nutrients flowing into the Mediterranean

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_9

179

180

C. Birkeland

(Aleem 1972). Age-class strength of economically important
marine invertebrates and fishes are correlated with river
discharge strength (Sutcliffe 1972, 1973; Wolff et al. 1987;
Darnaude 2005; Gillson 2011; Dutterer et al. 2012). Terrestrial nutrient inputs have been found to be a cause of
outbreaks of Acanthaster planci which have had major
effects on coral-reef community structure (Brodie
et al. 2005; Fabricius et al. 2010).
Striking examples of the magnitude of effects of agricultural nutrients on marine coastal environments are the extensive development of “dead zones” of coastal oceans in recent
decades. Fixed nitrogen is essential for making DNA, RNA
and proteins and so it is quickly taken up by living organisms
and is often in short supply in the natural world. Whereas
CO2 is a low-energy byproduct of processes using energy,
and it takes energy such as provided by photosynthesis to
remove it from the atmosphere, fixed nitrogen is the
end-product of an energetically expensive process and it is
quickly taken up when available. Nitrogen is naturally fixed
(converted to ammonium) on coral reefs mainly by
cyanobacteria using photosynthesis to power the conversion.
In the 1950s, the industrial production of fertilizer by use of
fossil fuels became a major economic process. The global
amount of fixed nitrogen is now twice the natural amount,
and this accumulation of molecules high in demand in the
biosphere probably does not have precedence in the Phanerozoic record. The excess fertilizer on continents now drains
into rivers, which in turn flow to the coastal marine areas.
The fixed nitrogen is taken up by phytoplankton, bacteria
and other microbes. As the biota grows, the increased biomass respires at night and uses up the available oxygen in the
sea. The hypoxic environment causes most of the animals in
the area to suffocate, hence the name of the regions “dead
zones”. The number and area of dead zones doubled every
decade since the 1960s, and by 2008 the number of dead

zones reached 405, covering a total area of ocean of
245,000 km2 (Diaz and Rosenberg 2008).
Ryther (1969) estimated that upwelling areas take up only
about 0.1 % of the ocean surface, but these small areas
provide support for 50 % of the world fishery catch, a
500-fold relative difference in the ratio of average yield
per unit area from the world ocean resulting from input of
nutrients. Natural abrupt reductions in nutrient
concentrations can also have influences on marine biota on
an international scale. In 1983, 17 million sea birds of
18 species disappeared from Christmas Island and animals
from all trophic levels (zooplankton, squid, planktivorous
fishes, marine iguanas, sea birds, fur seals and sea lions)
substantially decreased in abundance because of the lower
nutrients from the El Niño of 1982 (Glynn 1990). During the
1982–1983 El Niño – Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event,
there was a decrease in primary productivity and density of
phytoplankton, a temporary closure of the fishing industries,
and large-scale mortalities of sea birds (85 % in Peru) and
marine mammals (30 % for fur seals in the Galápagos).

Fig. 9.1 The physical forces that produce the geographic variation in
ecological processes of coral reefs. (a) Energy from the sun is more
concentrated throughout the year in the tropics. (b) Excess heat in the
tropics produces low pressure, rising air, with replacement air coming
from higher latitudes. (c) The spin of Earth causes the replacement air

to effectively move westward relative to the surface of Earth, creating
the trade winds. (d) The trade winds and the spin of Earth cause the
Coriolis effect, bringing warm seawater and rainfall to the western
tropical seas and upwelling of cool nutrient laden water to the eastern
tropical seas

9.2

Physical Processes That Bring
Geographic Differences to Ecological
Processes

9.2.1

Longitudinal Differences

The basic force behind both longitudinal and latitudinal
differences in ecological processes on coral reefs is the
sunlight falling at a high angle on equatorial regions
throughout the year. Since the angle is more direct near the
equator, the heat energy is concentrated over a smaller
surface area and so the air is warmer on average near the
equator (Fig. 9.1a). Although Earth receives an average of

9

Geographic Differences in Ecological Processes on Coral Reefs

12 h per day of sunlight everywhere, the sunlight is
distributed more evenly through the seasons in the tropics
and so there is no annual cooling.
The climatic and oceanographic patterns of the world are
driven by the excess heat in the tropics and the deficit at
higher latitudes. As the equatorial air warms, it expands and
rises, and is replaced near the surface of Earth by cooler air
from the north and south (Fig. 9.1b). Since Earth spins on its
axis from west to east, the trade winds (replacement air)
effectively (from the perspective of creatures on Earth’s
surface) move westward rather than directly north or south
(Fig. 9.1c). The trade winds blow the main equatorial
currents westward. The equatorial currents turn away from
the equator in the Atlantic and the Pacific when they are

Fig. 9.3 Change in dominant
trophic characteristics of coralreef communities as a function of
nutrient input both geographically
and locally

Prevalence in the
benthic community

Fig. 9.2 The trade winds bring
both upwelling of nutrients to the
eastern tropical oceans and rains
with terrestrial runoff of nutrients
to the western tropical oceans.
The oceanic regions tend to have
lower concentrations in the
surface waters than do continental
regions

181

blocked by the continents, moving clockwise in the northern
hemisphere and counterclockwise in the southern hemisphere (Fig. 9.1d). This pattern is called the Coriolis effect.
This contributes to a striking gradient in diversity of coralreef organisms across the tropical Pacific from high in the
west to less in the east, and it also causes major differences
in nutrient input on a geographic scale (Fig. 9.2) which
affects the trophic characteristics of the dominant organisms
(Fig. 9.3). Heterotrophic sessile animals have an advantage
in areas of high nutrient input (upwelling and terrestrial
runoff) and animals with photosynthetic symbioses are prevalent in tropical oligotrophic waters (Fig. 9.3).
From the geographic perspective of coral-reef management, the Coriolis effect determines the patterns of nutrient

182

input differently in the eastern and western ocean borders
(Fig. 9.2). Nutrients generally come up from depths below
the photic zone in the eastern borders of oceans (western
margins of continents) and come down from land on the
western sides of oceans (eastern coasts of continents). On
the western coasts of continents, the trade winds push ocean
currents away from the coast towards the west. The
westward-moving waters are replaced in part by the
nutrient-rich upwelling waters from deep below the photic
zone. The waters below the photic zone are relatively rich in
nutrients because without sunlight, photosynthesis does not
happen and so the nutrients are not taken up by phytoplankton. When upwelling brings the water into the photic zone,
the rich input of nutrients fertilizes the ocean surface and the
primary productivity in shallow water is increased. Sites of
upwelling do exist east of continents, for example, on the
coasts of Somalia, Yemen, Indonesia, and Venezuela; but
major sites of upwelling are prevalent on the western coasts
of continents, and this determines major fisheries areas and
affects important geographic differences in the nature of
coral communities (Fig. 9.3).
A typical influence of nutrients on geographic scale can
be witnessed in 1 day by a visitor to Panama. The Pacific and
Atlantic coasts are only about 70 km apart at the Isthmus of
Panama, yet the Pacific coast supports a large fisheries
industry while the Atlantic coast of Panama supports only
subsistence fishing and small-scale fishing enterprises. Vast
schools of fishes and hundreds of sea birds can be seen on an
outing to coral communities in the regions of upwelling
along the Pacific coast, while a diverse assemblage of fishes
typically in large schools, with each species swimming
alone, in pairs, or in small schools, is the usual case on
coral reefs in regions with less concentrated nutrient input.

C. Birkeland

There is also upwelling that occurs along the equator in
the center of the oceans. Nutrient-rich waters are pushed by
trade winds westward from upwelling areas on the west
coasts of continents. As they are carried westward in the
Equatorial Current, the Coriolis force moves surface water
to the left (southward) in the southern hemisphere and to the
right (northward) in the northern hemisphere. As surface
waters diverge, they are replaced by cooler, nutrient-rich
waters from below. This Equatorial Upwelling produces
cooler water with greater rates of primary productivity
along the equator in the center of the oceans, but there are
few islands or atolls in these regions with upwelling.
By the time the waters in the photic zone reach the
oceanic central Pacific, the nutrients have been taken up by
phytoplankton and the oceanic waters are generally nutrient
poor (Figs. 9.2 and 9.4). In these oligotrophic waters, a
relatively high proportion of nutrients is bound to the biomass in the shallow waters that encompass coral-reef
communities. On coral reefs of atolls in these central oceanographic regions, there is considerable recycling of nutrients
in the coral-reef system and comparatively little input from
outside sources (Sect. 1.1).
Trade winds blowing across the tropical ocean waters
onto the eastern coasts of continents are laden with moisture
(Fig. 9.2). Water has a higher latent heat capacity than does
soil, and so the continental land masses heat more rapidly
during the summer than do the oceans. The warmer air rises
over the continents and the moist air is drawn off the tropical
oceans. As these moisture laden monsoonal winds rise over
the coastal hills, the moisture precipitates. Therefore, the
major rivers that carry sediment into tropical coastal areas
are generally on the eastern coasts of continents (Figs. 9.3
and 9.4).

Fig. 9.4 The trade winds bring both upwelling of nutrients to the eastern tropical oceans and rains with terrestrial runoff of nutrients to the western
tropical oceans. The oceanic regions tend to have lower concentrations of nutrients in the surface waters than do continental regions

9

Geographic Differences in Ecological Processes on Coral Reefs

The influence of coastal runoff on coral reefs has been
widely studied and clearly have negative effects on reefs
(see ISRS 2004; Fabricius 2005). These include documented
declines in coral larval settlement and metamorphosis
(Hodgson 1990; Babcock and Davies 1991; Gilmour 1999;
Birrell et al. 2005; Fabricius et al. 2003; Kuffner et al. 2006).
On the eastern coasts of continents, coral reefs receive
sediment and nutrients from higher ground by terrestrial
runoff. About 82 % of all the sediment that is carried into
the oceans of the world drains off the eastern coasts of
landmasses into the western tropical seas (Fig. 9.5); only
2 % drains off the coasts in the eastern tropical seas
(Milliman and Meade 1983). Half the sediment being deposited into the oceans of the world is coming off the high
islands of the southwestern tropical seas (Milliman 1992),
the center of coral-reef diversity. The smaller rivers running
off the steeper slopes of the high islands in the southwestern
Pacific have greater sediment yields (load per unit drainage
basin area) than do larger rivers off the continents because
the larger rivers such as the Amazon tend to deposit sediment in their own beds and deltas.
Examples of the abrupt and major effects of rivers on
coastal coral reefs are given in Sect. 9.1. Rivers also influence biogeographic patterns. The Amazon River creates a
large gap in coral distribution and separates the corals of the
western tropical Atlantic into two biogeographic provinces.
Likewise, major breaks in the distribution of corals in the
Bay of Bengal and Andaman Sea (Indian Ocean) are formed
by river outflow.
In contrast, although erosion is a natural process, human
activities, especially agriculture and clearing of natural

183

vegetation, has increased the loss of soil into the oceans by
more than an order of magnitude. Rates of erosion can
increase by as much as 100-fold (Doolette and Magrath
1990). The input of soil from rivers has been over 13.5
billion tons annually (Milliman and Meade 1983). Milliman
et al. (1987) calculated that the sediment load of the Yellow
River has increased by an order of magnitude because of
farming practices in northern China. Approximately four
times as much sediment, nitrogen, and phosphorus enter
the marine waters off the coast of Queensland than before
western agriculture began (Brodie 1995).
Nutrient input has been increasing to an even greater
extent than has sedimentation. The rate of input of reactive
nitrogen into the open ocean has more than doubled globally,
especially in the North Pacific because of the human population growth and rapid industrial development. This doubling of reactive nitrogen is expected to increase primary
production and possibly lead to a change in the North Pacific
from nitrogen-limited to phosphorus-limited (Kim
et al. 2014). Following deforestation in the watershed in
the Amazon Basin, the volume of runoff has increased by
30 %, but the concentration of nitrogen doubled and the
concentration of phosphate increased nearly eightfold
(Hallock et al. 1993). The Mississippi River now carries
ten times the concentrations of nitrates and phosphates that
it did in the late 1960s (Hallock et al. 1993). The influence of
nutrification extends farther downstream than sedimentation. This has been suggested as a primary cause of widespread coral-reef degradation far from concentrations of
humans (Hallock et al. 1993).

Fig. 9.5 Well over 80 % of the sediment that is deposited into the oceans from the continents is from the eastern rivers in the tropics (From
Longhurst and Pauly 1987, modified from Milliman and Meade 1983)

184

Increased sedimentation and nutrient input into the
coastal marine ecosystems may have been causing broadscale changes in the biotic communities of coastal regions.
Paralytic shellfish poisoning resulting from blooms of toxic
dinoflagellates was unrecorded in the tropical western
Pacific before 1972, but the number of deaths and hospital
cases from dinoflagellate toxicity has been increasing rapidly in the continental high islands of the western Pacific and
along the coasts of Southeast Asia (Maclean 1984) where so
much of the world’s sediment input into the world’s oceans
is occurring.
Geographic and climatic patterns are usually more
dependable than are smaller-scale local weather trends, but
conversely, when large-scale climatic patterns are disrupted,
the effects can be more dramatic. While the Coriolis effect
and upwelling in the east are relatively dependable, they can
be disrupted by El Niño- Southern Oscillation (ENSO).
ENSO can cause major changes in the marine ecosystems,
mass mortalities throughout the food web, and long-term
deterioration of the coral reefs, especially in the eastern
Pacific where the ecosystem normally receives abundant
nutrient input (Glynn 1990).
The Coriolis effect also forces typhoons or tropical
cyclones to generally move from east to west because
Earth spins eastward below the atmosphere in which
cyclones are suspended (Fig. 9.1). Typhoons or hurricanes
(the names for major cyclones in the Pacific and Atlantic,
respectively) are created by rising warm air and rapid
replacement by air in “feeder bands” moving in laterally.
Since rising warm air creates and provides the energy for
cyclones, tropical cyclones will possibly increase in intensity with global warming. Typhoons usually increase in
intensity as they move westward. The increases will probably be greater in the western tropical oceans (e.g., Guam)
than farther east (e.g., Samoa). This is an example of how
warmer seawater might cause differences of some variables
along geographic regions might become even greater than
they are now.
The Coriolis effect determines the direction of major
current patterns away from the equator in the western sides
of tropical oceans and toward the equator on the eastern
sides (Fig. 9.1d). Thus, coral-reef communities are more
easily replenished with recruits from tropical waters after
local extinctions in the western tropical oceans, especially at
higher latitudes. This is a factor leading to greater species
richness in coral-reef communities in the western sides of
oceans. Coral-reef communities have a greater latitudinal
range in the western sides of oceans because of the northward flow of tropical waters. Aggregations of individuals of
species carried by currents to environments with ecological

C. Birkeland

conditions beyond their limits of successful reproduction
(“pseudopopulations”) are also more frequent at high
latitudes in western sides of oceans.
The greater longitudinal extent of the Pacific produces a
more observable decrease in species and habitat diversity
from west to east across the central Pacific, counter to the
main currents. A lesser degree of trophic and population
interconnections between coastal habitats in the Pacific
than in the greater Caribbean may result partially from less
reliable availability of noncoral habitats in Oceania
(Birkeland and Amesbury 1988). The occasional ENSO
changes direction of prevalent currents and periodically
allows for species introductions and replenishment
(Richmond 1990).

9.2.2

Latitudinal Differences

Throughout much of their range, coral reefs generally
exhibit rates of metabolism and calcification independent
of latitude (Smith and Kinsey 1976; Crossland 1988). However, when the latitudinal limits of reef growth are
approached, a relatively steep decrease of reef growth with
latitude becomes apparent. Gross carbonate production of
individual corals and coral-reef accretion by corals decline
in a linear fashion as a function of latitude in the Hawaiian
Archipelago (Grigg 1982). The point at which the rate of
reef accretion becomes less than the rates of reef subsidence
and/or erosion, beyond which the reef begins to “drown,” is
termed the Darwin Point (Fig. 3.7). The Darwin Point is the
threshold for oceanic atoll formation, and is potentially at
higher latitudes on the western sides of tropical oceans than
on the eastern sides.
As a rule of thumb, hermatypic corals are restricted to
regions where the average seawater temperatures are
18–30  C. Because of the Coriolis effect on major current
patterns, warm waters and coral reefs extend further from the
equator on the western sides of oceans. However, the temperature range tolerated by corals differs among geographic
regions, with the lethal limits of particular species being
higher where the mean seawater temperature is higher
(Jokiel and Coles 1990).
Light penetrates the ocean to greater depths when and
where the sun is directly overhead. The proportion of the
year in which the Sun is directly overhead decreases with
latitude, and the Sun is never directly overhead north of the
Tropic of Cancer or south of the Tropic of Capricorn. Therefore, we might have predicted that the maximum depth of
reef formation would decrease with latitude. However, this
may not be the case (Veron 1995).

9

Geographic Differences in Ecological Processes on Coral Reefs

9.3

Geographic Differences in Trophic
Characteristics of Dominant Species

In regions with rich nutrient input from external sources,
small organisms can preempt resources from larger
organisms. Whether planktonic or benthic, small plants
take nutrients from the water column more rapidly, and
grow and reproduce more rapidly, than do larger plants
with more complex structural attributes (Odum et al. 1958;
Geider et al. 1986). An experimental comparison of two
macroalgae of the Ulvophyceae showed that Ulva curvata
is able to respond to brief inputs of ammonium with more
effective uptake and more rapid growth than the more structurally complex Codium fragile (Ramus and Venable 1987).
Phytoplankton in the water column can preempt light and
reduce the compensation depth of benthic algae under
conditions of high nutrient input (Twilley et al. 1985). If
the compensation depth of benthic algae were at 100 m in
water without phytoplankton, then at a density of only
2 g m 3 phytoplankton would raise the compensation
depth of the benthic algae to 3.5 m, restricting benthic
algae to only the upper 3.5 % of their potential range (Ryther
1963). The single-celled phytoplankters take up nutrients
and reproduce rapidly, decreasing both the nutrients and
light available to the benthic algae (Geider et al. 1986). In
some areas with especially rich nutrient input, phytoplankton virtually exclude the entire benthic algal food web
(Kamura and Choonhabandit 1986). Although at least
31 families of coral-reef fishes were present, there were no
scarids, acanthurids, siganids or kyphosids (Menasveta
et al. 1986). However, herbivorous damselfishes were able
to maintain territories in shallow depths (3 4 m), presumably with some filamentous algae.
The same trends can be seen in coral-reef animals. The
growth rates of small suspension-feeding animals, such as
mussels and barnacles, are strongly associated with the
amount of food in the water column (Page and Hubbard
1987). The growth rates of large, colonial, plant-animal
symbionts such as hermatypic corals do not respond as
rapidly or to as great a degree to concentrated nutrient
input (Kinsey and Davies 1979). The growth of small corals
has been found to be much slower than previously assumed
(Wallace 1985; van Moorsel 1988).
There may be some physiological constraints and rate
limits associated with the physiological complexities of
plant-animal symbioses (Chap. 5). When primary production of phytoplankton increases, zooplankters can increase
rates of consumption and the secondary production of the
zooplankton community can increase several-fold
(12–16 mg C m 2 day 1 in tropical oceanic waters to
about 75 mg C m 2 day 1 in upwelling regions (Barnes
and Hughes 1988). In contrast, zooxanthellae and corals

185

are in a complex physiological balance (Chap. 5). Increased
nutrient input can sometimes cause a rapid increase in
zooxanthellae. But this overcrowding can disrupt the physiological conditions of the coral, which may react by expelling the excess zooxanthellae. This constrains a response to
nutrient fertilization with more rapid growth.
Community structure on shallow-water tropical hard
substrata is determined to a large extent during recruitment.
Competition for space among adult colonies is easier to see,
but the events during recruitment are of greater effect on the
eventual nature of the benthic community. In nutrient-rich
upwelling regions in the tropics, the rapid takeover of space
and accumulation of biomass by small, fast-growing suspension feeders such as barnacles, bivalves, sponges, ascidians,
and bryozoans often preempt space from coral recruits
(Birkeland 1977). Although it is not unusual to find adult
corals surviving and growing well in regions of upwelling, in
nutrient-rich lagoons of high islands, near the mouths of
rivers, and near sewer outfalls, these examples are most
often individual colonies that had reached a refuge in size.
These exceptional cases suggest that the physical environment itself is favorable for growth and survival of corals, but
excessive concentrations of nutrients have an indirect effect
of differentially favoring the algae and suspension-feeding
animals over coral recruits in the competition for space.
Greater rates of nutrient input intensify competition for
space by two mechanisms: faster growth of algae and suspension feeders and a greater density of recruitment (Barnes
1956; Sutcliffe 1972, 1973; Birkeland 1977, 1982). In contrast, space is available for a longer period of time in the
oligotrophic waters of the western Pacific, and the supply of
larvae in the water column, rather than availability of space,
is a major determinant of the size of recruitment (Birkeland
et al. 1982). Plant- animal symbioses, in contrast, are better
adapted to low-nutrient environments (Muscatine and Porter
1977). Coral communities are able to grow to a large size
and live for years in clear, nutrient-poor oceanic habitats
where active suspension feeders are unable to maintain
positive energy budgets (Page and Hubbard 1987). The
plant-animal symbioses inherit space in low-nutrient
environments by default, not by outcompeting the suspension feeders. Likewise, the benthic algae do not outcompete
the phytoplankton, but exist to the extent allowed by the
factors that limit phytoplankton standing stock.
Large, massive heterotrophic sponges are typical
indicators of “continental” areas such as the greater Caribbean and southeast Asia, including Indonesia, Sulawesi and
the Philippines (Figs. 9.4, 9.5, and 9.6). There is no true
“oceanic” region in the greater Caribbean because it is
tightly enclosed by North and South America. The nutrients
from the Amazon and Orinoco affect the Lesser Antilles and
occasionally get as far as Mona Channel west of Puerto Rico

186

C. Birkeland

Fig. 9.6 The relative predominance of heterotrophic invertebrates
overgrowing scleractinians in nutrient-rich waters (upper left –
barnacles, Galápagos; lower left – heterotrophic sponge, Pohnpei
lagoon) and relative predominance of colonial invertebrates with

symbiotic photosynthesizers overgrowing scleractinians in oligotrophic
waters (upper right – the sponges Lamellodysidea herbacea and
ascidians Diplosoma similis, American Samoa; lower right – the ascidian Lissoclinum patella, Palau)

(Bonilla et al. 1993; Hallock et al. 1993; Chuanmin
et al. 2004). The Atchafalaya branch of the Mississippi
River affects Flower Garden Bank corals in the northwestern
Gulf of Mexico (Dodge and Lang 1983). The Greater
Antilles consist of closely-space large ancient islands that
fill out the center of the greater Caribbean with “continental”
effects, as indicated by the large heterotrophic sponges
(Wilkinson 1987; Wilkinson and Cheshire 1990; Wulff
2012) and rapid algal growth (Roff and Mumby 2012). In
the southwestern Pacific, large sponges are likely to also be
common in the areas around the large continental islands of
Indonesia, Sulawesi, and Philippines because of the closelyspaced large ancient islands producing “continental” effects
(Figs. 9.4 and 9.5).
Oceanic coral reefs in oligotrophic water are dominated by
algal-animal symbionts (Figs. 9.3 and 9.6; Wilkinson 1983).
As we move along a gradient of increasing nutrient input, for
example, from an atoll to a high island or approaching a
sewage outfall, benthic algae and heterotrophs become more
prevalent. In regions of even stronger nutrient input, the
phytoplankton-based food web dominates and the substratum
becomes occupied predominantly by heterotrophic suspension feeders (Smith et al. 1981; Rose and Risk 1985; Kamura

and Choonhabandit 1986; Tsuchiya et al. 1986). Even in
generally oligotrophic oceanic regions, lagoons can be eutrophic and support large sponges (Fig. 9.6).
The potential biomass of algae on central Pacific coral
reefs on islands such as Guam and Maui (Fig. 9.7) is substantial. On Oahu, volunteers have been removing tons of
algae from 27 acres of seashore (e.g., 48, 42, 62, 66 tons
removed in 2009, 2011–2013, respectively, from Maunalua
Bay). Ninety-one tons of algae were also removed from a
Marine Life Conservation District shore in the first 3 years of
the removal program in Waikiki. In 2005, a large sucker on a
barge was developed to remove over a thousand pounds of
algae per hour from the reef and has already removed over a
million pounds of algae from Kaneohe Bay. Although algal
growth rates are generally lower in the Pacific than in the
greater Caribbean, and although macroalgal cover can
remain relatively low in the Pacific where herbivore biomass
has been reduced (Roff and Mumby 2012), the algal biomass
can increase by tons per hectare annually on the older massive high islands in the central Pacific and so we should
never be complacent.
In striking contrast, when Danielle Jayewardene (2009)
set up fish exclusion cages on the leeward coast of Hawaii

9

Geographic Differences in Ecological Processes on Coral Reefs

187

Fig. 9.7 Upper left – kona coast of Hawaii Island (Photo courtesy of
Bill Walsh). Upper right – west coast of Maui Island, about 100 km
from Hawaii Island (Photo courtesy of Rssell T. Sparks, DLNR). Lower

left – American Samoa, 14 S, predominantly crustose coralline algae.
Lower right – Guam 13.5 N (Photo courtesy of David Burdick)

Island, “Algal biomass within the cages did not increase
visibly after the first few months of herbivore exclusion,
and fleshy macroalgae were rare.” Also along the leeward
coast of Hawaii Island, Smith et al. 2001 set up a factorial
experiment to examine the relative importance of herbivory
and fertilization. The results showed both herbivory and
nutrients having significant effects, but even when nutrients
were added and herbivory was not allowed, the production
did not appear to be on the scale of many tons. The tons of
algae on Oahu were introduced species, selected for their
capacity for rapid growth, but nevertheless, the nutrients
were available on Oahu for repeated rapid and massive
algal production. American Samoan reefs are often
dominated by crustose coralline algae (Fig. 9.7), although
areas of filamentous algae can be maintained within the
territories of Acanthurus lineatus and Stegastes spp. In
1985, the reefs in Fagatele Bay National Marine Sanctuary
averaged 57 % cover by crustose coralline algae (Birkeland
et al. 1987).
The qualitative nature (life-history characteristics, physiology, morphology) of the dominant biota can influence
ecosystem-level processes. The “turn-on/turn-off” point of
reefs has been defined as the point at which the dominant
processes change from accretion to bioerosion or back

(Buddemeier and Hopley 1988). Reefs are generally growing (accretion is dominant) when scleractinian corals and
crustose coralline algae are prevalent. Bioerosion becomes
more prevalent in areas of high nutrient input (Chap. 4;
Highsmith 1980), lower pH (Chap. 4; Wisshak et al. 2012)
or up to tenfold greater in areas of both increased nutrients
and lower pH (DeCarlo et al. 2015) in which boring bivalves
and/or sponges become abundant within the reef framework
and sponges and algae become more prevalent than corals on
the exposed surfaces.
Hatcher (1997) described how energy and materials from
filamentous algae tend to enter the herbivore food web, and
energy and materials from more rigidly structured
macroalgae tend to enter the detrital food web. Where
much of the substrata are covered by living coral and the
algae are relatively few, the herbivorous fishes tend to keep
algae in the early successional and productive stage in which
filamentous algae are most prevalent (Birkeland et al. 1985).
After a disturbance when algae take over a greater portion of
the substrata and herbivorous fishes a given a choice of
algae, their selective feeding tends to advance succession
and lead to an increase in less palatable macroalgae. Small
plants of relatively simple morphology generally have higher
net productivity per unit biomass and a potential for more

188

C. Birkeland

rapid growth than do larger, more complex algae (Littler and
Littler 1980). If smaller organisms of relatively simple morphology have a higher net productivity per unit biomass
(Geider et al. 1986), then in view of the prevalence of filamentous algae and small, rapidly growing suspension feeders
(mussels, oysters, and barnacles) such as in regions of upwelling, we predict that the net yield from the system may be
greater in upwelling regions than in oligotrophic regions
where scleractinian corals and crustose coralline algae are
relatively prevalent. If the geographic pattern of nutrient
input affects the life-history characteristics of the dominant
organisms, then these matters should be taken into account
when developing resource management program (Chap. 12).

9.4

Regional Differences in Ecological
Processes

9.4.1

Grazing and Predation Pressure

Areas with nutrient input from upwelling produce large
stocks of fishes (Ryther 1969; Gulland 1976) and the ageclass strengths of fishes and invertebrates are often
correlated with annual river-discharge strength (Aleem
1972; Sutcliffe 1972, 1973; Wolff et al. 1987), presumably
because of increased survival of planktotrophic larvae with a

Fig. 9.8 Characteristic views of reef fishes on two sides of the Isthmus
of Panamá. On oligotrophic Caribbean reefs, Holacanthus ciliaris and
many other species are often seen singly or in pairs, whereas on eastern

concentrated supply of food. Dense populations of predators
and grazers that result from strong recruitment exert intense
predation and grazing pressure. The grazing pressure on
benthic communities of the Pacific coast of Panama where
upwelling occurs is greater than on the Caribbean coast
(Glynn 1972; Earle 1972; Vermeij 1978) and this has a
major qualitative influence on the structure of the benthic
communities and ecosystem processes.
Standardized experimental comparisons of the intensity of
grazing on sponges by fishes at three geographically separated
locations in both the Caribbean and in the eastern tropical
Pacific showed the grazing pressure in the eastern Pacific to
average 25 times greater than the grazing pressure in the
Caribbean (Birkeland 1987). The eastern Pacific reefs were
more densely populated with sponge-grazing angelfishes
(Holacanthus and Pomacanthus) than were Caribbean reefs
(Fig. 9.8), and the sponges were smaller and more cryptic in
the eastern Pacific even though they grew rapidly when
protected from grazing (Birkeland 1987; Fig. 9.9).
Two behavioral changes of predators can occur as population density increases, and these amplify the intensity of
grazing and predation pressure. First, the Holacanthus
passer in the eastern Pacific tend to forage in schools, occasionally as large as four or five dozen, while members of this
genus in the Caribbean tend to forage alone or in pairs. This
compounds the effects of large populations because each fish

Pacific reefs affected by upwelling of nutrients, Holacanthus passer
and many other species are often seen in schools of dozens

9

Geographic Differences in Ecological Processes on Coral Reefs

189

Fig. 9.9 Intensity of grazing on sponges manually exposed on a reef
on Isla Taboguilla, Pacific Panamá, over 3 days. Upper left photograph
is of a rock which has just been turned over to expose sponges naturally
protected from grazing on the underside of the rock. Upper right
photograph is of the same after 72-h of grazing, mainly by
Pomacanthus zonipectus. Lower left photograph is of a rock which

was overgrown on its upper surface by a sponge while in a fishexclusion cage, from which the rock was just removed. Lower right
photograph shows the marks of 72-h of grazing at Isla Taboguilla (Note
that the sponges on the naturally exposed substrata are very tiny in
comparison to sponges inaccessible to fishes on the undersides of rocks
or in fish-exclusion cages)

forages more efficiently when it is part of a school than when
it is alone (Pitcher et al. 1982; Pitcher and Magurran 1983;
Pitcher 1986; Wolf 1987). Concentrated grazing by an
aggregation of fishes could also have more intensive effects
than the grazing by the same number of individual fishes that
are more randomly or evenly distributed.
Second, when population densities of predators and
grazers become large and prey become scarce, the
consumers must broaden their diet in order to get enough
to eat (Ivlev 1961; Werner and Hall 1974). Intense grazing
by generalists can set back succession, increasing the proportion of early successional biota with a greater ratio of net
to gross productivity (Birkeland et al. 1985). Refuge in
patchy distribution and irregular abundance is not as effective for small prey against a variety of common generalist
grazers or predators that forage in schools (Pitcher
et al. 1982; Wolf 1987), because generalists can forage
widely, being maintained on alternative foods between
patches of the prey in question. When foraging by
generalists is intense, turnover in occupation of substratum

increases and many small individuals of a variety of prey
species may be grazed indiscriminately.
Chemical and morphological defenses are more characteristic of organisms in nutrient-poor environments (Coley
et al. 1985). Morphological and chemical defenses may be
ineffective if the prey individual is too small to be
recognized by the grazer or predator. If grazing is intense
enough, the prey may be bitten off incidentally before they
reach a recognizable size. This may apply to coral recruits as
well (Sammarco 1980, 1985). Under these circumstances,
chemical and morphological defenses may be less effective
for survival to reproduction than is rapid growth and early
reproduction. As grazing intensity increases along a gradient
of increasing concentration of nutrients, the smaller, fastergrowing species of benthic organisms are favored both in
competition for space and by reproducing before being
eaten.
Both the tendency of the predators toward more
generalized diets and the responses of the prey toward
investing in rapid growth and reproduction rather than

190

C. Birkeland

defense (Coley et al. 1985)—conditions brought about by
concentrated pulses of excess nutrient input—tend to
increase net production, increase rates of population turnover, and shorten the food web.

9.4.2

Food Webs

The number of substantial trophic levels in food webs
between the primary producers and humans decreases as
nutrient input increases (Ryther 1969). Nutrient input tends
to shorten food webs by several distinct mechanisms
(Hallock 1987). Concentrations of rapidly growing and rapidly reproducing large-celled or chain-forming diatoms are
supported in regions with nutrient input from upwelling and
terrestrial runoff. These dense concentrations of large-celled
phytoplankters support dense concentrations of relatively
large herbivores such as anchovy and krill, which are then
directly fed upon by tuna, sea birds, and marine mammals. In
contrast, in nutrient-poor waters such as the tropical gyres,
tiny coccolithophorids and other nanoplankton and
picoplankton are the predominant primary producers. The
primary consumers of the tiny phytoplankters are usually
small, leading to added levels and interconnections in the
food web before harvest by the largest animals in the sea.
Although coral reefs exist in tropical regions of upwelling, they are more prevalent in environments with low
concentrations of nutrient input. Plant-animal symbioses
are favored in competition for space in regions of dilute
nutrient input (Muscatine and Porter 1977; Lewin
et al. 1983; Wilkinson. 1986; Birkeland 1987). Large colonial animals such as corals add topographic complexity to
the habitat. The development of topographically complex
biological substrata facilitates the accommodation of more
species in the habitat. The diversity of species on coral reefs
and the advantages of recycling of nutrients both tend to lead
to more complex food webs. On coral reefs, even fish feces
have been observed to be fed upon (recycled) by corals and
fishes. In fact, Robertson (1982) deduced that some fish fecal
material may be recycled through five fishes before it
reaches the coral or other benthic substrata.
Hallock (1987) further elaborated on several ways in
which a low level of nutrient input leads to habitat diversity
and species diversity, and therefore to a more complex food
web. Habitat diversity is increased in low-nutrient
environments because gradients extend across wider areas
and are more stable. Oligotrophic waters are relatively clear
and so the gradient in light attenuation is extended over a
longer depth gradient. Low-nutrient waters are generally
more stable in depth stratification because vertical mixing
is characteristic of regions of nutrient input by upwelling and
internal waves. A stable pattern of environmental heterogeneity could increase the potential for specialization and

species diversity. Regions with strong pulses of nutrient
input are less stable, not only because of the fluctuations in
magnitude of nutrient input, but because of the physical
factors that accompany upwelling (water temperature
change) and river discharge (salinity changes, turbidity,
and sedimentation).
In regions of short food webs, the ratio of fisheries yield
to gross primary production is higher than in complex
communities with more trophic levels, such as coral reefs,
because energy is lost at each step as matter is passed up the
food web. Therefore, in regions of nutrient input such as
upwelling areas, the fisheries yield per unit gross productivity would be substantially higher than in oligotrophic areas
most favorable to coral reefs (Fig. 1.1). Ryther (1969)
assigns one or two steps between phytoplankton and humans
in upwelling systems, acknowledging that nutrient-rich areas
of the world ocean have the fewest trophic levels in their
food webs. Grigg et al. (1984) assigned six trophic levels to
coral-reef systems. The implications of these levels for management will be developed (Sects. 1.1 and 12.6.2).

9.4.3

Diversity and Ecosystem Function

The geographic differences among coral reefs that first come
to mind concern species richness. The diversity of species,
genera, and families of corals, fishes, and most other taxonomic groups of coral-reef animals are very much greater in
the western Pacific compared to the Atlantic or eastern
tropical Pacific (Paulay 1997), and most of the causal
explanations for these differences involve multiple factors
of geographic patterns and processes such as isolation and
current direction (Bowen et al. 2013). But does the diversity
of corals affect the growth of the reef? It is certainly important that species are present to handle the complete array of
essential roles, such as herbivory and provision of topographic complexity of reef structure; otherwise coral-reef
communities are not resilient to disturbance (Bellwood
et al. 2004; Roff and Mumby 2012). But do reefs in Japan
grow substantially faster than those in French Polynesia?
About 400 species of hermatypic corals occur in Japanese
waters (Veron 1993), while a total of only about 155 species
occur in French Polynesia (Society Islands, Tuamotus,
Gamblers, Australs, Marquesas; see Chevalier 1982).
Notwithstanding the spectacular differences among geographic regions in size, age, and species richness (Paulay
1997), these characteristics do not appear to affect the overall growth or physiology of coral reefs (Kinsey 1983;
Crossland 1988). The reefs and atolls of French Polynesia
often appear to be accreting or growing at the same rate or
better than those in Japanese waters. Likewise, Caribbean
and other western Atlantic reefs have only about 65 species
of hermatypic corals, about one-sixth the species richness of

9

Geographic Differences in Ecological Processes on Coral Reefs

Japanese waters, yet the reefs in the Atlantic seem to be
accreting at rates comparable to those in the Pacific (Kinsey
1983), at least prior to the stress of global changes in the
more recent three decades. The characteristics of the physical environment overshadow the influence of differences in
biodiversity on the functioning of coral reefs, as long as
representatives of each of the performers of key ecological
roles are present. Primary productivity and fisheries yield are
most strongly influenced by local physical environmental
factors and human activities, not obviously greater or lesser
on Atlantic reefs than on more diverse reefs in the western
Pacific.
Despite the concept of convergent evolution, the richer
species pool in the western Pacific provides kinds of
predators with no counterparts in the western Atlantic; the
crown-of-thorns seastar, Hymenocera (shrimp that prey on
large seastars), giant clams, anemone fishes, schooling
catfishes, and sea snakes are examples. Some of the individual species such as the crown-of-thorns starfish Acanthaster
planci (Indo-West Pacific), Diadema antillarum (western
Atlantic), and Eucidaris thouarsii (Galapagos Islands)
cause large-scale phenomena that are unique to the particular geographic region (Carpenter 1997). Mutualistic
associations are also more diverse in the western Pacific,
with some groups of associations, such as giant clamzooxanthellae and anemone-anemonefishes, being characteristic of the Indo-West Pacific (Vermeij 1978), but not
the Atlantic or eastern tropical Pacific.
Some entire classes, orders, and families of organisms are
absent from coral reefs in the central Pacific, but present in
the western Pacific. There are at least 91 species of crinoids
in the shallow waters of Indonesia, at least 55 in the
Philippines, 21 in Palau, 6 in Guam and the Marshall Islands,
and none at all on coral reefs in Hawaii, French Polynesia,
the Line Islands, or the eastern tropical Pacific (Birkeland
1989). Although individual species of echinoderms have
overwhelming influences on the functioning of the coralreef ecosystems in their respective regions, some other species in their classes do not, and the overall species diversity
of their classes does not seem to have any ecological effects
(Birkeland 1989).
Nevertheless, coral-reef communities appear susceptible
to diseases when large monocultures exist. Diseases of commercial sponges have spread widely in the tropical western
Atlantic about six times since the mid-nineteenth century. A
disease killed about a million mother-of-pearl-producing
oysters in the Gambier and Tuamotu archipelagoes in the
late 1980s (Sect. 1.3). A massive mortality of Diadema
antillarum occurred in the tropical western Atlantic in the
early 1980s. The density of D. antillarum prior to the mortality may have been unnaturally high as a result of fishing
pressure on predators of urchins (Hay 1984; Hughes 1994).
Evenness in species abundance is an aspect of diversity.

191

Regardless of species richness, the thin dispersal of species
may facilitate stability of the system by reducing the spread
of communicable disease and making the overexploitation
of certain species uneconomical.

9.5

Management Considerations

The tropical western Atlantic is only about a tenth the area of
the tropical western Pacific. The interconnectedness of the
entire tropical western Atlantic, as evidenced by the spread
of diseases of urchins and sponges throughout the region
within a year on each occasion, and by the relatively uniform
faunal distribution compared to the tropical Pacific, indicates
that management of coral-reef resources requires international cooperation. Sea turtles from nests in one country
may never return because they have been harvested by
hunters in other countries. As exemplified by the effects of
the Aswan Dam on the fisheries of the eastern Mediterranean, a project undertaken hundreds of kilometers inland in
one country can have major effects on the marine fishery
resources of several other countries (Aleem 1972). Unfortunately, there are presently no international legal mechanisms
analogous to domestic court cases that can be applied to
prevent international downstream damages. Each nation is
an independent legal unit in an ecological continuum.
The coral reefs of the world cover about one-sixth of the
world’s coastlines, have greater gross productivity, and have
a far greater standing stock of fishes than the combined stock
of all the regions of upwelling. Yet upwelling favors abundant recruitment that potentially supports sustainable industrial fisheries, while most commercial export fisheries on
coral reefs have been comparatively vulnerable to overexploitation. Because of the spectacular standing stock of
coral-reef fish biomass, government agencies often consider
it their mandate to develop export fishing industries to help
improve the economies and standards of living of the indigenous people. Although well intentioned, these government
agencies most often bring principles of fisheries science
from temperate regions to coral reefs, and this often
undermines more effective and appropriate management
systems already in existence, having been developed over
centuries by the indigenous people (Sect. 12.6.3).
Why are principles of fisheries science from the temperate regions often inappropriate for coral-reef fisheries? The
large numbers of species and topographic complexity of
coral reefs make wholesale harvest and processing relatively
uneconomical. Although the biodiversity, the large number
of steps in the food web, and the life-history characteristics
of species adapted to low-nutrient environments all contribute to the maintenance of high-standing stocks of many
species per unit of gross production, a relatively small portion of this gross production is transformed into secondary

192

production that is meaningful for human consumption
(Sects. 1.1 and 12.6.2). Furthermore, the life-history traits
of target species of coral reefs (residential postlarval stages,
slow growth, long life, dependence on multiple reproduction) make coral-reef animals particularly vulnerable to
overexploitation (Sect. 12.5). In Chap. 12, a paradigm for
resource management is presented for coral reefs that takes
into account the unique aspects of coral-reef ecosystems.

References
Aleem AA (1972) Effect of river outflow management on marine life.
Mar Biol 15:200–208
Babcock R, Davies P (1991) Effects of sediment on settlement of
Acropora millepora. Coral Reefs 9:205–208
Barnes H (1956) Balanus balanoides (L.) in the Firth of Clyde: the
development and annual variation of the larval population, and the
causative factors. J Anim Ecol 25:72–84
Barnes RSK, Hughes RN (1988) An introduction to marine ecology.
Blackwell Sci Publ, Oxford, 351 pp
Bellwood DR, Hughes TP, Folke C, Nyström M (2004) Confronting the
coral reef crisis. Nature 429:827–833
Birkeland C (1977) The importance of rate of biomass accumulation in
early successional stages of benthic communities to the survival of
coral recruits. Proc 3rd Int Coral Reef Symp, Miami 1: Biology:
15–21
Birkeland C (1982) Terrestrial runoff as a cause of outbreaks of
Acanthaster planci (Echinodermata: Asteroidea). Mar Biol
69:175–185
Birkeland C (ed) (1987) Comparison between Atlantic and Pacific
tropical marine coastal ecosystems: community structure, ecological processes, and productivity. UNESCO Reports in Marine Science 46, 262 pp
Birkeland C (1989) The influence of echinoderm on coral-reef
communities. In: Jangoux M, Lawrence JM (eds) Echinoderm studies. AA Balkema, Rotterdam, pp 1–79
Birkeland C, Amesbury SS (1988) Fish-transect surveys to determine
the influences of neighboring habitats on fish community structure
in the tropical Pacific. In: Dahl AL (ed) Regional co-operation on
environmental protection of the marine and coastal areas of the
Pacific, vol 97, UNEP Regional Seas Reports and Studies., pp
195–202
Birkeland C, Rowley D, Randall RH (1982) Coral recruitment patterns
at Guam. Proc 4th Internat Coral Reef Symp, Manila 2: 339–344
Birkeland C, Nelson SG, Wilkins S deC, Gates P (1985) Effects of fish
grazing on coral reef community metabolism. Proc 5th Int Coral
Reef Congr, Tahiti 4: 47–51
Birkeland C, Randall RH, Wass RC, Smith B, Wilkins S (1987)
Biological resource assessment of the Fagatele Bay National
Marine Sanctuary. US Department of Commerce, NOAA, National
Ocean Service, Washington, DC, 232 pp
Birrell CL, McCook LJ, Willis BL (2005) Effects of algal turfs and
sediment on coral settlement. Mar Pollut Bull 51:408–414
Bonilla J, Senior W, Bugden J, Zafiriou O, Jones R (1993) Seasonal
distribution of nutrients and primary productivity on the eastern
continental shelf of Venezuela as influenced by the Orinoco River.
J Geophys Res 98:2245–2257
Bowen BW, Rocha LA, Toonen RJ, Karl SA et al (2013) The origins of
tropical marine biodiversity. Trends Ecol Evol 28:359–366
Brodie J (1995) The problems of nutrients and eutrophication in the
Australian marine environment. In: Zann LP, Sutton DC (eds) The
state of the marine environment report for Australia, Technical

C. Birkeland
Annex 2. Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, Townsville,
pp 1–29
Brodie J, Fabricius K, De’ath G, Okaji K (2005) Are increased nutrient
inputs responsible for more outbreaks of crown-of-thorns starfish?
An appraisal of the evidence. Mar Pollut Bull 51:266–278
Buddemeier RW, Hopley D (1988) Turn-ons and turn-offs: causes and
mechanisms of the initiation and termination of coral reef growth.
Proc 6th Int Coral Reef Symp, Townsville 1: 253–26
Carpenter RC (1997) Invertebrate predators and grazers. In: Birkeland
C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman & Hall, New York, pp
198–229
Chevalier JP (1982) Reef Scleractinia of French Polynesia. Proc 4th Int
Coral Reef Symp, Manila 2: 177–182
Chuanmin H, Montgomery ET, Schmitt RW, Müller-Harger FE (2004)
The dispersal of the Amazon and Orinoco River water in the
tropical Atlantic and Caribbean Sea: observations from space and
S-PALACE floats. Deep-Sea Res II 51:1151–1171
Coley PD, Bryant JP, Chapin FS III (1985) Resource availability and
plant antiherbivore defense. Science 230:895–899
Crossland CJ (1988) Latitudinal comparisons of coral reef structure and
function. Proc 6th Int Coral Reef Symp, Townsville 1: 221–226
Darnaude AM (2005) Fish ecology and terrestrial carbon use in coastal
areas: implications for marine fish production. J Anim Ecol
74:864–876
DeCarlo TM, Cohen AL, Barkley HC, Cobban Q, Young C,
Shamberger KE, Brainard RE, Golbuu Y (2015) Coral
macrobioerosion is accelerated by ocean acidification and nutrients.
Geology 43:7–10
Diaz RJ, Rosenberg R (2008) Spreading dead zones and consequences
for marine ecosystems. Science 321:926–929
Dodge RE, Lang JC (1983) Environmental correlates of hermatypic
coral (Montastrea annularis) growth on the East Flower Gardens
Bank, northwest Gulf of Mexico. Limnol Oceanogr 28:228–240
Doolette JB, Magrath WB (eds) (1990) Watershed development in
Asia. Strategies and technologies. World Bank Tech Paper
12, 227 pp
Dutterer AC, Mesing C, Cailteux R, Allen MS, Pine WE, Strickland PA
(2012) Fish recruitment is influenced by river flows and floodplain
inundation at Apalachicola River, Florida. River Res Appl
29:1110–1118
Earle SA (1972) A review of the marine plants of Panama. Bull Biol
Soc Wash 2:69–87
Fabricius KE (2005) Effects of terrestrial runoff on the ecology of
corals and coral reefs: review and synthesis. Mar Pollut Bull
50:125–146
Fabricius KE, Wild C, Wolanski E, Abele D (2003) Effects of transparent exopolymer particles and muddy terrigenous sediments on the
survival of hard coral recruits. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 57:613–621
Fabricius KE, Okaji K, De’ath G (2010) Three lines of evidence to link
outbreaks of the crown-of-thorns seastar Acanthaster planci to the
release of larval food limitation. Coral Reefs 29:593–605
Geider RJ, Platt T, Raven JA (1986) Size dependence of growth and
photosynthesis in diatoms; a synthesis. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
30:93–104
Gillson J (2011) Freshwater flow and fisheries production in estuarine
and coastal systems: where a drop of rain is not lost. Rev Fish Sci
19:168–186
Gilmour J (1999) Experimental investigation into the effects of
suspended sediment on fertilisation, larval survival and settlement
in a scleractinian coral. Mar Biol 135:451–462
Glynn PW (1972) Observations on the ecology of the Caribbean and
Pacific coasts of Panama. Bull Biol Soc Wash 2:13–20
Glynn PW (ed) (1990) Global ecological consequences of the 1982–83
El Niño-Southern Oscillation. Elsevier Press, Amsterdam, 563 pp
Grigg RW (1982) Darwin Point: a threshold for atoll formation. Coral
Reefs 1:29–35

9

Geographic Differences in Ecological Processes on Coral Reefs

Grigg RW, Polovina JJ, Atkinson MJ (1984) Model of a coral reef
ecosystem. III. Resource limitation, community regulation, fisheries
yield and resource management. Coral Reefs 3:23–27
Gulland JA (1976) Production and catches of fish in the sea. In:
Cushing DH, Walsh JJ (eds) The ecology of the seas. WB Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, pp 283–314
Hallock P (1987) Fluctuations in the trophic resource continuum; a
factor in global biodiversity cycles. Palaeoceanography 2:457–471
Hallock P, Müller-Harger FE, Halas JC (1993) Coral reef decline. Natl
Geogr Res Explor 9:358–378
Hatcher BG (1997) Organic production and decomposition. In:
Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman & Hall,
New York, pp 140–174
Hay ME (1984) Patterns of fish and urchin grazing on Caribbean coral
reefs: are previous results typical? Ecology 65:446–454
Highsmith RC (1980) Geographic patterns of coral bioerosion: a productivity hypothesis. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 46:177–196
Hodgson G (1990) Tetracycline reduces sedimentation damage to
corals. Mar Biol 104:493–496
Hughes TP (1994) Catastrophes, phase shifts, and large-scale degradation of a Caribbean coral reef. Science 265:1547–1551
ISRS (2004) The effects of terrestrial runoff of sediments, nutrients,
and other pollutants on coral reefs. Briefing Paper 3, International
Society for Reef Studies, 18 pp
Ivlev VS (1961) Experimental ecology of the feeding of fishes. Yale
University Press, New Haven
Jayewardene D (2009) A factorial experiment quantifying the influence
of parrotfish density and size on algal reduction on Hawaiian coral
reefs. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 375:64–69
Jokiel PL, Coles SL (1990) Response of Hawaiian and other IndoPacific reef corals to elevated temperature. Coral Reefs 8:155–162
Kamura S, Choonhabandit S (1986) Distribution of benthic marine
algae on the coasts of Khang Khao and Thai Ta Mun, Sichang
Islands, the Gulf of Thailand. Galaxea 5:97–114
Kim I-N, Lee K, Gruber N, Karl DM, Bullister JL, Yang S, Kim T-W
(2014) Increasing anthropogenic nitrogen in the North Pacific
Ocean. Science 346:1102–1106
Kinsey DW (1983) Standards of performance in coral reef primary
production and carbonate turnover. In: Barnes DJ
(ed) Perspectives on coral reefs. Brian Clouston Publ, Manuka,
pp 209–220
Kinsey DW, Davies PJ (1979) Effects of elevated nitrogen and phosphorous on coral reef growth. Limnol Oceanogr 24:935–940
Kuffner IB, Walters LJ, Becerro MA, Paul VJ, Ritson-Williams R,
Beach KS (2006) Inhibition of coral recruitment by macroalgae
and cyanobacteria. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 323:107–117
Lewin RA, Cheng L, Alberte RA (1983) Prochloron-ascidian
symbioses: photosynthetic potential and productivity. Micrones
19:165–170
Littler MM, Littler DS (1980) The evolution of phallus form and
survival strategies in benthic marine macroalgae: held and laboratory tests of a functional form model. Am Nat 116:25–44
Longhurst AR, Pauly D (1987) Ecology of tropical oceans. Academic,
London, 407 pp
Maclean J (1984) Red tide – a growing problem in the Indo-Pacific
region. ICLARM Newsl 7(4):20
Menasveta P, Wongratana T, Chaitanawisuti, Rungsupa S (1986) Species composition and standing crop of coral reef fishes in the
Sichang Islands, Gulf of Thailand. Galaxea 5:115–121
Milliman JD (1992) River sediment discharge to the sea: new analysis
of old data. Coastal systems studies and sustainable development.
UNESCO Tech Pap Mar Sci 64:56–66
Milliman JD, Meade RH (1983) World-wide delivery of river sediment
to the oceans. J Geol 91:1–21

193
Milliman JD, Qin YS, Ren ME, Saito Y (1987) Man’s influence on the
erosion and transport of sediment by Asian rivers: the Yellow River
(Huanghe) example. J Geol 95:751–762
Muscatine L, Porter JW (1977) Reef corals: mutualistic symbiosis
adapted to nutrient-poor environments. Bioscience 27:454–460
Odum EP, Keunzler EJ, Bunt MX (1958) Uptake of P32 and primary
productivity in marine benthic algae. Limnol Oceanogr 3:340–345
Page HM, Hubbard DM (1987) Temporal and spatial patterns of growth
in mussels Mytilus edulis on an offshore platform: relationships to
water temperature and food availability. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol
111:159–179
Paulay G (1997) Diversity and distribution of reef organisms. In:
Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman & Hall,
New York, pp 298–353
Pitcher TJ (1986) Predators and food are the keys to understanding fish
shoals: a review of recent experiments. Nat Can Ann Rev Ecol Syst
113:225–233
Pitcher TJ, Magurran AE (1983) Shoal size, patch profitability and
information exchange in foraging goldfish. Anim Behav
31:546–555
Pitcher TJ, Magurran AE, Winfield IJ (1982) Fish in larger shoals find
food faster. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 10:149–151
Ramus J, Venable M (1987) Temporal ammonium patchiness and
growth rate in Codium and Ulva (Ulvophyceae). J Phycol
23:518–523
Richmond RH (1990) Relationships among reproductive mode, biogeographic distribution patters and evolution in scleractinian corals.
In: Hoshi M, Yamashita O (eds) Advances in invertebrate reproduction, vol 5. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 317–322
Robertson DR (1982) Fish feces as fish food on a Pacific coral reef. Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 7:253–265
Roff G, Mumby PJ (2012) Global disparity in the resilience of coral
reefs. Trends Ecol Evol 27:404–419
Rose CS, Risk MJ (1985) Increase in Cliona deletrix infestation of
Montastrea cavernous heads on an organically polluted portion of
the Grand Cayman fringing reef. Mar Ecol 6:345–363
Ryther JH (1963) Geographic variations in productivity. In: Hill MN
(ed) The sea, vol 2. Wiley, New York
Ryther JH (1969) Photosynthesis and fish production in the sea. Science
166:72–76
Sammarco PW (1980) Diadema and its relationship to coral spat
mortality: grazing, competition, and biological disturbances. J Exp
Mar Biol Ecol 45:245–272
Sammarco PW (1985) The Great Barrier Reef vs. the Caribbean:
comparisons of grazers, coral recruitment patterns, and reef recovery. Proc 5th Int Coral Reef Congr, Tahiti 4: 391–397
Smith SV, Kinsey DW (1976) Calcium carbonate production, coral reef
growth and sea level change. Science 194:937–939
Smith SV, Kimmerer WJ, Laws EA, Brock RE, Walsh TW (1981)
Kaneohe Bay sewage diversion experiment: perspectives on ecosystem response to nutritional perturbation. Pac Sci 35:279–402
Smith JE, Smith CM, Hunter CL (2001) An experimental analysis of
the effects of herbivory and nutrient enrichment on benthic community dynamics on a Hawaiian reef. Coral Reefs 19:332–342
Sutcliffe WH Jr (1972) Some relations of land drainage, nutrients,
particulate material, and fish catch in two eastern Canadian bays. J
Fish Res Board Can 29:357–362
Sutcliffe WH Jr (1973) Correlations between seasonal river discharge
and local landings of American lobster (Homarus americanus) and
Atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus) in the Gulf of
St. Lawrence. J Fish Res Board Can 30:856–859
Tsuchiya M, Nakasone Y, Moordee R, Manthachitra V (1986) Distribution of subtidal macrobenthic animals around the Sichang
islands, the Gulf of Thailand. Galaxea 5:75–96

194
Twilley RR, Kemp WM, Staver KW, Stevenson JC, Boynton WR
(1985) Nutrient enrichment of estuarine submersed vascular plant
communities. 1. Algal growth acid effects on production of plants
and associated communities. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 23:179–191
van Moorsel GWNM (1988) Early maximum growth of stony corals
(Scleractinia) after settlement on artificial substrata on a Caribbean
reef. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 50:127–135
Vermeij GJ (1978) Biogeography and adaptation, patterns of marine
life. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 332 pp
Veron JEN (1993) A biogeographic database of hermatypic corals.
Species of the central Indo-Pacific, genera of the world. Aust Inst
Mar Sci Monogr Ser 10:1–433
Veron JEN (1995) Corals in space and time. The biogeography and
evolution of the Scleractinia. University of New South Wales Press,
Sydney, 321 pp
Wallace CC (1985) Seasonal peaks and annual fluctuation in recruitment of juvenile scleractinian corals. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
21:289–298
Werner EE, Hall DJ (1974) Optimal foraging and the size selection of
prey be the bluegill sunfish (Lepomis macrochirus). Ecology
55:1042–1052

C. Birkeland
Wilkinson CR (1983) Role of sponges in coral reef structural processes.
In: Barnes DJ (ed) Perspectives on coral reefs. Brian Clouston Publ,
Manuka, pp 263–274
Wilkinson CR (1986) The nutritional spectrum in coral reef benthos or
sponging off one another for dinner. Oceanus 29:68–75
Wilkinson CR (1987) Interocean differences in size and nutrition of
coral reef sponge populations. Science 236:1654–1657
Wilkinson CR, Cheshire AC (1990) Comparisons of sponge
populations across the barrier reefs of Australia and Belize: evidence for higher productivity in the Caribbean. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
67:285–294
Wisshak M, Schönberg CHL, Form A, Freiwald A (2012) Ocean
acidification accelerates reef bioerosion. PLoS One 7:e45124
Wolf NG (1987) Schooling tendency and foraging benefit in the ocean
surgeonfish. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 21:59–63
Wolff WJ, Gueye A, Meijboo A, Piersma T, Sall MA (1987) Distribution, biomass, recruitment and productivity of Anadara senillis (L.)
(Mollusca: Bivalvia) on the Banc d’Arguin, Mauritania. Neth J Sea
Res 21:243–253
Wulff J (2012) Ecological interactions and the distribution, abundance,
and diversity of sponges. Adv Mar Biol 61:273–344

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals
A Complex Triangle

10

Mark A. Hixon

Abstract

The coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle is an accepted generalization embedded within a
highly complex web of biotic interactions and abiotic conditions that bring exceptions. The
pattern is confirmed by observations that herbivorous fishes and urchins can have very
strong effects on the standing crop of reef macroalgae, thereby opening space for corals to
thrive. However, other factors, such as the abundance and distribution of territorial
damselfishes, shelter for schooling herbivores, water motion, and nutrient flux, as well as
multiple stressors on corals, can modify this basic pattern, sometimes strongly. High levels
of herbivory lead to dominance by low-lying algae, including crustose corallines that may
foster coral settlement. The intensity of herbivory by schooling fishes often varies
unimodally with depth: low in very shallow water due to wave stress and other factors
limiting accessibility by fishes, high at moderate depths, and low in deeper water where
coral growth that provides shelter for fishes declines. Dense stands of macroalgae tend to
thrive where herbivores are rare due to lack of habitat complexity that provides refuges
from predation. Herbivorous damselfishes can act as natural cages by inhibiting schooling
grazers and maintaining a high diversity of mid-successional algae within their territories
via moderate grazing (intermediate-predation effect). These algal mats not only inhibit
coral growth, but also serve as localized refugia for small invertebrates and newly settled
fishes. Nutrients also play a pivotal role in structuring benthic algal productivity, standing
crops, and species assemblages. Besides directly consuming corals or algae, reef fishes can
also affect invertebrate corallivores and herbivores, causing subsequent indirect effects on
reef benthos. Examples include predation on the corallivorous crown-of-thorns seastar and
herbivorous sea urchins, the latter causing halos around patch reefs where urchins remain
near cover. From a management perspective, conserving herbivores is clearly important for
keeping reef algae in check. Maintaining both the abundance and species diversity of
herbivores of a variety of sizes, especially via marine reserves, is likely the best means
of ensuring that macroalgae do not displace corals. Such rules of thumb are likely essential
for fostering the ecological resilience of coral reefs, especially in the context of a warming
and acidifying ocean.
Keywords

Herbivore  Corallivore  Territorial damselfish  Phase shift  Trophic cascade

M.A. Hixon (*)
Sidney & Erica Hsiao Endowed Chair in Marine Biology, Department
of Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA
e-mail: hixonm@hawaii.edu
# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_10

195

196

10.1

M.A. Hixon

Introduction

10.1.1 Fishes and Coral Reefs
Besides the corals themselves, fishes are perhaps the most
conspicuous and beautiful inhabitants of coral reefs. Their
diversity is amazing. It has been estimated that over 5,000
species of fish inhabit coral reefs worldwide (Cowman and
Bellwood 2013), and locally, hundreds of species can coexist on the same reef. For example, Smith and Tyler (1972)
found 75 species occupying a 3-m diameter patch reef in the
Caribbean, which is not a particularly speciose region compared to the Indo-Pacific (Paulay 1997).
The variety of sizes and shapes of reef fishes is as remarkable as their species diversity. The smallest vertebrate is a
goby less than 10 mm long that inhabits Indian Ocean reefs
(Winterbottom and Emery 1981), whereas at the other
extreme, reef sharks, groupers, barracudas, and even wrasses
and parrotfishes can reach startling sizes measured in meters.
Fishes exploit virtually every conceivable microhabitat and
food source on reefs, from incoming oceanic plankton, to a
wide variety of benthic organisms, to other fishes (see
reviews in Sale 1991, 2002). Moreover, reef fishes often
occur in high standing stocks, with 8 mT/ha being near the
likely present maximum, observed on uninhabited Jarvis
Atoll in the Pacific (Sandin et al. 2008). Not surprisingly,
reef fishes are an important food source for many tropical
nations (reviews by Russ 1991; Polunin and Roberts 1996).
It seems almost a foregone conclusion, then, to assert that
fishes have strong effects on the dominant benthos of reefs:
corals and macroalgae. As reviewed below, herbivorous
fishes normally do substantially affect the distribution and
abundance of algae on reefs that are not overfished.
Although relatively few major direct effects of corallivorous
fishes on corals have been found, newly reported cases of
corallivory are increasing, and the indirect effects of herbivorous fishes on corals can be substantial and perhaps essential for the ecological resilience of reefs. Additionally, there

Fig. 10.1 The coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle as a simple interaction web, showing positive (+) and negative ( ) direct effects (solid
arrows) and indirect effects (dashed arrows). Arrow thickness depicts
the relative strength of interactions, and font size represents relative
biomass between scenarios. (a) The triangle on a reef that is relatively

is evidence that various fishes affect the distribution and
abundance of invertebrate herbivores and corallivores, further affecting reef algae and corals indirectly.

10.1.2 Coral-Seaweed-Herbivore Triangle
A popular yet somewhat controversial hypothesis is that
herbivorous fishes (and some macroinvertebrates, especially
sea urchins) facilitate dominance by corals on reefs by
preventing macroalgae (or equivalently, “seaweeds”, with
apologies to phycologists) from outcompeting or otherwise
hindering corals (e.g., Hughes 1989, 1994; Carpenter 1990;
Done 1992; Knowlton 1992; Tanner 1995; McClanahan
et al. 1996; Lirman 2001; Burkepile and Hay 2008, 2010;
Barott et al. 2012). Indeed, there is some evidence that the
evolution of modern herbivorous reef fishes may have been a
prerequisite for dominance by reef-building corals.
Bellwood and Wainwright (2002: 30) conclude from the
fossil record that “the inferred scenario is one of increased
herbivory, both in intensity and excavation depth, with a
concomitant decrease in the abundance of macrophytes.
This results in a system dominated by close-cropped turfs,
where decreased competition between algae and corals
permits coralline algae and corals to proliferate.” Thus,
herbivores, seaweeds, and corals can be viewed as an important interaction web on healthy reefs, whereby predators
(herbivores) control the dominant competitors for space
(macroalgae), allowing subordinate competitors (reefbuilding corals) to thrive (Fig. 10.1a).
At the risk of proliferating ecological jargon, let us call
this concept the coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle.
Overfishing of herbivorous fishes combined with the loss
of herbivorous macroinvertebrates can degrade this triangle,
facilitating the replacement of corals by macroalgae as the
dominant benthos (Fig. 10.1b). This change is often
characterized as a “phase shift” that contributes to the
demise of coral reefs (reviews by McCook 1999; McManus

healthy from a human perspective: many herbivores indirectly cause
high live coral cover. (b) The triangle on a reef that is relatively
degraded from a human perspective: macroalgae overgrow corals in
the absence of substantial herbivory

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals

et al. 2000; Nyström et al. 2000, 2008, 2012; McManus and
Polsenberg 2004; Pandolfi et al. 2005; Ledlie et al. 2007;
Mumby et al. 2007b, 2013; Mumby and Steneck 2008;
Bruno et al. 2009; Cheal et al. 2010; Hughes et al. 2010;
Roff and Mumby 2012; Graham et al. 2013). Such phase
shifts may represent “alternative stable states” in that a
positive feedback loop can develop following the loss of
herbivores in which more algae and less coral means less
shelter for fishes and macroinvertebrates, which inhibits
further recruitment of herbivores, which means continuing
low herbivory, high algal growth, and less coral (review by
Petraitis 2013). Of course, degradation of the triangle is only
one of a multitude of threats to coral reefs, as detailed
elsewhere in this volume.
There is some controversy regarding the generality of the
coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle. First, it has been debated
whether macroalgal standing crops on reefs are controlled
more from the top-down by herbivory or more from the
bottom-up by nutrient flux (Lapointe 1997, 1999; Hughes
et al. 1999; McCook 1999; Miller et al. 1999; Aronson and
Precht 2000; Belliveau and Paul 2002; Jompa and McCook
2002; McClanahan et al. 2002; Diaz-Pulido and McCook
2003; Lapointe et al. 2004; Sotka and Hay 2009), although
meta-analyses have indicated that herbivores are typically
more important than nutrients (Burkepile and Hay 2006).
Nonetheless, there are reef systems where both top-down
and bottom-up factors are simultaneously important (e.g.,
Smith et al. 2001, 2010; Stimson et al. 2001; Thacker
et al. 2001), a pattern that is also evident in meta-analyses
(Gruner et al. 2008).
Second, the extent to which macroalgae outcompete or
otherwise inhibit corals is also somewhat controversial
(Miller 1998; McCook 1999; McCook et al. 2001; Williams
et al. 2001; Birrell et al. 2008), with lab and field
experiments both demonstrating such effects (Hughes
1989; Tanner 1995; Lirman 2001; Birrell et al. 2005, 2008;
Kuffner et al. 2006; Box and Mumby 2007; Arnold
et al. 2010) and failing to do so (Jompa and McCook 1998;
McCook 2001). Dominance in competitive interactions
between turf algae and corals varies with human presence,
likely due to effects of fishing on herbivores (Barott
et al. 2012). The effects of parrotfish consuming both
seaweeds and corals can make it difficult to detect
seaweed-coral competition (Miller and Hay 1998), and competition between sea urchins and herbivorous fishes further
complicates these interactions (McClanahan 1992;
McClanahan et al. 1996). Rather than extending such
debates, my intent is to examine the complex role of reef
fishes in structuring coral-reef benthos.
It is important at the outset to stress that the coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle may often not be as simple as
depicted in Fig. 10.1 because this triad does not occur in
isolation from the remainder of the reef ecosystem. All three

197

groups of organisms are affected by a variety of other
organisms and abiotic factors that act in concert with
interactions inside the triangle. Indeed, the coral-seaweedherbivore triangle is part of the vastly complex interaction
web that we call a coral reef ecosystem, involving a variety
of direct and indirect effects among herbivores, seaweeds,
corals, and their biotic and abiotic environment is ways that
defy simplistic explanations (as detailed below). For example, herbivorous fishes can actually aid the dispersal of
macroalgae, fragments of which may survive gut passage
and reattach to the reef (Vermeij et al. 2013). Unfortunately
for present-day scientists, much of what we know of reef
ecosystems is a recent remnant of far richer systems that
included numerous mega herbivores, including sea turtles,
manatees, etc. (Jackson 1997).
Given this context, this chapter focuses on the myriad
effects of (1) herbivorous fishes on the distribution and
abundance of reef algae, and indirectly, corals,
(2) corallivorous fishes that directly consume reef-building
corals, and (3) fishes that consume and compete with invertebrate herbivores and corallivores, thereby indirectly affecting macroalgae and corals. The overall conclusion is that,
beyond useful yet not quite universal concepts like the coralseaweed-herbivore triangle, the immense complexity of
coral reefs – combined with numerous synergistic threats
to these ecosystems – makes explicitly detailed guidelines
for conservation and management difficult. Nonetheless,
there is sufficient generality that rules of thumb – such as
maintaining high diversity and large populations of
herbivores of a variety of body sizes – should be widely
implemented to bolster the ecological resilience of coral
reefs.

10.1.3 Scope of Review
This chapter focuses on the one-way effects of fishes upon
reefs, emphasizing the mechanisms and constraints under
which fishes cause shifts in the relative dominance of benthic organisms. However, it is important to realize that this
limited perspective ignores most of the complex interactions
between fishes and the reefs they inhabit. Indeed, the reciprocal effects of reefs upon fishes (e.g., interaction arrows that
would flow in the opposite directions as those in Fig. 10.1)
are a matter of life and death for many species; many fishes
are obligatory denizens of coral reefs and derive all their
food and shelter from this habitat. The demise of a reef
certainly has repercussions for reef fishes (review by Sale
and Hixon 2014). For example, macroalgal overgrowth of
reefs may reduce the density of both herbivorous and carnivorous fishes in Kenya (McClanahan et al. 1999). Indeed,
Reese (1981) proposed that the density of obligate coralfeeding fishes can be used as a bioindicator of the general

198

M.A. Hixon

health of a reef, yet this idea stirred considerable controversy
(Bell et al. 1985; Bouchon-Navarro et al. 1985; Williams
1986; Roberts et al. 1988; Sano et al. 1987; White 1988;
Bouchon-Navarro and Bouchon 1989; Clarke 1996; Kokita
and Nakazono 2001). The close association of fishes and
corals was documented by Harmelin-Vivien (1989), who
noted a significant linear relationship between the number
of fish species and the number of coral species among reefs
across the Indo-Pacific region, but no such relationship with
the number of algal species. In any case, the death and
collapse of a coral reef reduces living space for fishes,
which in turn may reduce local populations of herbivores,
thereby inhibiting reef recovery (Mumby and Steneck 2008;
Nyström et al. 2012; Sale and Hixon 2014).
Other potentially important interactions between fishes and
reefs that will not be covered here are, first, assessment of the
relative effects of fishes vs invertebrate herbivores (Hay 1984;
Carpenter 1986; Foster 1987; Morrison 1988; Klumpp and
Pulfrich 1989), and second, the role of fish defecation and
excretion fertilizing reef benthos (Meyer et al. 1983; Meyer
and Schultz 1985a, b; Polunin and Koike 1987; Polunin 1988;
Harmelin-Vivien et al. 1992; Burkepile et al. 2013). Finally,
space limitations preclude exploration of the many fascinating
and ecologically important interactions among fishes and the
community structure of reef fishes per se. For example,
changes in the abundance of predatory fishes could result in
reciprocal shifts in the density of herbivorous fishes, with
ramifications for the benthos (Graham et al. 2003; Mumby
et al. 2006, 2012). Fortunately, volumes on these topics edited
by Sale (1991, 2002) and Mora (2014) are unparalleled and
recommended for those desiring a detailed introduction to
reef-fish ecology, just as Polunin and Robert’s (1996) edited
volume covers reef fisheries.
This review, then, is by no means exhaustive. Previous
reviews detailing interactions among reef fishes, seaweeds,
and corals include Hixon (1986), Hutchings (1986), Glynn
(1988, 1990), Steneck (1988), Horn (1989), Hay (1991,
1997), Jones et al. (1991), and McCook (1999). This review
summarizes relevant literature published through 2013,
emphasizing earlier foundational studies that are not always
readily available on-line.

10.2

The Players: Corallivorous
and Herbivorous Reef Fishes

Only a handful of families of fishes have been documented
to have obvious direct effects on reef corals (Fig. 10.2).
Although about 10 families and over 100 species of fish
are known to eat coral polyps, there are relatively few groups
that feed strictly on corals (reviews by Robertson 1970;
Randall 1974; Cole et al. 2008; Rotjan and Lewis 2008).
This pattern may be due to coral polyps being relatively

unpalatable compared to other prey in terms of their chemical composition, their protective nematocysts, and their calcium-carbonate skeletons. The predominant corallivores are
butterflyfishes (Family Chaetodontidae, Cole et al. 2011);
about half of the over 100 species eat corals (Allen 1981;
Cole et al. 2008; Rotjan and Lewis 2008). Other relatively
large fishes that regularly consume corals are triggerfishes
(Balistidae), filefishes (Monacanthidae), and puffers
(Tetraodontidae) (e.g., Jayewardene et al. 2009). Whereas
the butterflyfishes delicately extract individual polyps from
the coral skeleton, triggerfishes and puffers tend to scrape or
excavate pieces of the coral colony with their beak-like
mouths. Smaller corallivores include at least one goby
(Gobiidae; Patton 1974).
Among the corallivores, the social systems of the
butterflyfishes are best documented, often comprising
territories defended by male-female pairs (Reese 1975;
Hourigan 1989; Roberts and Ormond 1992). About 8 species
of wrasse and about 20 species of parrotfish (both Labridae)
also consume living coral tissue (Bruckner et al. 2000;
Rotjan and Lewis 2006, 2008; Cole et al. 2008, 2010;
Mumby 2009; Rotjan and Dimond 2010; Bonaldo and
Bellwood 2011; Cole and Pratchett 2011a; Burkepile
2012), especially the largest species, the endangered
bumphead parrotfish Bolbometopon muricatum (Randall
1974; Choat 1991; Bellwood et al. 2003). About a third of
the species of corallivorous reef fish feed almost exclusively
on corals (Cole et al. 2008).
In contrast to the corallivores, herbivores are relatively
speciose (Fig. 10.2). As collated by Allen (1991) and Choat
(1991), the predominant consumers of benthic algae are
most of the approximately 75 species of surgeonfishes
(Acanthuridae), all 27 species of rabbitfishes (Siganidae),
all 79 species of parrotfishes (formerly Scaridae, now the
Subfamily Scarinae of the Family Labridae), and over half of
the approximately 320 species of damselfishes
(Pomacentridae). Other herbivorous families include smaller
fishes, such as combtooth blennies (Blenniidae), and even
batfish (Platax pinnatus, Bellwood et al. 2006). The geographic distribution of herbivorous reef fishes is likely limited by temperature-related feeding and digestive processes
(Floeter et al. 2005).
The feeding modes of herbivorous reef fishes are highly
variable (reviews by Ogden and Lobel 1978; Horn 1989;
Glynn 1990; Choat 1991; Wainwright and Bellwood 2002;
Choat et al. 2002, 2004). Surgeonfishes and rabbitfishes tend
to crop seaweeds in a browsing mode that leaves algal
holdfasts intact. Parrotfishes, on the other hand, have highly
modified jaws and fused teeth. With these beaks (which
inspired their name) and depending upon the species,
parrotfishes superficially scrape or deeply excavate the substratum and remove algal holdfasts along with the dead coral
to which the algae attach, and occasionally, live coral

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals

199

Fig. 10.2 Families of largerbodied reef fishes that include the
most corallivorous and
herbivorous species. Note that
members of all the listed
corallivore families include
species that do not consume
corals, and about half the species
of damselfish are not herbivorous.
Certain species in numerous other
families also consume corals
and/or algae. Note that
parrotfishes are increasingly
documented to consume live
coral as well as algae (Modified
from Hixon 1997)

(Bellwood and Choat 1990; Bruckner et al. 2000; Rotjan and
Lewis 2006; Bonaldo and Bellwood 2009; Mumby 2009;
Rotjan and Dimond 2010; Burkepile 2012). This activity
makes parrotfishes the major source of bioerosion (and producer of coral sand) among reef fishes (reviews by
Hutchings 1986; Choat 1991, Chapter 4). Different species
of algae are differentially consumed by different species of
herbivore, indicating that herbivore diversity is important in
controlling the overall standing crop of seaweeds (Mantyka
and Bellwood 2007a, b; Burkepile and Hay 2008).
Surgeonfishes, rabbitfishes, and parrotfishes exhibit variable
social systems, from individual territories to transient foraging aggregations (e.g., Ogden and Buckman 1973;
Robertson et al. 1979; Robertson and Gaines 1986).
Most herbivorous (actually, omnivorous) damselfishes
maintain permanent individual territories, measuring about
a square meter in area, which they defend vigorously against

other herbivores (e.g., Low 1971). This defense, combined
with moderate browsing and even “weeding” behavior
(sensu Lassuy 1980), often maintains a distinctive mat of
erect algae within the territory. By forming large schools,
parrotfishes and surgeonfishes can sometimes overwhelm
and denude damselfish territories (Jones 1968; Barlow
1974; Vine 1974; Robertson et al. 1976; Foster 1985;
Reinthal and Lewis 1986).
Overall, both corallivorous and herbivorous fishes display
a wide variety of feeding modes and behaviors, suggesting
that the ecological effects of these consumers are bound to
vary widely from species to species and from reef to reef.
This immense functional diversity indicates likely complementary, synergistic, and redundant roles of multiple species
in maintaining the resilience of what humans consider to be
healthy coral reefs. What follows, then, are summaries of
specific studies that can be generalized only with caution.

200

10.3

M.A. Hixon

Effects of Fishes on Seaweeds

10.3.1 Schooling Herbivores
Parrotfishes, surgeonfishes, and rabbitfishes often occur in
dense aggregations that have obvious effects on reef
macroalgae. Densities can average well over 10,000 herbivorous fish per hectare (review by Horn 1989), standing
stocks on unfished reefs in the Great Barrier Reef can
reach 45 metric tons per km2 (Williams and Hatcher 1983),
and secondary productivity can approach 3 metric tons per
km2 per year (review by Russ and St. John 1988). At
Orpheus Island on the Great Barrier Reef, the entire area of
the reef crest can be grazed by the parrotfish Scarus rivulatus
monthly (Fox and Bellwood 2007, 2008). In the Caribbean,
parrotfishes can graze at rates of over 150,000 bites per m2
per day (Carpenter 1986), although it has been estimated that
these fish can maintain only 10–30 % of a structurally
complex fore-reef in a grazed state (Mumby 2006). At
lower algal productivities on reefs in the Florida Keys,
herbivorous fishes may consume up to 100 % of the entire
daily production, ranging as low as about 30 % in some
microhabitats (Paddack et al. 2006). Hatcher (1981)
estimated that about half the net algal production on One
Tree Reef, Australia, was consumed by fishes. At the same
site, Hatcher and Larkum (1983) demonstrated that algal
standing crop was controlled by grazing fishes during both
autumn and spring on the reef slope (10 m depth), but only
during spring in the lagoon (2 m depth). In autumn, inorganic nitrogen limited the standing crop of lagoon algae
despite the continued presence of fishes (Hatcher 1997). In
some systems, such intense herbivory enhances local primary productivity by maintaining algae at an early-successional stage (Montgomery 1980; Birkeland et al. 1985;
Carpenter 1986).
In addition to seasonal variation, an apparently general
trend is that the spatial distribution of herbivory by fishes
varies inversely with tidal exposure and/or wave action (Van
den Hoek et al. 1975, 1978) and directly with the availability
of shelter for the herbivores from predatory fishes (Hay
1981a; Lewis 1986), with both turbulence and shelter often
decreasing with depth. Thus, as documented in Guam (Nelson
and Tsutsui 1981), the Caribbean (Hay et al. 1983; Lewis and
Wainwright 1985), the Great Barrier Reef (Russ 1984a, b),
and the Indian Ocean (Sluka and Miller 2001), the depth
distribution of herbivores and grazing intensity may often be
unimodal: low in very shallow water due to limited accessibility by fishes, high at intermediate depths due to high
accessibility and shelter, and low in deep reef areas (greater
than about 10 m), where the abundance of coral shelter for
fishes typically decreases. However, in areas where intense
fishing has greatly reduced the abundance of piscivores,

herbivorous fishes may be active at greater depths, with
algal standing stocks consequently being lower than usual at
those depths (Hay 1984). The unimodal depth distribution of
herbivorous fishes may explain the bimodal zonation of erect
algal cover found on reefs such as those in Curacao (Van den
Hoek et al. 1978): high cover in the eulittoral zone (0–1 m
depth), low on the upper reef slope (1–30 m), and high again
on the lower slope (30–50 m).
Lack of shelter for grazing fishes probably also explains
the existence of extensive algal plains occurring on sand
bottoms below and between reefs, as well as high algal
densities on very shallow reef flats lacking adequate shelter
for fishes (Van den Hoek et al. 1978; Hay 1981b; McCook
1997). Overall, it appears that the risk of predation limits the
grazing activities of smaller reef fishes to areas providing
structural refuges (reviews by Hixon 1991, 2015).
At the microhabitat scale, schooling herbivores may
invade territories of damselfish, which harbor higher standing crops of seaweeds than the surrounding seascape (Jones
1968; Barlow 1974; Vine 1974; Robertson et al. 1976; Foster 1985; Reinthal and Lewis 1986). However, herbivores
may spend less time foraging where macroalgal stands are
particularly dense (Hoey and Bellwood 2011). At broader
regional scales, on the Great Barrier Reef, inner-shelf reefs
support both high macroalgal cover and high densities yet
low biomass of parrotfishes, whereas outer-shelf reefs support the opposite patterns (Hoey and Bellwood 2008;
Wismer et al. 2009), although other schooling herbivores
are more abundant on the outer reef than inshore (Williams
and Hatcher 1983; Russ 1984a, b). The mechanisms underlying these patterns appear to be related to between-region
differences in the palatability and productivity of reef algae
(Roff and Mumby 2012). (Chap. 9 provides a general review
of regional variation in coral-reef processes.)
Regionally, comparisons among reefs have shown clear
inverse correlations between the biomass of herbivorous
fishes and the percent cover of macroalgae in the Caribbean
(Williams and Polunin 2001) and the Great Barrier Reef
(Wismer et al. 2009). Locally, herbivores can be more abundant inside marine reserves, with consequent declines in
macroalgal abundance relative to fished areas, as
documented in the Bahamas (Mumby et al. 2006), but not
in Belize (McClanahan et al. 2011b). In the Bahamas, this
pattern can lead to a trophic cascade that benefits corals
(Mumby et al. 2007a). Field experiments pioneered by
Stephenson and Searles (1960) and Randall (1961), in
which herbivorous fishes are excluded from reef plots by
cages, have shown that such correlations are a case of cause
and effect. Typically, heavily grazed dead coral surfaces
become dominated by grazer-resistant algal crusts or turfs,
whereas caged but otherwise identical surfaces become covered by high standing crops of erect algae (Vine 1974;

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals

Wanders 1977; Lassuy 1980; Sammarco 1983; Hixon and
Brostoff 1985; Carpenter 1986; Lewis 1986; Morrison 1988;
Scott and Russ 1987; McCauley et al. 2010). Essentially,
erect algae competitively exclude crusts in the absence of
grazing, but crusts are more resistant to grazing (Littler
et al. 1983; Steneck 1983). Overall, the local species diversity of algae on exposed flat surfaces declines with increasing density of schooling herbivores (Day 1977; Brock 1979),
an effect that is ameliorated on surfaces where algae can
grow in crevices (Brock 1979; Hixon and Brostoff 1985;
Hixon and Menge 1991).
A yearlong experiment off Hawai‘i examined the benthic
successional sequences and mechanisms that cause these
general patterns (Hixon and Brostoff 1996). Succession
was followed on dead coral surfaces subjected to each of
three grazing treatments: protected within grazer-exclusion
cages, exposed to moderate grazing inside damselfish
territories, and exposed to intense parrotfish and surgeonfish
grazing outside territories. The ungrazed successional
sequence inside cages was an early assemblage of filamentous green and brown algae (including Entermorpha and
Ectocarpus) replaced by a high-diversity assemblage of
mostly red filaments (including Centroceras and
Ceramium), which in turn was replaced by a low-diversity
assemblage of mostly coarsely-branched species (including
Hypnea and Tolypiocladia). Plotted in a multispecies ordination (detrended correspondence analysis), ungrazed succession followed a distinct trajectory over the year
(Fig. 10.3a). Intense herbivory by parrotfishes and
surgeonfishes outside damselfish territories caused succession to follow a very different path, where the early filaments
were replaced immediately by grazer-resistant crustose species, including the red coralline Hydrolithon (Fig. 10.3a).
This result suggests that heavy grazing deflected the normal
trajectory of succession toward herbivore-resistant algae
(Hixon and Brostoff 1996). Other experiments showing the
important role of herbivores in benthic algal succession
include McClanahan (1997) in Kenya, Ceccarelli
et al. (2005) in Papua New Guinea, and Burkepile and Hay
(2010) in Florida.
In summary, intense herbivory, especially where an abundance and variety of herbivore species are present, strongly
influences the standing crop, productivity, and community
structure of reef algae. It also appears that selection for
resistance to such herbivory may compromise competitive
ability among algal species (Littler and Littler 1980; Hay
1981b; Lewis 1986; Morrison 1988). Off the Caribbean
coast of Panamá, fishes may prevent competitively dominant
(but highly palatable) sand-plain species from displacing
competitively subordinate (but grazer-resistant) reef algae
(Hay 1981b; Hay et al. 1983). This dichotomy may act to
maintain between-habitat diversity in algae (Hay 1981b, see
also Lewis 1986).

201

Fig. 10.3 Patterns of macroalgal succession and local species diversity on a Hawaiian coral reef under three levels of grazing by
macroherbivores: caged (none), inside damselfish territories (moderate), and outside territories (intense). (a) Succession as a stylized
ordination of macroalgal communities through time in species space
(i.e., each curve shows community change in species composition and
relative abundance through time). The pattern of ungrazed succession
(caged) is decelerated within damselfish territories, whereas succession
is deflected onto a new trajectory toward crustose algae outside
territories. (b) Macroalgal species diversity after 1 year, indicating an
intermediate-predation effect within damselfish territories, such that the
damselfish is locally a keystone species (Modified from Hixon and
Brostoff 1983, 1996)

10.3.2 Territorial Damselfishes
By defending small patches of dead coral, and grazing or
“weeding” the algae in these patches in a particular way,
territorial damselfishes often establish and maintain visually
distinct mats of macroalgae on reefs (Vine 1974; Brawley
and Adey 1977; Lassuy 1980; Montgomery 1980; Hixon and
Brostoff 1996; Hata and Kato 2003). In general, these mats
are sites of greater primary productivity than comparable
areas outside territories (Montgomery 1980; Russ 1987;
Klumpp et al. 1987). This production is an important food
source for not only the resident damselfish, but also small
invertebrate herbivores inhabiting the mat and larger intruding herbivores (Russ 1987; Klumpp and Polunin 1989).

202

Given that territory mats can cover well over 50 % of
shallow reef tracts on some reefs (Sammarco and Williams
1982; Klumpp et al. 1987), the local effects of damselfishes
on the benthic community can be substantial. In particular,
the defense, grazing, and weeding activities of damselfish
(possibly combined with localized fecal fertilization)
strongly affect the local species diversity of reef algae.
This general effect has been demonstrated by three similar
experiments in Guam (Lassuy 1980), Hawai‘i (Hixon and
Brostoff 1983), and the Great Barrier Reef (Sammarco
1983). Each experiment compared algal diversity on dead
coral surfaces exposed to each of three different treatments:
accessible to mostly damselfish grazing inside territories,
accessible to intense grazing by other herbivores outside
territories, and protected within fish-exclusion cages outside
territories.
Although strict comparisons are precluded by differences
in experimental design and laboratory analyses, some general patterns do emerge. For both damselfish species he
studied (Stegastes lividus and Hemiglyphidodon
plagiometopon), Lassuy (1980) found that caged surfaces
exhibited the greatest algal diversity after 2 months. Both
Hixon and Brostoff (1983) and Sammarco (1983) obtained
the same result from samples taken after 2–6 months and
3 months, respectively. However, after a year both the latter
studies found that algal diversity was greatest inside damselfish territories. These data, combined with the fact that
Sammarco studied one of the same species as Lassuy
(H. plagiometopon), suggest that Lassuy’s (1980) samples
may have represented relatively early successional stages.
In the Hawai‘i study, Hixon and Brostoff (1996) showed
that moderate grazing by the damselfish Stegastes
fasciolatus (now S. marginatus) slowed and appeared to
stop succession at a high-diversity middle stage dominated
by red filaments (Fig. 10.3a). Thus, rather than deflecting the
successional trajectory like more intensive grazers (see
above), damselfish appeared to simply decelerate algal succession. Territorial fish may maintain the mid-successional
algal community because these species provide a superior
food source for the damselfish (Montgomery and Gerking
1980) and/or a source of invertebrate prey and palatable
epiphytes (Lobel 1980).
Hixon and Brostoff (1983, 1996) further showed that
grazing by damselfish inside their territories was of intermediate intensity relative to that within cages and outside
territories. Correspondingly, the standing crop of algae was
also at intermediate levels inside territories, whereas local
species diversity was at its maximum. These results thus
corroborated the intermediate-predation hypothesis
(review by Hixon 1986). At low levels of grazing within
cages, a few dominant competitors (coarsely branching species such as Hypnea and Tolypiocladia) were capable of
locally excluding most other species. At high levels outside
territories, only a few crustose species persisted. Inside

M.A. Hixon

damselfish territories, the coexistence of many algal species
was maintained because their densities were apparently kept
below levels where resources (presumably mediated by living space) became severely limiting (Fig. 10.3b).
Given that territorial damselfish can locally enhance species diversity, they can be considered “keystone species”
(sensu Paine 1966, see also Williams 1980). However,
unlike the normal kind of keystone species, which enhance
diversity by increasing predation intensity on a prey assemblage, the territorial behavior of damselfish enhances diversity by decreasing predation overall (Fig. 10.3b). That is, in
the absence of a normal keystone species, predation is low
and diversity is low because a few prey species competitively exclude most others from the local system (e.g., Paine
1966). However, in the absence of damselfish (“keystone
species in reverse”), predation is high (due to schooling
herbivores) and diversity is low because few prey are able
to survive intense herbivory.
There is evidence that this pattern documented in Hawai‘i
is common. Assuming that grazing intensity was intermediate inside damselfish territories in Sammarco’s (1983) study,
Hemiglyphidodon plagiometopon is a keystone species
where it is abundant at the Great Barrier Reef, and possibly
Guam (Lassuy 1980). It has also been found that species
diversity of macroalgae in territories of other damselfish,
including Stegastes planifrons off Puerto Rico (Hinds and
Ballantine 1987) and Stegastes fuscus off Brazil (Ferreira
et al. 1998), decline in when caged, also suggesting a
keystone-species effect. Note, however, that not all
damselfishes enhance local algal diversity; some species
maintain near monocultures within their territories by
intense nonselective grazing (Montgomery 1980) and/or
weeding (Hata and Kato 2002; Hata et al. 2002). Although
Stegastes nigricans maintains strong dominance by
Womersleyella setacea in its territories in Okinawa, the
abundance and species diversity of benthic foraminifera is
greater inside territories than outside (Hata and Nishihira
2002).
Regardless of whether damselfishes enhance local algal
diversity, the greatly increased standing crop of erect algae
inside their territories (compared to more heavily grazed
surfaces outside) has important secondary effects on reef
benthos. The algal mat serves as a refuge for invertebrate
microfauna and/or various epiphytes (Lobel 1980; Hixon
and Brostoff 1985; Zeller 1988), as well as newly settled
fishes (Green 1992, 1998). Also, because accretion by crustose coralline algae adds to the reef framework and such
algae are overgrown by the algal mat, damselfish territories
may be sites of weakened reef structure (Vine 1974; Lobel
1980). Crustose corallines also provide settlement substratum for some reef-building corals (Morse et al. 1988;
Heyward and Negri 1999), so damselfish territories may
additionally inhibit coral settlement.

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals

Damselfish territories may also indirectly affect nitrogen
fixation on reefs, although available data are somewhat
contradictory. During the same study as Sammarco (1983)
described above, Wilkinson and Sammarco (1983) found
that nitrogen fixation by blue-green algae (cyanobacteria)
was positively correlated with grazing intensity on the Great
Barrier Reef, being lowest within cages, intermediate inside
damselfish territories, and greatest outside territories. However, both Lobel (1980) and Hixon and Brostoff (unpublished) found considerably more blue-green algae inside
than outside territories in Hawai‘i. Finally, Ruyter Van
Steveninck (1984) found no differences in the abundance
of filamentous blue-green algae inside and outside damselfish territories in the Florida Keys. These discrepancies
suggest possible regional differences in local distribution
and abundance of blue-green algae.

10.3.3 Conclusions Regarding Effects of Fishes
on Seaweeds
Herbivorous fishes can strongly affect the distribution and
abundance of reef macroalgae. Where there is ample shelter
from predation and protection from strong turbulence, schooling herbivores can consume reef algae to very low standing
crops, leaving mostly grazer-resistant forms such as crusts,
compact turfs, or chemically-defended species. Such intense
herbivory may be essential for reef-building corals to flourish.
Describing the coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle, Glynn
(1990: 391) concluded that the “maintenance of modern
coral reefs may be due largely to the activities of fish and
invertebrate herbivores that prevent competitively superior
algal populations from dominating open, sunlit substrates.”
Nonetheless, it is important to realize that a myriad of factors
are involved in these and other switches in dominance among
algal growth forms and between algae and corals. For example, Littler and Littler (1984) saw nutrient levels as pivotal in
determining whether and how herbivory will determine the
dominant benthos on reefs, and subsequent experimental work
showed that nutrient levels may or may not affect these
interactions (Smith et al. 2001; Stimson et al. 2001; Thacker
et al. 2001). Thus, a synergistic combination of “top-down”
factors (herbivory) and “bottom-up” factors (nutrients) likely
determine whether corals or seaweeds dominate reef benthos
(Hatcher 1990; Szmant 2001; McClanahan et al. 2002). Additionally, by providing spatial refuges from predation for both
corals and seaweeds, the physical structure of the habitat
(holes and crevices) affects local grazing rates, with further
ramifications for benthic community structure (Littler
et al. 1989; Hixon and Menge 1991).
Besides schooling herbivores, territorial damselfishes
have particularly strong local effects on shallow reef algae,
effects which can cascade through the entire benthic community. The defensive and grazing activities of damselfishes

203

and the resulting dense algal mats they defend can substantially affect reef accretion, nitrogen fixation, epiphytes and
small invertebrates that inhabit the algae, and, as will be seen
in the next section, corallivores (Fig. 10.4). Clearly, herbivorous fishes are major players determining the character of
shallow coral-reef communities, and territorial damselfishes
in particular can act as keystone species.

10.4

Effects of Fishes on Corals

10.4.1 Direct Consumption
The genera of corals most commonly grazed by reef fishes
are Acropora, Pocillopora, Montipora, and Porites (reviews
by Cole et al. 2008; Rotjan and Lewis 2008). Compared to
the effects of herbivores on algae, surprisingly few studies
have demonstrated that corallivorous fishes influence the
distribution and abundance of reef-building corals. For
example, although butterflyfishes are among the most obligatory of corallivores (Reese 1977), these fishes originally
appeared to have a negligible effect on coral standing crops
(Harmelin-Vivien and Bouchon-Navarro 1981, 1983). At
Aqaba in the Red Sea and Moorea in the South Pacific,
butterflyfishes occurred at average densities of 69 and
51 fish per 1,000 m2, yet consumed an average of only
about 10 and 28 g of coral polyps per 1,000 m2 per day,
respectively. It appears that corals often retract all their
polyps in response to predation by butterflyfish, making
polyps locally unavailable to predators for considerable
periods. Such factors may preclude high densities of largebodied obligate corallivores, perhaps necessitating the large
feeding territories defended by butterflyfishes (see Tricas
1989; Roberts and Ormond 1992). More recently, however,
it has been documented that butterflyfishes on the Great
Barrier Reef can consume up to 79 % of the annual productivity of tabular acroporid corals (Cole et al. 2012).
The local distributions of several coral genera are
strongly affected by coral-feeding fishes. Neudecker (1979)
provided one of the first experimental demonstrations that
fishes can potentially affect the depth zonation of corals. Off
Guam, he transplanted small colonies of Pocillopora
damicornis from a relatively fish-free lagoon (1–2 m
depth) to reef slopes (15–30 m depth) where this coral was
naturally absent and corallivorous fishes were common.
Coral transplants survived well when caged, but exposed
colonies were partially consumed by butterflyfishes and
triggerfishes within 1 week (see also Hixon and Brostoff
1996). Additionally, butterflyfishes may negatively affect
corals indirectly by being vectors for diseases (Raymundo
et al. 2009).
Locally high densities of corallivorous fishes can clearly
stress their particular host corals (Cole and Pratchett 2011b),
and these predators may selectively target colonies with high

204

M.A. Hixon

Fig. 10.4 Flowchart synthesizing the interactions between fishes and
benthos on a shallow coral reef where territorial damselfishes are
abundant. Arrows indicate positive (+) and negative ( ) effects.
Dashed lines indicate relatively weak effects, and dotted lines indicate
effects that are poorly documented and/or controversial. Where

territorial damselfishes are rare, some of these effects reverse. In
particular, erect algae and their associates are often replaced by
grazer-resistant crustose algae (which may serve as settlement habitat
for corals) due to intense grazing by transient herbivores (Modified
from Hixon 1983)

densities of macroboring organisms (Rotjan and Lewis
2005). Such differential effects can have ramifications for
interactions among corals. For example, off Hawai‘i, Cox
(1986) showed that the feeding preference of the
butterflyfish Chaetodon unimaculatus for the coral
Montipora verrucosa can reverse the competitive dominance of this coral over another coral, Porites compressa.
Inside fish-exclusion cages, Montipora overgrew Porites,
yet outside cages, this dominance sometimes reversed due
to differential grazing of Montipora by the butterflyfish.
Besides the strict corallivores, herbivorous fishes may
also directly affect corals by occasionally consuming or
otherwise killing them. Territorial damselfishes are known
to remove polyps, thereby killing patches of coral on which
the damselfish establish their algal mats. In the Caribbean,
the damselfish Stegastes planiforns was observed killing
Orbicella (formerly Montastraea) annularis and Acropora

cervicornis (Kaufman 1977). Knowlton et al. (1990)
suggested that such predation dramatically slowed the recovery of A. cervicornis off Jamaica following Hurricane Allen,
inhibiting the usual dominance of this species. Similarly, off
the Pacific coast of Panamá, Stegastes acapulcoensis killed
patches of Pavona gigantea (Wellington 1982).
Wellington’s study demonstrated how this direct effect,
combined with various indirect effects, strongly affected
coral zonation (see below).
Outside damselfish territories, there can be direct consumptive effects of herbivorous fishes on corals. Field
observations have noted grazing fishes damaging juvenile
corals (Randall 1974; Bak and Engel 1979), although
Birkeland (1977) documented herbivores avoiding coral
recruits. Littler et al. (1989) suggested that parrotfishes
(Scarus spp. and Sparisoma spp.) substantially influence
the local distribution of Porites porites off Belize by

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals

eliminating this delicately branching species from areas
where these fish are abundant. They proposed that a combination of differential consumption of P. porites by
parrotfishes and the relative availability of refuge holes for
grazing fishes of different sizes among different
microhabitats determined whether back-reef bottoms were
dominated by macroalgae, P. porites, or the relatively
mound-shaped and grazer-resistant P. astreoides. Similarly,
recently recruited coral colonies survived intense parrotfish
grazing in laboratory mesocosms in Hawai‘i only when
structural refuges from grazing were provided (Brock
1979). Indeed, although it was long believed that only the
largest species of parrotfish, the Indo-Pacific Bolbometopon
muricatum, consumes substantial amounts of live coral
(Randall 1974; Choat 1991), individually consuming about
2.5 metric tons of living coral per year (Belwood et al. 2003),
there is increasing evidence that smaller parrotfishes may
also negatively affect corals (Bruckner and Bruckner 1998;
Bonaldo and Bellwood 2011; Burkepile 2012, but see
Mumby 2009).
A poorly documented yet possibly substantial source of
coral mortality is consumption of coral spawn by
planktivorous reef fishes, especially on the Great Barrier
Reef (Westneat and Resing 1988; Pratchett et al. 2001). Less
directly, parrotfish of the genus Sparisoma may differentially
target gravid polyps of Orbicella in the Caribbean, thereby
lowering the fitness of grazed coral colonies prior to spawning
(Rotjan and Lewis 2009). Also poorly documented yet potentially important are the combined negative effects of
corallivory and bleaching on the condition and recovery of
corals. Fish may (or may not) target bleached corals (Cole
et al. 2009), and bleached corals that have been previously
grazed by parrotfish may show a persistent reduction in the
density of endosymbiotic zooxanthellae compared to bleached
colonies that have not been grazed (Rotjan et al. 2006).

10.4.2 Indirect Effects
Available experimental evidence suggests that indirect
effects of herbivorous fishes influence the local distribution
and abundance of corals more extensively than direct consumption by corallivores. As reviewed in the introduction to
this chapter, schooling herbivores can benefit corals indirectly by reducing the standing crops of seaweeds that compete with corals via the coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle
(Fig. 10.1a). For example, Lewis (1986) noted that
macroalgae overgrew corals of the genus Porites when herbivorous fishes were excluded by fencing from a shallow
reef off Belize for 10 weeks. Lirman (2001) documented that
more than 50 % of the basal perimeter of Siderastrea
siderea, Porites astreoides, and Orbicella faveolata in the
Florida Keys was in contact with macroalgae. Excluding

205

herbivores by caging these perimeters resulted in increased
algal biomass, accompanied by decreased growth rates of
Porites and increased mortality of Orbicella. However,
Siderastrea was unaffected by seaweeds. Following a coral
bleaching event on the Great Barrier Reef, algal cover
increased and live coral cover decreased in plots caged to
exclude herbivorous fishes, indicating the important role of
herbivores in fostering ecological resilience (Hughes
et al. 2007). Inside a marine reserve in the Bahamas, herbivory was greater, macroalgal abundance was less, and coral
recruitment was greater than in adjacent fished areas, yet
overall coral community structure was no different (Mumby
et al. 2006, 2007a). Following the massive coral bleaching
event in 1998, which shifted benthic dominance from corals
to seaweeds on many reefs, a marine reserve harboring
herbivorous fishes recovered at a rate no greater than fishes
reefs (McClanahan 2008).
By defending and maintaining their algal mats, territorial
damselfish produce patches in which juvenile corals are
often smothered (Vine 1974; Potts 1977). Additionally, the
algal mat provides microhabitats facilitating various boring
organisms, which intensifies bioerosion of the coral framework (review by Hutchings 1986, Chapter 4). However,
some coral species seem to recruit more successfully to
damselfish territories than to adjacent undefended areas,
suggesting that the territories may provide at least a temporary refuge from corallivores (Sammarco and Carleton 1981;
Sammarco and Williams 1982; Wellington 1982; Suefuji
and van Woesik 2001). If for any reason coral colonies
manage to reach a certain size, they may become invulnerable to algal overgrowth (Birkeland 1977).
Given that damselfishes may have both positive and
negative effects on corals, complex interactions can result.
An example is provided by a study of coral zonation on
the Pacific coast of Panamá by Wellington (1982). In this
system, branching Pocillopora corals dominated shallow
areas (0–6 m depth), while the massive Pavona gigantea
dominated deeper areas (6–10 m depth). Combining field
observations and experiments, Wellington discovered an
interactive feedback loop whereby the damselfish Stegastes
acapulcoensis may directly and indirectly cause this zonation (Fig. 10.5). When establishing territories in the shallow
zone, damselfish differentially kill Pavona by polyp removal
and maintain their algal mats on the exposed substrata.
However, Pocillopora is apparently protected by its tightly
branched morphology and rapid polyp regeneration. Additionally, Pocillopora colonies within the periphery of
territories are protected from corallivores by the defensive
behavior of the damselfish. These factors enhance the ability
of Pocillopora to competitively dominate Pavona in shallow
areas. The Pocillopora framework, in turn, provides the
damselfish with shelter, a necessary requisite for a territory.
In the deep zone, shelter sites and thus damselfish densities

206

M.A. Hixon

Fig. 10.5 Interactive feedback loops influencing the depth zonation of
Pocillopora and Pavona corals off the Pacific coast of Panamá. Arrows
indicate positive (+) and negative ( ) effects. The direct negative effect
of territorial damselfish on Pavona in shallow water is due to polyp

removal, whereas the “direct” positive effect in deep water is actually
an indirect effect mediated by the scarcity of damselfish shelters (From
Wellington 1982)

are low because overall coral cover (and thus between-coral
competition) is low, apparently due to physical factors
(attenuated light, reduced water motion, etc.). Here, transient
fish corallivores (mostly puffers) differentially eat
Pocillopora, whose branches they can ingest and masticate,
leaving Pavona as the dominant coral.
Finally, a variety of reef fishes have been observed feeding on diseased Acropora coral tissue affected by black-band
and brown-band disease, which could potentially spread
these diseases from head to head and/or foster recovery of
infected heads (Chong-Seng et al. 2011).

as within damselfish territories, but will often be eventually
overgrown by algae in the absence of substantial herbivory.
Those coral larvae settling on surfaces exposed to grazing by
herbivorous fishes outside territories may or may not
initially suffer high mortality, depending on whether they
are consumed along with targeted prey, but some colonies
normally reach an invulnerable size where they are both
immune to incidental predation and freed from competition
with algae. Rotjan and Lewis (2008) suggest that, as reefs
continue to be degraded by various human activities,
corallivory will become increasingly important as an agent
of reef decline.

10.4.3 Conclusions Regarding Effects of Fishes
on Corals

10.5

Truly corallivorous fishes have been shown to affect the
local distribution and abundance of some corals directly
via consumption. However, the indirect effects of the
coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle and the territorial activities
of herbivorous damselfishes appear to have more substantial
effects on corals in shallow water. In any case, direct
interactions between fishes and corals seem to be largely
indeterminate. It appears that, on exposed reef surfaces,
coral recruits may initially experience enhanced survival
where they are protected from intensive fish grazing, such

Besides directly consuming corals or algae, reef fishes can
also affect invertebrate corallivores and herbivores, causing
subsequent indirect effects on the dominant reef benthos.
Most obviously, some fishes directly consume these
organisms, including the major invertebrate corallivore –
the crown-of-thorns seastar (Acanthaster planci) – and the
major invertebrate herbivores: sea urchins (reviews by
Jackson 1994; Roberts 1995). At the Great Barrier Reef,
Pearson and Endean (1969) noted planktivorous damselfish

Effects of Fishes on Invertebrate
Corallivores and Herbivores

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals

consuming early developmental stages of Acanthaster. In
the Red Sea, Ormond et al. (1973) documented that
triggerfishes and puffers killed 1,000–4,000 Acanthaster
per hectare each year, a rate that accounted for an observed
decline in the Acanthaster population. However,
experiments on the Great Barrier Reef detected no effects
of fish predation on juvenile Acanthaster (Sweatman 1995).
Triggerfishes and puffers also consume sea urchins, as do
large wrasses and porcupinefishes (Diodontidae, Randall
1967). Field experiments have demonstrated that such predation can be intense (Glynn et al. 1979) and force urchins to
remain near shelter (Carpenter 1984). Thus, the risk of
predation by fishes limits the area over which urchins can
overgraze algae and seagrass, resulting in discrete barren
zones or “halos” around Caribbean reefs (Ogden
et al. 1973). Hay (1984) suggested that overfishing of large
wrasses and triggerfishes caused the unusually high urchin
densities in populated regions of the Caribbean before the
mass mortality of Diadema antillarum in 1983 (Lessios
1988). Mumby (2006) calculated that, following the ecological extinction of Diadema, parrotfish grazing alone was
insufficient to prevent macroalgae from displacing corals.
Besides the mechanism of direct consumption, fishes may
negatively affect invertebrate corallivores and herbivores by
competitive interactions. In defending their territories, several damselfish species in the South Pacific exclude
Acanthaster (Weber and Woodhead 1970). This exclusion
apparently results in the preferred prey of the seastar (mostly
acroporid corals) being more abundant and more diverse
inside territories than outside (Glynn and Colgan 1988). In
contrast, the species diversity of new coral recruits on the
Great Barrier Reef was smaller inside territories of the
damselfish Hemiglyphidodon plagiometopon, although the
density of coral recruits (mostly acroporids) was greater
there (Sammarco and Carleton 1981).
In the Caribbean, the damselfish Stegastes planiforns can
exclude Diadema urchins from their territories (Williams
1980, 1981), which may also serve as refuges for certain
corals (Sammarco and Williams 1982). Corals such as Favia
fragum can apparently withstand competition with the
macroalgae that dominate inside territories. Given that,
first, damselfish can prevent urchins from overgrazing their
territories, and second, that the algae growing within the
territories provide food for the damselfish, Eakin (1987)
concluded that the relationship between damselfish and
their algal mats is a case of mutualism.
Parrotfishes and surgeonfishes also compete with
Diadema on Caribbean reefs, although the urchin appears
to be the dominant competitor in this case (Carpenter 1986).
In particular, increases in the local abundances of these
fishes have been documented following experimental
removals of or natural declines in populations of the urchin
(Hay and Taylor 1985; Carpenter 1990; Robertson 1991;
Hixon and Beets, unpublished).

207

Finally, complex interactions between invertebrates and
fishes can occur. Outbreaks of Acanthaster can kill large
tracts of coral, presumably increasing the availability of
substrata for macroalgal growth, which in turn may increase
the local densities of herbivorous fishes and decrease
densities of corallivorous fishes. This sequence was
documented for some fishes both at the Great Barrier Reef
(Williams 1986) and off Japan (Sano et al. 1987), although
the response of herbivorous fishes was negligible. Clearly,
there are many possible ecological linkages among algae,
corals, invertebrate herbivores and corallivores, and reef
fishes.

10.6

Implications for Reef Management
and Conservation: A Complex Triangle

As a generality subject to exceptions, the coral-seaweedherbivore triangle on healthy reefs (Fig. 10.1a) is confirmed
by observations that herbivorous fishes and urchins can have
very strong effects on the standing crop of reef macroalgae,
thereby opening space for corals to thrive. However, other
factors, such as the abundance and distribution of territorial
damselfishes, shelter for schooling herbivores, water motion,
and nutrient flux, as well as multiple stressors on corals, can
modify this basic pattern, sometimes strongly (Szmant 2001;
Cheal et al. 2010; McClanahan et al. 2011a). The degradation of the coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle (Fig. 10.1b) is
also reasonable generality, in that overfishing of herbivores
(or loss by other factors) can facilitate the overgrowth of
corals by macroalgae. Again, however, there are exceptions
and conflicting results. For example, although a negative
correlation was documented between the density of herbivorous fishes and the cover of seaweeds on Caribbean reefs, the
abundance of seaweeds was high even on lightly fished reefs
(Williams and Polunin 2001; see also Cheal et al. 2010).
In New Caledonia and elsewhere, there may be little
correlation among reef protection status (especially in
lightly fished regions), coral recovery, and relative
macroalgal development following severe storms and
bleaching events (Carassou et al. 2013). Also problematic
is determining whether seaweeds truly outcompete corals, or
merely colonize dead coral surfaces after a polyp colony is
killed by other factors (McCook 1999; McCook et al. 2001),
including algae fostering coral disease (Smith et al. 2006).
Additionally, there are sufficient differences between Caribbean and Indo-Pacific reef ecosystems and their respective
stressors that extrapolating findings between ocean basins
may be unwarranted (Roff and Mumby 2012).
Given the variety of factors that may modify the simple
coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle (Fig. 10.1a), it may be
more prudent to include the many biotic and abiotic environmental factors that can affect the outcome of the basic
interaction web. Figure 10.6 is offered as an image of the

208

M.A. Hixon

Fig. 10.6 The coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle including some of
the major complicating factors that affect each member of the triad.
Note that “predation” can include disease, parasitism, carnivory, and
fishing mortality, and “disturbance” can include wave surge, sand
scour, sedimentation, and pollution. Ocean warming and acidification
will affect all members of the triad in ways that are likely to be
negative for corals (and perhaps fishes) and may be positive for

macroalgae. The relative strengths of all direct and indirect interactions
among all these factors (among others) will ultimately determine
whether or not the triangle is dominated by interactions illustrated
among herbivores, macroalgae, and corals. Given the number of factors
involved and high variation in their intensities, the simple coralseaweed-herbivore triangle is unlikely to operate in every system,
despite its broad relevance

more realistic triangle, including some of the more important
complicating factors (see related figures by Mumby and
Steneck 2008; Nyström et al. 2012; Burkepile et al. 2013).
Recent models have attempted to address some of this complexity (Mumby 2006; Mumby et al. 2007; Ruiz Sebastián
and McClanahan 2013).
From a management perspective, conserving herbivores
is clearly important for keeping reef seaweeds in check
(Mumby et al. 2007a, b; McClanahan et al. 2012). Given
that seaweeds have evolved a variety of structural and chemical defenses that inhibit particular herbivores (reviews by
Hay and Fenical 1988; Steneck 1988; Duffy and Hay 1990;
Hay 1991, 1997), maintaining both the abundance and species diversity of herbivores of a variety of sizes is likely the
best means of ensuring that seaweeds do not displace corals,
as demonstrated experimentally by Burkepile and Hay
(2008, 2010) and suggested by the modeling studies of
Mumby (2006) and the correlative field studies of Cheal
et al. (2010). Parrotfishes, especially larger individuals, are
often seen as a particular conservation target for enhancing
the ecological resilience of coral reefs (Bellwood et al. 2004,
2012; Mumby 2006, 2009; Mumby et al. 2006, 2007a, b).

Larger parrotfish are particularly important in controlling
macroalgal biomass (Jayewardene 2009).
Beyond the general rule of thumb of “conserve and foster
herbivores,” the complexity of interactions among fishes,
seaweeds, corals, and their reef environment makes it difficult to provide explicitly detailed predictions relevant to the
management and conservation of coral reefs. For example,
before predicting how fishing will secondarily affect the
benthic community on a reef explicitly, one must know
how different fish populations will respond to exploitation,
and as a prerequisite, what determines the local population
sizes of fishes in the absence of fishing. Understanding of the
mechanisms driving and regulating the population dynamics
of coral-reef fishes is an onerous undertaking (e.g., Hixon
et al. 2012). Nonetheless, it is clear that both corallivores and
herbivores are often subjected to intensive overfishing
(review by Russ 1991; Roberts 1995; Polunin and Roberts
1996; Bellwood et al. 2012), so rules of thumb are essential
for fostering the reef resilience.
The immense complexity of coral-reef ecosystems means
that the demise or outbreak of a single species or functional
group of species due to human activities may have

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals

unanticipated and possibly severe consequences for the
remainder of the system (Chap. 11). Reef fishes, in particular, manifest a very complex variety of direct and indirect
effects on the benthos of coral reefs (e.g., Figs. 10.4 and
10.5) – far more complicated than the simple triangle
illustrated in Fig. 10.1, or even the complex triangle
illustrated in Fig. 10.6. The numerous indirect interactions
between fishes and the reefs they inhabit may simultaneously be both positive and negative from a human perspective. For example, damselfish territories may be sites of
high productivity and species diversity of seaweeds and
associated fauna, including new recruits of reef fishes, but
may also be sites of reduced coral growth and weakened reef
framework. The multitude and complexity of these effects
severely limits our ability to predict the precise outcome of
active management of any particular species, let alone multiple species.
Although reef systems may be too complicated to allow
us to predict explicit outcomes of human activities beyond
basic concepts like the coral-seaweed-herbivore triangle, the
patterns summarized in this and other chapters of this volume do provide an important lesson: managers should cast a
skeptical and cautious eye on proposals to strongly reduce
the abundance of any native coral-reef inhabitant. The secondary results of such alterations may be both unexpected
and undesirable. Perhaps more than any other natural system, coral reefs verify John Muir’s (1911) axiom: “When we
try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to
everything else in the universe.” Given the widespread degradation of coral reefs occurring worldwide, perhaps the
most effective approach to the conservation and management of these amazing and valuable ecosystems is to ensure
that some reefs – especially those buffered from or adapted
to ocean warming and acidification – are fully protected
from regional human impacts (both extractive and
nonextractive) in large marine reserves, thereby ensuring
substantial local populations of herbivorous fishes and
other resilience mechanisms (Pandolfi et al. 2005; Hughes
et al. 2006; Mumby and Steneck 2008; Steneck et al. 2009;
Edwards et al. 2010; Selig and Bruno 2010).
Marine reserves may harbor more coral-reef piscivores
that may inhibit increases in herbivore populations (Graham
et al. 2003), but there is ample evidence that piscivores also
play an important role regulating and thus stabilizing the
population dynamics of their prey (Hixon and Jones 2005).
Of course, marine reserves are necessary but not sufficient
for saving reefs; multiple sources of protection and active
management are essential (Pandolfi et al. 2005; Nyström
et al. 2012; Carassou et al. 2013). In any case, despite broad
protections in substantial regions such as the Great Barrier
Reef Marine Park in Australia and the Papahānaumokuākea
Marine National Monument in Hawai‘i, humankind has byand-large been woefully slow in fostering the resilience of our

209

remaining coral reefs (Mora et al. 2006; Hughes et al. 2010).
Time is short to reverse this dangerous trend.
Acknowledgments I thank Chuck Birkeland for his perseverance and
patience in completing this volume. I offer my sincere apologies to
authors of any highly relevant publications I missed in my literature
search. I thank the U.S. National Science Foundation for funding my
research cited herein. This chapter is dedicated to my new grandson,
Nolan Barrett Broeder, to the memory of Gerry Wellington, and to all
those who actively work to save our remaining coral reefs, so that
Nolan and his generation may experience these rainbow wonders of
nature.

References
Allen GR (1981) Butterflyfishes and angelfishes of the world. Mergus
Publishers, Melle
Allen GR (1991) Damselfishes of the world. Mergus Publishers, Melle
Arnold SN, Steneck RS, Mumby PJ (2010) Running the gauntlet:
inhibitory effects of algal turfs on the processes of coral recruitment. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 414:91–105
Aronson RB, Precht WF (2000) Herbivory and algal dynamics on the
coral reef at Discovery Bay, Jamaica. Limnol Oceanogr 45:251–255
Bak RPM, Engel MS (1979) Distribution, abundance, and survival of
juvenile hermatypic corals (Scleractinia) and the importance of life
history stages in the parent coral community. Mar Biol 54:341–352
Barlow GW (1974) Extraspecihc imposition of social grazing among
surgeonfishes (Pisces: Acanthuridae). J Zool 174:333–340
Barott KL, Williams GJ, Vermeij MJA, Harris J, Smith JE, Rohwer FL,
Sandin SA (2012) Natural history of coral algae competition
across a gradient of human activity in the Line Islands. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 460:1–12
Bell JD, Harmelin-Vivien M, Galzin R (1985) Large scale spatial
variation in the abundance of butterflyfishes (Chaetodontidae) on
Polynesian reefs. Proc 5th Int Coral Reef Symp 5:421–426
Belliveau SA, Paul VJ (2002) Effects of herbivory and nutrients on the
early colonization of crustose coralline and fleshy algae. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 232:105–114
Bellwood DR, Choat JH (1990) A functional analysis of grazing in
parrotfishes (family Scaridae): the ecological implications. Environ
Biol Fish 28:189–214
Bellwood DR, Wainwright PC (2002) The history and biogeography of
fishes on coral reefs. In: Sale PF (ed) Coral reef fishes: dynamics
and diversity in a complex ecosystem. Academic, San Diego, pp
5–32
Bellwood DR, Hoey AS, Choat JH (2003) Limited functional redundancy in high diversity systems: resilience and ecosystem function
on coral reefs. Ecol Lett 6:281–285
Bellwood DR, Hughes TP, Folke C, Nyström M (2004) Confronting the
coral reef crisis. Nature 429:827–833
Bellwood DR, Hughes TP, Hoey AS (2006) Sleeping functional group
drives coral-reef recovery. Curr Biol 16:2434–2439
Bellwood DR, Hoey AS, Hughes TP (2012) Human activity selectively
impacts the ecosystem roles of parrotfishes on coral reefs. Proc R
Soc B 279:1621–1629
Birkeland C (1977) The importance of rate of biomass accumulation in
early successional stages of benthic communities to the survival of
coral recruits. Proc 3rd Int Coral Reef Symp 1:15–21
Birkeland C, Nelson SG, Wilkins S, Gates P (1985) Effects of grazing
by herbivorous fishes on coral reef community metabolism. Proc
5th Int Coral Reef Symp 4:47–51

210
Birrell CL, McCook LJ, Willis BL (2005) Effects of algal turfs and
sediment on coral settlement. Mar Poll Bull 51:408–414
Birrell CL, McCook LJ, Willis BL, Harrington L (2008) Chemical
effects of macroalgae on larval settlement of the broadcast spawning
coral Acropora millepora. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 362:129–137
Bonaldo RM, Bellwood DR (2009) Dynamics of parrotfish grazing
scars. Mar Biol 156:771–777
Bonaldo RM, Bellwood DR (2011) Parrotfish predation on massive
Porites on the Great Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs 30:259–269
Bouchon-Navarro Y, Bouchon C (1989) Correlations between
chaetodontid fishes and coral communities of the Gulf of Aqaba
(Red Sea). Environ Biol Fish 25:1–3
Bouchon-Navarro Y, Bouchon C, Harmelin-Vivien ML (1985)
Impact of coral degradation on a chaetodontid fish assemblage
(Moorea, French Polynesia). Proc 5th Int Coral Reef Symp
5:427–432
Box SJ, Mumby PJ (2007) Effect of macroalgal competition on growth
and survival of juvenile Caribbean corals. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
342:139–149
Brawley SH, Adey WH (1977) Territorial behavior of threespot damselfish (Eupomacentrus planifrons) increases reef algal biomass and
productivity. Environ Biol Fish 2:45–51
Brock RE (1979) An experimental study on the effects of grazing by
parrotfishes and role of refuges in benthic community structure. Mar
Biol 51:381–388
Bruckner AW, Bruckner RJ (1998) Destruction of coral by Sparisoma
viride. Coral Reefs 17:350
Bruckner AW, Bruckner RJ, Sollins P (2000) Parrotfish predation on
live coral: “spot biting” and “focused biting”. Coral Reefs 19:50
Bruno JF, Sweatman H, Precht WF, Selig ER, Schutte VGW (2009)
Assessing evidence of phase shifts from coral to macroalgal dominance on coral reefs. Ecology 90:1478–1484
Burkepile DE (2012) Context-dependent corallivory by parrotfishes in
a Caribbean reef ecosystem. Coral Reefs 31:111–120
Burkepile DE, Hay ME (2006) Herbivore vs. nutrient control of marine
primary producers: context-dependent effects. Ecology
87:3128–3139
Burkepile DE, Hay ME (2008) Herbivore species richness and feeding
complementarity affect community structure and function on a
coral reef. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:16201–16206
Burkepile DE, Hay ME (2010) Impact of herbivore identity on algal
succession and coral growth on a Caribbean reef. PLoS ONE 5(1):
e8963. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0008963
Burkepile DE, Allgeier JE, Shantz AA, Pritchard CE, Lemoine NP,
Bhatti LH, Layman CA (2013) Nutrient supply from fishes
facilitates macroalgae and suppresses corals in a Caribbean coral
reef ecosystem. Sci Rep 3:e1493. doi:10.1038/srep01493
Carassou L, Leopold M, Guillemot N, Wantiez L, Kulbicki M (2013)
Does herbivorous fish protection really improve coral reef resilience? A case study from New Caledonia (South Pacific). PLoS One
8(4), e60564
Carpenter RC (1984) Predator and population density control of homing behavior in the Caribbean echinoid Diadema antillarum. Mar
Biol 82:101–108
Carpenter RC (1986) Partitioning herbivory and its effects on coral reef
algal communities. Ecol Mono 56:345–363
Carpenter RC (1990) Mass mortality of Diadema antillarum II. Effects
on population densities and grazing intensity of parrotfishes and
surgeonfishes. Mar Biol 104:79–86
Ceccarelli DM, Jones GP, McCook LJ (2005) Foragers versus farmers:
contrasting effects of two behavioural groups of herbivores on coral
reefs. Oecologia 145:445–453
Cheal AJ, MacNeil MA, Cripps E, Emslie MJ, Jonker M, Schaffelke B,
Sweatman H (2010) Coral–macroalgal phase shifts or reef resilience: links with diversity and functional roles of herbivorous fishes
on the Great Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs 29:1005–1015

M.A. Hixon
Choat JH (1991) The biology of herbivorous fishes on coral reefs. In:
Sale PF (ed) The ecology of fishes on coral reefs. Academic, San
Diego, pp 120–155
Choat JH, Clements KD, Robbins WD (2002) The trophic status of
herbivorous fishes on coral reefs: 1: dietary analyses. Mar Biol
140:613–623
Choat JH, Robbins WD, Clements KD (2004) The trophic status of
herbivorous fishes on coral reefs. 2. Food processing modes and
trophodynamics. Mar Biol 145:445–454
Chong-Seng KM, Cole AJ, Pratchett MS, Willis BL (2011) Selective
feeding by coral reef fishes on coral lesions associated with brown
band and black band disease. Coral Reefs 30:473–481
Clarke RD (1996) Population shifts in two competing fish species on a
degrading coral reef. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 137:51–58
Cole AJ, Pratchett MS (2011a) Inter-specific variation in susceptibility
to grazing among common reef corals. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
422:155–164
Cole AJ, Pratchett MS (2011b) Effects of juvenile coral-feeding
butterflyfishes on host corals. Coral Reefs 30:623–630
Cole AJ, Pratchett MS, Jones GP (2008) Diversity and functional
importance of coral-feeding fishes on tropical coral reefs. Fish
Fisher 9:286–307
Cole AJ, Pratchett MS, Jones GP (2009) Effects of coral bleaching on
the feeding response of two species of coral-feeding fish. J Exp Mar
Biol Ecol 373:11–15
Cole AJ, Pratchett MS, Jones GP (2010) Corallivory in tubelip wrasses:
diet, feeding and trophic importance. J Fish Biol 76:818–835
Cole AJ, Lawton RJ, Pratchett MS, Wilson SK (2011) Chronic coral
consumption by butterflyfishes. Coral Reefs 30:85–93
Cole AJ, Lawton RJ, Wilson SK, Pratchett MS (2012) Consumption of
tabular acroporid corals by reef fishes: a comparison with
plant–herbivore interactions. Func Ecol 26:307–316
Cowman PF, Bellwood DR (2013) The historical biogeography of coral
reef fishes: global patterns of origination and dispersal. J Biogeogr
40:209–224
Cox EF (1986) The effects of a selective corallivore on growth rates
and competition for space between two species of Hawaiian corals.
J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 101:161–174
Day RW (1977) Two contrasting effects of predation on species richness in coral reef habitats. Mar Biol 44:1–5
Diaz-Pulido G, McCook LJ (2003) Relative roles of herbivory and
nutrients in the recruitment of coral-reef seaweeds. Ecology
84:2026–2033
Done TJ (1992) Phase shifts in coral reef communities and their
ecological significance. Hydrobiologia 247:121–132
Duffy JE, Hay ME (1990) Seaweed adaptations to herbivory. BioSci
40:368–375
Eakin CM (1987) Damselfishes and their algal lawns: a case of plural
mutualism. Symbiosis 4:275–288
Edwards HJ, Elliott IA, Eakin CM, Irikawa A, Madin JS, McField M,
Morgan JA, Van Woesik R, Mumby PJ (2010) How much time can
herbivore protection buy for coral reefs under realistic regimes of
hurricanes and coral bleaching? Glob Change Biol. doi:10.1111/j.
1365-2486.2010.02366.x
Ferreira CEL, Goncalves JEA, Coutinho R, Peret AC (1998) Herbivory
by the dusky damselfish Stegastes fuscus (Cuvier, 1830) in a tropical rocky shore: effects on the benthic community. J Exp Mar Biol
Ecol 229:241–264
Floeter SR, Behrens MD, Ferreira CEL, Paddack MJ, Horn MH (2005)
Geographical gradients of marine herbivorous fishes: patterns and
processes. Mar Biol 147:1435–1447
Foster SA (1985) Group foraging by a coral reef fish: a mechanism for
gaining access to defended resources. Anim Behav 33:782–792
Foster SA (1987) The relative impacts of grazing by Caribbean coral
reef fishes and Diadema: effects of habitat and surge. J Exp Mar
Biol Ecol 105:1–20

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals

Fox RJ, Bellwood DR (2007) Quantifying herbivory across a coral reef
depth gradient. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 339:49–59
Fox RJ, Bellwood DR (2008) Direct versus indirect methods of
quantifying herbivore grazing impact on a coral reef. Mar Biol
154:325–334
Glynn PW (1988) Predation on coral reefs: some key processes, concepts
and research directions. Proc 6th Int Coral Reef Symp 1:51–62
Glynn PW (1990) Feeding ecology of selected coral-reef
macroconsumers: patterns and effects on coral community structure. In: Dubinsky Z (ed) Ecosystems of the world, vol. 25: coral
reefs. Elsevier Science Publishing, New York, pp 365–400
Glynn PW, Colgan MW (1988) Defense of corals and enhancement of
coral diversity by territorial damselfishes. In: Proceedings of 6th
international coral reef symposium 2:157–163
Glynn PW, Wellington GM, Birkeland C (1979) Coral reef growth in
the Galapagos: limitation by sea urchins. Science 203:47–49
Graham NAJ, Evans RD, Russ GR (2003) The effects of marine reserve
protection on the trophic relationships of reef fishes on the Great
Barrier Reef. Environ Conserv 30:200–208
Graham NAJ, Bellwood DR, Cinner JE, Hughes TP, Norström AV,
Nyström M (2013) Managing resilience to reverse phase shifts in
coral reefs. Front Ecol Environ 11:541–548
Green AL (1992) Damselfish territories: focal sites for studies of the
early life history of labroid fishes. Proc 7th Int Coral Reef Symp
1:601–605
Green AL (1998) Spatio-temporal patterns of recruitment of labroid
fishes (Pisces: Labridae and Scaridae) to damselfish territories.
Environ Biol Fish 51:235–244
Gruner DS, Smith JE, Seabloom EW, Sandin SA, Ngai JT, Hillebrand H,
Harpole WS, Elser JJ, Cleland EE, Bracken MES, Borer ET, Bolker
BM (2008) A cross-system synthesis of consumer and nutrient
resource control on producer biomass. Ecol Lett 11:740–755
Harmelin-Vivien ML (1989) Reef fish community structure: an IndoPacific comparison. In: Harmelin-Vivien ML, Bourliere F (eds)
Vertebrates in complex tropical systems. Springer, New York, pp
21–60
Harmelin-Vivien ML, Bouchon-Navarro Y (1981) Trophic
relationships among chaetodontid fishes in the Gulf of Aqaba
(Red Sea). Proc 4th Int Coral Reef Symp, Manila 2:537–544
Harmelin-Vivien ML, Bouchon-Navarro Y (1983) Feeding diets and
significance of coral feeding among chaetodontid fishes in Moorea
(French Polynesia). Coral Reefs 2:119–127
Harmelin-Vivien ML, Peyrot-Clausade M, Romano JC (1992) Transformation of algal turf by echinoids and scarid fishes on French
Polynesian coral reefs. Coral Reefs 11:45–50
Hata H, Kato M (2002) Weeding by the herbivorous damselfish
Stegastes nigricans in nearly monocultural algae farms. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 237:227–231
Hata H, Kato M (2003) Demise of monocultural algal farms by exclusion of territorial damselfish. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 263:159–167
Hata H, Nishihira M (2002) Territorial damselfish enhances multispecies co-existence of foraminifera mediated by biotic habitat
structuring. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 270:215–240
Hata H, Nishihira M, Kamura S (2002) Effects of habitat-conditioning
by the damselfish Stegastes nigricans (Lacepède) on the community
structure of benthic algae. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 280:95–116
Hatcher BG (1981) The interaction between grazing organisms and the
epilithic algal community of a coral reef: a quantitative assessment.
Proc 4th Int Coral Reef Symp 2:515–524
Hatcher BC (1990) Coral reef primary productivity: a hierarchy of
pattern and process. Trends Ecol Evol 5:149–155
Hatcher BG (1997) Organic production and decomposition. In:
Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman & Hall,
New York, pp 140–174

211
Hay ME (1981a) Spatial patterns of grazing intensity on a Caribbean
barrier reef: herbivory and algal distribution. Aquat Bot 11:97–109
Hay ME (1981b) Herbivory, algal distribution, and the maintenance of
between-habitat diversity on a tropical fringing reef. Am Nat
118:520–540
Hay ME (1984) Patterns of fish and urchin grazing on Caribbean coral
reefs: are previous results typical? Ecology 65:446–454
Hay ME (1991) Fish-seaweed interactions on coral reefs: effects of
herbivorous fishes and adaptations of their prey. In: Sale PF
(ed) The ecology of fishes on coral reefs. Academic, San Diego,
pp 96–119
Hay ME (1997) The ecology and evolution of seaweed-herbivore
interactions on coral reefs. Coral Reefs 16(Suppl):S67–S76
Hay ME, Fenical W (1988) Marine plant-herbivore interactions: the
ecology of chemical defense. Ann Rev Ecol Syst 19:111–145
Hay ME, Taylor PR (1985) Competition between herbivorous fishes
and urchins on Caribbean reefs. Oecologia 65:591–598
Hay ME, Colburn T, Downing D (1983) Spatial and temporal patterns
in herbivory on a Caribbean fringing reef: the effects on plant
distribution. Oecologia 58:299–308
Heyward AJ, Negri AP (1999) Natural inducers for coral larval metamorphosis. Coral Reefs 18:273–279
Hinds PA, Ballantine DL (1987) Effects of the Caribbean threespot
damselfish, Stegastes planifrons (Cuvier), on algal lawn composition. Aquat Bot 27:299–308
Hixon MA (1983) Fish grazing and community structure of reef corals
and algae: a synthesis of recent studies. In: Reaka ML (ed) The
ecology of coral reefs, NOAA Symposium Series Undersea
Research, vol. 1. NOAA National Undersea Research Program,
Rockville, pp 79–87
Hixon MA (1986) Fish predation and local prey diversity. In:
Simenstad CA, Cailliet GM (eds) Contemporary studies on fish
feeding. Junk, Dordrecht, pp 235–257
Hixon MA (1991) Predation as a process structuring coral reef fish
communities. In: Sale PF (ed) The ecology of fishes on coral reefs.
Academic, San Diego, pp 475–508
Hixon MA (1997) The effects of reef fishes on corals and algae. In:
Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman and Hall,
New York, pp 230–248
Hixon MA (2015) Predation: piscivory and the ecology of coral-reef
fishes. In: Mora C (ed) Ecology and conservation of fishes on coral
reefs: the functioning of an ecosystem in a changing world.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 41–54
Hixon MA, Brostoff WN (1983) Damselfish as keystone species in
reverse: intermediate disturbance and diversity of reef algae. Science 220:511–513
Hixon MA, Brostoff WN (1985) Substrate characteristics, fish grazing,
and epibenthic reef assemblages off Hawaii. Bull Mar Sci
37:200–213
Hixon MA, Brostoff WN (1996) Succession and herbivory: effects of
differential fish grazing on Hawaiian coral-reef algae. Ecol Mono
66:67–90
Hixon MA, Jones GP (2005) Competition, predation, and densitydependent mortality in demersal marine fishes. Ecology
86:2847–2859
Hixon MA, Menge BA (1991) Species diversity: prey refuges modify
the interactive effects of predation and competition. Theor Popul
Biol 39:178–200
Hixon MA, Anderson TW, Buch KL, Johnson DW, McLeod JB,
Stallings CD (2012) Density dependence and population regulation
in marine fish: a large-scale, long-term field manipulation. Ecol
Mono 82:467–489
Hoey AS, Bellwood DR (2008) Cross-shelf variation in the role of
parrotfishes on the Great Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs 27:37–47

212
Hoey AS, Bellwood DR (2011) Suppression of herbivory by
macroalgal density: a critical feedback on coral reefs? Ecol Lett
14:267–273
Horn MH (1989) Biology of marine herbivorous fishes. Oceanogr Mar
Biol Annu Rev 27:167–272
Hourigan TF (1989) Environmental determinants of butterflyfish social
systems. Environ Biol Fish 25:61–78
Hughes TP (1989) Community structure and diversity of coral reefs: the
role of history. Ecology 70:275–279
Hughes TP (1994) Catastrophes, phase-shifts, and large-scale degradation of a Caribbean coral reef. Science 265:1547–1551
Hughes TP, Baird AH, Dinsdale EA, Moltschaniwskyj NA, Pratchett
MS, Tanner JE, Willis BL (1999) Patterns of recruitment and
abundance of corals along the Great Barrier Reef. Nature 397:59–63
Hughes TP, Bellwood DR, Folke CS, McCook LJ, Pandolfi JM (2006)
No-take areas, herbivory and coral reef resilience. Trends Ecol Evol
22:1–3
Hughes TP, Rodrigues MJ, Bellwood DR, Ceccarelli D, HoeghGuldberg O, McCook L, Moltschaniwskyj N, Pratchett MS, Steneck
RS, Willis B (2007) Phase shifts, herbivory, and the resilience of
coral reefs to climate change. Curr Biol 17:360–365
Hughes TP, Graham NAJ, Jackson JBC, Mumby PJ, Steneck RS (2010)
Rising to the challenge of sustaining coral reef resilience. Trends
Ecol Evol 25:633–642
Hutchings PA (1986) Biological destruction of coral reefs: a review.
Coral Reefs 4:239–252
Jackson JBC (1994) Constancy and change of life in the sea. Phil Trans
R Soc B 344:55–60
Jackson JBC (1997) Reefs since Columbus. Coral Reefs 16(Suppl):
S23–S32
Jayewardene D (2009) A factorial experiment quantifying the influence
of parrotfish density and size on algal reduction on Hawaiian coral
reefs. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 375:64–69
Jayewardene D, Donahue MJ, Birkeland C (2009) Effects of frequent
fish predation on corals in Hawaii. Coral Reefs 28:499–506
Jompa J, McCook LJ (1998) Seaweeds save the reefs?!: Sargassum
canopy decreases coral bleaching on inshore reefs. Reef Res 8:5
Jompa J, McCook LJ (2002) The effects of nutrients and herbivory on
competition between a hard coral (Porites cylindrica) and a brown
alga (Lobophora variegata). Limnol Oceanogr 47:527–534
Jones RS (1968) Ecological relationships in Hawaiian and Johnston
Island Acanthuridae (surgeonfishes). Micronesica 4:309–361
Jones GP, Befell DJ, Sale PF (1991) Fish predation and its impact on
the invertebrates of coral reefs and adjacent sediments. In: Sale PF
(ed) The ecology of fishes on coral reefs. Academic, San Diego, pp
156–179
Kaufman LS (1977) The threespot damselfish: effects on benthic biota
of Caribbean coral reefs. 3rd Int Coral Reef Symp 1:559–564
Klumpp DW, Polunin NVC (1989) Partitioning among grazers of food
resources within damselfish territories on a coral reef. J Exp Mar
Biol Ecol 125:145–169
Klumpp DW, Pulfrich A (1989) Trophic significance of herbivorous
macroinvertebrates on the central Great Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs
8:135–144
Klumpp DW, McKinnon D, Daniel P (1987) Damselfish territories:
zones of high productivity on coral reefs. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
40:41–51
Knowlton N (1992) Thresholds and multiple stable states in coral reef
community dynamics. Am Zool 32:674–679
Knowlton N, Lang JC, Keller BD (1990) Case study of natural population collapse: post-hurricane predation on Jamaican staghorn corals.
Smithson Contr Mar Sci 31:1–25
Kokita T, Nakazono A (2001) Rapid response of an obligately
corallivorous filefish Oxymonacanthus longirostris (Monacanthidae)
to a mass coral bleaching event. Coral Reefs 20:155–158

M.A. Hixon
Kuffner IB, Walters LJ, Becerro MA, Paul VJ, Ritson-Williams R,
Beach KS (2006) Inhibition of coral recruitment by macroalgae
and cyanobacteria. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 323:107–117
Lapointe BE (1997) Simultaneous top-down and bottom-up forces
control macroalgal blooms on coral reefs. Limnol Oceanogr
44:1586–1592
Lapointe BE (1999) Simultaneous top-down and bottom-up forces
control macroalgal blooms on coral reefs (reply to the comment
by Hughes et al.). Limnol Oceanogr 44:1586–1592
Lapointe BE, Barile PJ, Yentsch CS, Littler MM, Littler DS, Kakuk B
(2004) The relative importance of nutrient enrichment and herbivory on macroalgal communities near Norman’s Pond Cay, Exumas
Cays, Bahamas: a “natural” enrichment experiment. J Exp Mar Biol
Ecol 298:275–301
Larkum AWD (1983) The primary productivity of plant communities
on coral reefs. In: Barnes DJ (ed) Perspectives on coral reefs.
Australian Institute of Marine Science, Townsville, pp 221–230
Lassuy DR (1980) Effects of “farming” behaviour by Eupomacentrus
lividus and Hemiglyphidodon plagiometapon on algal community
structure. Bull Mar Sci 30:304–312
Ledlie MH, Graham NAJ, Bythell JC, Wilson SK, Jennings S, Polunin
NVC, Hardcastle J (2007) Phase shifts and the role of herbivory in
the resilience of coral reefs. Coral Reefs 26:641–653
Lessios HA (1988) Mass mortality of Diadema antillarum in the
Caribbean: what have we learned? Ann Rev Ecol Syst 19:371–393
Lewis SM (1986) The role of herbivorous fishes in the organization of a
Caribbean reef community. Ecol Mono 56:183–200
Lewis SM, Wainwright PC (1985) Herbivore abundance and grazing
intensity on a Caribbean coral reef. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol
87:215–228
Lirman D (2001) Competition between macroalgae and corals: effects
of herbivore exclusion and increased algal biomass on coral survivorship and growth. Coral Reefs 19:392–399
Littler MM, Littler DS (1980) The evolution of thallus form and
survival strategies in benthic marine macroalgae: field and laboratory tests of a functional form model. Am Nat 116:25–44
Littler MM, Littler DS (1984) Models of tropical reef biogenesis. Prog
Phycol Res 3:323–364
Littler MM, Taylor PR, Littler DS (1983) Algal resistance to herbivory
on a Caribbean barrier reef. Coral Reefs 2:111–118
Littler MM, Taylor PR, Littler DS (1989) Complex interactions in the
control of coral zonation on a Caribbean reef flat. Oecologia
80:331–340
Lobel PS (1980) Herbivory by damselfishes and their role in coral reef
community ecology. Bull Mar Sci 30:273–289
Low RM (1971) Interspecific territoriality in a pomacentrid reef fish,
Pomacentrus flavicauda Whitley. Ecology 52:648–654
Mantyka CS, Bellwood DR (2007a) Direct evaluation of macroalgal
removal by herbivorous coral reef fishes. Coral Reefs 26:435–442
Mantyka CS, Bellwood DR (2007b) Macroalgal grazing selectivity
among herbivorous coral reef fishes. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
352:177–185
McCauley DJ, Micheli F, Young HS, Tittensor DP, Brumbaugh DR,
Madin EMP, Holmes KE, Smith JE, Lotze HK, DeSalles PA,
Arnold SN, Worm B (2010) Acute effects of removing large fish
from a near-pristine coral reef. Mar Biol 157:2739–2750
McClanahan TR (1992) Resource utilization, competition, and predation: a model and example from coral reef grazers. Ecol Model
61:195–215
McClanahan TR (1997) Primary succession of coral-reef algae: differing patterns on fished versus unfished reefs. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol
218:77–102
McClanahan TR (2008) Response of the coral reef benthos and herbivory to fishery closure management and the 1998 ENSO disturbance.
Oecologia 155:169–177

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals

McClanahan TR, Kamukuru AT, Muthiga NA, Yebio MG, Obura D
(1996) Effect of sea urchin reductions on algae, coral, and fish
populations. Cons Biol 10:136–154
McClanahan TR, Hendrick V, Rodrigues MJ, Polunin NVC (1999)
Varying responses of herbivorous and invertebrate-feeding
fishes to macroalgal reduction on a coral reef. Coral Reefs
18:195–203
McClanahan TR, Cokos BA, Sala E (2002) Algal growth and species
composition under experimental control of herbivory, phosphorus
and coral abundance in Glovers Reef, Belize. Mar Poll Bull
44:441–451
McClanahan TR, Huntington BE, Cokos B (2011a) Coral responses to
macroalgal reduction and fisheries closure on Caribbean patch
reefs. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 437:89–102
McClanahan TR, Muthiga NA, Coleman RA (2011b) Testing for
top-down control: can post-disturbance fisheries closures reverse
algal dominance? Aquatic Conserv Mar Freshw Ecosyst 21:658–675
McClanahan TR, Donner SD, Maynard JA, MacNeil MA, Graham
NAJ, Maina J, Baker AC, I. JBA, Beger M, Campbell SJ, Darling
ES, Eakin CM, Heron SF, Jupiter SD, Lundquist CJ, McLeod E,
Mumby PJ, Paddack MJ, Selig ER, Van Woesik R (2012)
Prioritizing key resilience indicators to support coral reef management in a changing climate. PLoS ONE 7(8), doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0042884
McCook LJ (1997) Effects of herbivory on zonation of Sargassum spp.
within fringing reefs of the central Great Barrier Reef. Mar Biol
129:713–722
McCook LJ (1999) Macroalgae, nutrients and phase shifts on coral
reefs: scientific issues and management consequences for the
Great Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs 18:357–367
McCook LJ (2001) Competition between corals and algal turfs along a
gradient of terrestrial influence in the nearshore central Great Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs 19:419–425
McCook LJ, Jompa J, Diaz-Pulido G (2001) Competition between
corals and algae on coral reefs: a review of evidence and
mechanisms. Coral Reefs 19:400–417
McManus JW, Polsenberg JF (2004) Coral–algal phase shifts on coral
reefs: ecological and environmental aspects. Prog Ocean
60:263–279
McManus JW, Meñez LAB, Kesner-Reyes KN, Vergara SG, Ablan
MC (2000) Coral reef fishing and coral-algal phase shifts:
implications for global reef status. ICES J Mar Sci 57:572–578
Meyer JL, Schultz ET (1985a) Migrating haemulid fishes as a source of
nutrients and organic matter on coral reefs. Limnol Oceanogr
30:146–156
Meyer JL, Schultz ET (1985b) Tissue condition and growth rate of
corals associated with schooling fish. Limnol Oceanogr 39:157–166
Meyer JL, Schultz ET, Helfman GS (1983) Fish schools: an asset to
corals. Science 220:1047–1049
Miller MW (1998) Coral/seaweed competition and the control of reef
community structure within and between latitudes. Oceanogr Mar
Biol Ann Rev 36:65–96
Miller MW, Hay ME (1998) Effects of fish predation and seaweed
competition on the survival and growth of corals. Oecologia
113:231–238
Miller MW, Hay ME, Miller SL, Malone D, Sotka EE, Szmant AM
(1999) Effects of nutrients versus herbivores on reef algae: a new
method for manipulating nutrients on coral reefs. Limnol Oceanogr
44:1847–1861
Montgomery WL (1980) The impact of non-selective grazing by the
giant blue damselfish, Microspathodon dorsalis, on algal
communities in the Gulf of California, Mexico. Bull Mar Sci
30:290–303
Montgomery WL, Gerking SD (1980) Marine macroalgae as foods for
fishes: an evaluation of potential food quality. Environ Biol Fish
5:143–153

213
Mora C (2015) Perpetual struggle for conservation in a crowded world
and the needed paradigm shift for easing ultimate burdens. In: Mora
C (ed) Ecology and conservation of fishes on coral reefs: the
functioning of an ecosystem in a changing world. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 289–296
Mora C, Andréfouët S, Costello MJ, Kranenburg C, Rollo A, Veron J,
Gaston KJ, Myers RA (2006) Coral reefs and the global network of
marine protected areas. Science 312:1750–1751
Morrison D (1988) Comparing fish and urchin grazing in shallow and
deeper coral reef algal communities. Ecology 69:1367–1382
Morse DE, Hooker N, Morse ANC, Jensen RA (1988) Control of larval
metamorphosis and recruitment in sympatric agaricid corals. J Exp
Mar Biol Ecol 116:193–212
Muir J (1911) My first summer in the Sierra. Houghton Mifflin, Boston
Mumby PJ (2006) The impact of exploiting grazers (Scaridae) on the
dynamics of Caribbean coral reefs. Ecol Appl 16:747–769
Mumby PJ (2009) Phase shifts and the stability of macroalgal
communities on Caribbean coral reefs. Coral Reefs 28:761–773
Mumby PJ, Dahlgren CP, Harborne AR, Kappel CV, Micheli F,
Brumbaugh DR, Holmes KE, Mendes JM, Broad K, Sanchirico JN,
Buch K, Box S, Stoffle RW, Gill AB (2006) Fishing, trophic cascades,
and the process of grazing on coral reefs. Science 311:98-101
Mumby PJ, Steneck RS (2008) Coral reef management and conservation in light of rapidly evolving ecological paradigms. Trends Ecol
Evol 23:555–563
Mumby PJ, Harborne AR, Williams J, Kappel CV, Brumbaugh DR,
Micheli F, Holmes KE, Dahlgren CP, Paris CB, Blackwell PG
(2007a) Trophic cascade facilitates coral recruitment in a marine
reserve. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:8362–8367
Mumby PJ, Hastings A, Edwards HJ (2007b) Thresholds and the
resilience of Caribbean coral reefs. Nature 450:98–101
Mumby PJ, Steneck RS, Edwards AJ, Ferrari R, Coleman R, Harborne
AR, Gibson JP (2012) Fishing down a Caribbean food web relaxes
trophic cascades. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 445:13–24
Mumby PJ, Steneck RS, Hastings A (2013) Evidence for and against
the existence of alternate attractors on coral reefs. Oikos
122:481–491
Nelson SG, Tsutsui RN (1981) Browsing by herbivorous reef fishes on
the agarophyte Gracilaria edulis (Rhodophyta) at Guam, Mariana
Islands. Proc 4th Int Coral Reef Symp 2:503–506
Neudecker S (1979) Effects of grazing and browsing fishes on the
zonation of corals in Guam. Ecology 60:666–672
Nyström M, Folke C, Moberg F (2000) Coral reef disturbance and
resilience in a human-dominated environment. Trends Ecol Evol
15:413–417
Nyström M, Graham NAJ, Lokrantz J, Norström AV (2008) Capturing
the cornerstones of coral reef resilience: linking theory to practice.
Coral Reefs 27:795–809
Nyström M, Norström AV, Blenckner T, De la Torre-Castro M, Eklöf
JS, Folke C, Österblom H, Steneck RS, Thyresson M, Troell M
(2012) Confronting feedbacks of degraded marine ecosystems.
Ecosystems 15:695–710
Ogden JC, Buckman NS (1973) Movements, foraging groups, and
diurnal migrations of the striped parrotfish Scarus croicensis
Bloch (Scaridae). Ecology 54:589–596
Ogden JC, Lobel PS (1978) The role of herbivorous fishes and urchins
in coral reef communities. Environ Biol Fish 3:49–63
Ogden JC, Brown RA, Salesky N (1973) Grazing by the echinoid
Diadema antillarum philippi: formation of halos around West
Indian patch reefs. Science 182:715–717
Ormond RFG, Head SH, Moore RJ, Rainbow PR, Saunders AP (1973)
Formation and breakdown of aggregations of the crown-of-thorns
starfish. Acanthaster planci (L.). Nature 246:167–169
Paddack MJ, Cowen RK, Sponaugle S (2006) Grazing pressure of
herbivorous coral reef fishes on low coral-cover reefs. Coral Reefs
25:461–472

214
Paine RT (1966) Food web complexity and species diversity. Am Nat
100:65–75
Pandolfi JM, Jackson JBC, Baron N, Bradbury RH, Guzman HM,
Hughes TP, Kappel CV, Micheli F, Ogden JC, Possingham HP,
Sala E (2005) Are U.S. coral reefs on the slippery slope to slime?
Science 307:1725–1726
Patton WK (1974) Community structure among the animals inhabiting
the coral Pocillopora damicornis at Heron Island. Australia. In:
Frost SH, Weissand MP, Saunders JB (eds) Symbiosis in the sea.
University of South Carolina Press, Columbia, pp 219–243
Paulay G (1997) Diversity and distribution of reef organisms. In:
Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman & Hall,
New York, pp 298–353
Pearson RG, Endean R (1969) A preliminary study of the coral predator
Acanthaster planci (L.) (Asteroidea) on the Great Barrier Reef.
Notes Dept Harbours Marine, Qld, Aust 3:27–55
Petraitis P (2013) Multiple stable states in natural ecosystems. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Polunin NVC (1988) Efficient uptake of algal production by a single
resident herbivorous fish on a reef. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 123:61–76
Polunin NVC, Koike I (1987) Temporal focusing of nitrogen release by
a periodically feeding reef fish. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 111:285–296
Polunin NVC, Roberts CM (eds) (1996) Reef fisheries. Chapman &
Hall, London
Potts DC (1977) Suppression of coral populations by filamentous algae
within damselfish territories. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 28:207–216
Pratchett MS, Gust N, Goby G, Klanten SO (2001) Consumption of
coral propagules represents a significant trophic link between corals
and reef fish. Coral Reefs 20:13–17
Randall JE (1961) Overgrazing of algae by herbivorous marine fishes.
Ecology 42:812
Randall JE (1967) Food habits of reef fishes of the West Indies. Stud
Trop Oceanogr 5:665–847
Randall JE (1974) The effects of fishes on coral reefs. Proc 2nd Int
Coral Reef Symp 1:159–166
Raymundo LJ, Halford AR, Maypa AP, Kerr AM (2009) Functionally
diverse reef-fish communities ameliorate coral disease. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 106:17067–17070
Reese ES (1975) A comparative field study of the social behavior and
related ecology of reef fishes of the family Chaetodontidae. Z
Tierpsychol 37:37–61
Reese ES (1977) Coevolution of corals and coral feeding fishes of the
family Chaetodontidae. Proc 3rd Int Coral Reef Symp 2:268–274
Reese ES (1981) Predation on corals by fishes of the family
Chaetodontidae: implications for conversation and management of
coral reef ecosystems. Bull Mar Sci 31:594–604
Reinthal PN, Lewis SM (1986) Social behavior, foraging efficiency and
habitat utilization in a group of tropical herbivorous fish. Anim
Behav 34:1687–1693
Roberts CM (1995) Effects of fishing on the ecosystem structure of
coral reefs. Cons Biol 9:988–995
Roberts CM, Ormond RFG (1992) Butterflyfish social behaviour, with
special reference to the incidence of territoriality: a review. Environ
Biol Fish 34:79–93
Roberts CM, Ormond RFG, Shepherd ARD (1988) The usefulness of
butterfly fishes as environmental indicators on coral reefs. Proc 6th
Int Coral Reef Symp 2:331–336
Robertson R (1970) Review of the predators and parasites of stony
corals, with special reference to symbiotic prosobranch gastropods.
Pac Sci 24:43–54
Robertson DR (1991) The role of adult biology in the timing of
spawning of tropical reef fishes. In: Sale PF (ed) The ecology of
fishes on coral reefs. Academic, San Diego, pp 356–386
Robertson DR, Gaines SD (1986) Interference competition structures
habitat use in a local assemblage of coral reef surgeonfishes. Ecology 67:1372–1383

M.A. Hixon
Robertson DR, Sweatman HPA, Fletcher EA, Cleland MG (1976)
Schooling as a mechanism for circumventing the territoriality of
competitors. Ecology 57:1208–1220
Robertson DR, Polunin NVC, Leighton K (1979) The behavioral ecology of three Indian Ocean surgeonfishes (Acanthurus lineatus,
A. leucosternum, and Zebrasoma scopas): their feeding strategies,
and social and mating systems. Environ Biol Fish 4:125–170
Roff G, Mumby PJ (2012) Global disparity in the resilience of coral
reefs. Trends Ecol Evol 27:404–413
Rotjan RD, Dimond JL (2010) Discriminating causes from
consequences of persistent parrotfish corallivory. J Exp Mar Biol
Ecol 390:188–195
Rotjan RD, Lewis SM (2005) Selective predation by parrotfishes on the
reef coral Porites astreoides. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 305:193–201
Rotjan RD, Lewis SM (2006) Parrotfish abundance and selective
corallivory on a Belizean coral reef. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol
335:292–301
Rotjan RD, Lewis SM (2008) Impact of coral predators on tropical
reefs. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 367:73–91
Rotjan RD, Lewis SM (2009) Predators selectively graze reproductive
structures in a clonal marine organism. Mar Biol 156:569–577
Rotjan RD, Dimond JL, Thornhill DJ, Leichter JJ, Helmuth B, Kemp
DW, Lewis SM (2006) Chronic parrotfish grazing impedes coral
recovery after bleaching. Coral Reefs 25:361–368
Russ GR (1984a) Distribution and abundance of herbivorous grazing
fishes in the central Great Barrier Reef. I. Levels of variability
across the entire continental shelf. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 20:23–34
Russ GR (1984b) Distribution and abundance of herbivorous
grazing fishes in the central Great Barrier Reef. II. Patterns of
zonation of mid-shelf and outershelf reefs. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
20:35–44
Russ GR (1987) Is the rate of removal of algae by grazers reduced
inside territories of tropical damselfishes? J Exp Mar Biol Ecol
110:1–17
Russ GR (1991) Coral reef fisheries: effects and yields. In: Sale PF
(ed) The ecology of fishes on coral reefs. Academic, San Diego,
pp 601–635
Russ GR, St. John J (1988) Diets, growth rates and secondary production of herbivorous coral reef fishes. Proc 6th Int Coral Reef Symp
2:37–43
Ruyter van Steveninck ED (1984) The composition of algal vegetation
in and outside damselfish territories on a Florida reef. Aquat Bot
20:11–19
Sale PF (ed) (1991) The ecology of fishes on coral reefs. Academic, San
Diego
Sale PF (ed) (2002) Coral reef fishes: dynamics and diversity in a
complex ecosystem. Academic, San Diego
Sale PF, Hixon MA (2014) Addressing the global decline in coral reefs
and forthcoming impacts on fishery yields. In: Bortone S
(ed) Interrelationships between coral reefs and fisheries. CRC
Press, Boca Raton, pp 7–18
Sammarco PW (1983) Effects of fish grazing and damselfish territoriality on coral reef algae. I. Algal community structure. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 13:1–14
Sammarco PW, Carleton JH (1981) Damselfish territoriality and coral
community structure: reduced grazing, coral recruitment, and
effects on coral spat. Proc 4th Int Coral Reef Symp 2:525–535
Sammarco PW, Williams AH (1982) Damselfish territoriality:
influences on Diadema distribution and implications for coral community structure. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 8:53–59
Sandin SA, Smith JE, DeMartini EE, Dinsdale EA, Donner SD,
Friedlander AM, Konotchick T, Malay M, Maragos JE, Obura D,
Pantos O, Paulay G, Richie M, Rohwer F, Schroeder RE, Walsh S,
Jackson JBC, Knowlton N, Sala E (2008) Baselines and degradation
of coral reefs in the northern Line Islands. PLoS One 3(2), e1548.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001548

10

Reef Fishes, Seaweeds, and Corals

Sano M, Shimizu M, Nose Y (1987) Long-term effects of destruction of
hermatypic corals by Acanthaster planci infestation on reef fish
communities at Iriomote Island, Japan. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
37:191–199
Scott FJ, Russ GR (1987) Effects of grazing on species composition of
the epilithic algal community on coral reefs in the central Great
Barrier Reef. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 39:293–304
Sebastián CR, McClanahan TR (2013) Description and validation of
production processes in the coral reef ecosystem model CAFFEE
(Coral–Algae–Fish-Fisheries Ecosystem Energetics) with a
fisheries closure and climatic disturbance. Ecol Model 263:326–348
Selig ER, Bruno JF (2010) A global analysis of the effectiveness of
marine protected areas in preventing coral loss. PLoS One 5(2):
e9278. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0009278
Sluka RD, Miller MW (2001) Herbivorous fish assemblages and herbivory pressure on Laamu Atoll, Republic of Maldives. Coral Reefs
20:255–262
Smith CL, Tyler JC (1972) Space resource sharing in a coral reef fish
community. Bull Nat Hist Mus Los Angeles Co 14:125–170
Smith JE, Smith CM, Hunter CL (2001) An experimental analysis
of the effects of herbivory and nutrient enrichment on
benthic community dynamics on a Hawaiian reef. Coral Reefs
19:332–342
Smith JE, Shaw M, Edwards RA, Obura D, Pantos O, Sala E, Sandin
SA, Smriga S, Hatay M, Rohwer FL (2006) Indirect effects of algae
on coral: algae-mediated, microbe-induced coral mortality. Ecol
Lett 9:835–845
Smith JE, Hunter CL, Smith CM (2010) The effects of top–down versus
bottom–up control on benthic coral reef community structure.
Oecologia 163:497–507
Sotka EE, Hay ME (2009) Effects of herbivores, nutrient enrichment,
and their interactions on macroalgal proliferation and coral growth.
Coral Reefs 28:555–568
Steneck RS (1983) Escalating herbivory and resulting adaptive trends
in calcareous algal crusts. Paleobiology 9:44–61
Steneck RS (1988) Herbivory on coral reefs: a synthesis. Proc 6th Int
Coral Reef Symp 1:37–49
Steneck RS, Paris CB, Arnold SN, Ablan-Lagman MC, Alcala AC,
Butler MJ, McCook LJ, Russ GR, Sale PF (2009) Thinking and
managing outside the box: coalescing connectivity networks to
build region-wide resilience in coral reef ecosystems. Coral Reefs
28:367–378
Stephenson W, Searles RB (1960) Experimental studies on the ecology
of intertidal environments of Heron Island. I. Exclusion of fish from
beach rock. Aust J Mar Freshw Res 2:241–267
Stimson J, Larned ST, Conklin E (2001) Effects of herbivory, nutrient
levels, and introduced algae on the distribution and abundance of
the invasive macroalga Dictyosphaeria cavernosa in Kaneohe Bay,
Hawaii. Coral Reefs 19:343–357
Suefuji M, van Woesik R (2001) Coral recovery from the 1998
bleaching event is facilitated in Stegastes (Pisces: Pomacentridae)
territories, Okinawa, Japan. Coral Reefs 20:385–386
Sweatman HPA (1995) A field study of fish predation on juvenile
crown-of-thorns starfish. Coral Reefs 14:47–53
Szmant AM (2001) Why are coral reefs world-wide becoming
overgrown by algae? Algae, algae everywhere, and nowhere a bite
to eat! Coral Reefs 19:299–302
Tanner JE (1995) Competition between scleractinian corals and
macroalgae: an experimental investigation of coral growth, survival, and reproduction. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 190:151–168
Thacker RW, Ginsburg DW, Paul VJ (2001) Effects of herbivore
exclusion and nutrient enrichment on coral reef macroalgae and
cyanobacteria. Coral Reefs 19:318–329

215
Tricas TM (1989) Determinants of feeding territory size in the
corallivorous butterfly fish, Chaetodon multicinctus. Anim Behav
37:830–841
Van den Hoek C, Cortel-Breeman AM, Wanders JBW (1975) Algal
zonation in the fringing coral reef of Caracas, Netherlands Antillies,
in relation to zonation of corals and gorgonians. Aquat Bot
1:269–308
Van den Hoek C, Breeman AM, Bak RPM, van Buurt G (1978) The
distribution of algae, corals, and gorgonians in relation to depth, light
attenuation, water movement and grazing pressure in the fringing
coral reef of Curacao, Netherlands Antilles. Aquat Bot 5:1–46
Vermeij MJA, van der Heijden RA, Olthuis JG, Marhaver KL, Smith
JE, Visser PM (2013) Survival and dispersal of turf algae and
macroalgae consumed by herbivorous coral reef fishes. Oecologia
171:417–425
Vine PJ (1974) Effects of algal grazing and aggressive behaviour of the
fishes Pomacentrus lividus and Acanthurus sohal on coral-reef
ecology. Mar Biol 24:131–136
Wainwright PC, Bellwood DR (2002) Ecomorphology of feeding in
coral reef fishes. In: Sale PF (ed) Coral reef fishes: dynamics and
diversity in a complex ecosystem. Academic, San Diego, pp 33–55
Wanders JBW (1977) The role of benthic algae in the shallow reef of
Curacao (Netherlands Antilles). III: the significance of grazing.
Aquat Bot 3:357–390
Weber JN, Woodhead PMJ (1970) Ecological studies of the coral
predator Acanthaster planci in the South Pacific. Mar Biol 6:12–17
Wellington GM (1982) Depth zonation of corals in the Gulf of Panama:
control and facilitation by resident reef fish. Ecol Mono 52:223–241
Westneat MW, Resing JM (1988) Predation on coral spawn by
planktivorous fish. Coral Reefs 7:89–92
White AT (1988) Chaetodon occurrence relative to coral reef habitats
in the Philippines with implications for reef assessment. Proc 6th Int
Coral Reef Symp 2:427–431
Wilkinson CR, Sammarco PW (1983) Effects of fish grazing and
damselfish territoriality on coral reef algae. II. Nitrogen fixation.
Mar Ecol Prog Ser 13:15–19
Williams AH (1980) The threespot damselfish: a noncarnivorous keystone species. Am Nat 116:138–142
Williams AH (1981) An analysis of competitive interactions in a patchy
back-reef environment. Ecology 62:1107–1120
Williams DM (1986) Temporal variation in the structure of reef slope
fish communities (central Great Barrier Reef): short-term effects of
Acanthaster planci infestation. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 28:157–164
Williams DM, Hatcher AI (1983) Structure of fish communities on
outer slopes of inshore, mid-shelf and outer shelf reefs of the
Great Barrier Reef. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 10:239–250
Williams ID, Polunin NVC (2001) Large-scale associations between
macroalgal cover and grazer biomass on mid-depth reefs in the
Caribbean. Coral Reefs 19:358–366
Williams ID, Polunin NVC, Hendrick VJ (2001) Limits to grazing by
herbivorous fishes and the impact of low coral cover on macroalgal
abundance on a coral reef in Belize. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
222:187–196
Winterbottom R, Emery AR (1981) A new genus and two new species
of gobiid fishes (Perciformes) from the Chagos Archipelago, Central Indian Ocean. Environ Biol Fish 6:139–149
Wismer S, Hoey AS, Bellwood DR (2009) Cross-shelf benthic community structure on the Great Barrier Reef: relationships between
macroalgal cover and herbivore biomass. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
376:45–54
Zeller DC (1988) Short-term effects of territoriality of a tropical damsel
fish and experimental exclusion of large fishes on invertebrates in
algal turfs. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 44:85–93

Coral Disturbance and Recovery
in a Changing World

11

Margaret W. Miller

Abstract

Much of the historical development of ecological thought has revolved around disturbance
and the responses of organisms, species and assemblages. Coral reefs have figured prominently in this intellectual development. Historically, observed coral populations and
communities have been understood as displaying the net balance (though rarely reaching
an equilibrium) between disruptive forces and those leading to recovery of coral abundance
and composition. The fact of drastic coral decline over the past few decades implies a shift
in this balance toward greater influence of disturbance and/or lesser effectiveness of
recovery. This chapter examines the likelihood that both expanding disturbances
(in identity, scale, intensity, and/or frequency) and impaired recovery processes (resulting
at least partially from expanding chronic disturbances) are likely contributors to this shift.
The contemplation of progressively more radical management interventions to combat
expanding disturbance and faltering recovery invokes a need for targeted research to clarify
and minimize risks while maximizing benefits of such intervention strategies.
Keywords

Resilience  Chronic  Bleaching  Disease  Storms

11.1

Introduction

The concepts and theory of disturbance and recovery are
seminal in the field of community ecology and much of this
theory is based on coral reefs as a model system. These
concepts came to the forefront in the effort to explain the
origin and maintenance of species diversity in communities.
That is, how do so many species, especially species that
appear to make their living in a similar manner (i.e., have
similar niches) persist in equilibrium? Several pivotal works
in the 1970s revealed that periodic repeated disturbances at
different scales generally preclude equilibrium, climax
conditions in marine benthic communities (including coral

M.W. Miller (*)
Southeast Fisheries Science Center, NOAA/NMFS, 75 Virginia Beach
Dr., Miami, FL 33149, USA
e-mail: margaret.w.miller@noaa.gov

reefs) where space and light are the primary limiting
resources (Dayton 1971; Sutherland and Karlson 1977;
Connell 1978). By preventing an equilibrium climax community, disturbance is understood to allow the maintenance
of high species diversity by precluding competitive exclusion (Connell 1978).
Disturbance, by definition (Box 11.1), is bad for the status
quo but not uniformly bad. The effects of a given disturbance event will depend not only on the nature of the
disturbance but also on the previous experience of the present assemblage (Hughes and Connell 1999; Mumby
et al. 2011). In addition, the variable nature of biotic
populations and species implies that the experience and
therefore the effects of disturbance will vary between species and among individuals within a species according to
their tolerances. These tolerances clearly change over time
as genetic or physiological adaptation may adjust the tolerance of individuals within a species and changing species

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_11

217

218

Box 11.1
For the purposes of this review, disturbance will be
referenced as “killing, displacement, or damaging of
one or more individuals (or colonies) that directly or
indirectly creates an opportunity for new individuals
(or colonies) to become established.” (Sousa 1984,
p. 356).

Box 11.2: Typologies of Disturbance
Natural vs. Anthropogenic: As denoted by the concept of an ‘Anthropocene’ age, nothing is truly free of
anthropogenic influence. We have increasing understanding that ‘natural’ processes determining carbonate chemistry, storms, disease, etc. are all affected by
the rapidly changing atmospheric/CO2/ climate system. Most everything is BOTH
Biotic vs. Abiotic: Similarly, changes in fundamental ocean chemistry and climate interact with the
biology of organisms in ways that substantially blur
this distinction. For example, increased river runoff
from extreme rainfall events has been convincingly
linked with destructive outbreaks of corallivores
(Fabricius et al. 2010).
Global vs. Local: Climate and chemistry-based
disturbances are clearly global in origin, but the experience of them is also local. This distinction may be
important from a patch dynamics or metapopulation
perspective, but several important threats (especially
disease and often bleaching) appear to operate at multiple scales
Chronic vs. Acute: This is a highly relevant
dichotomy as these likely have distinct consequences
for recovery and evolutionary outcomes. Both types
are probably increasing (e.g., extreme thermal
bleaching events AND nutrient loading are likely
increasing in many reefs). However, as the frequency
of acute disturbances increases, as expected for thermal bleaching over the next two decades, it also blurs
to a chronic disturbance.

composition may adjust the tolerance of the extant community. Such shifts in species and community tolerance can
happen rapidly, especially within the context of rapid environmental changes, and are crucial interactors with disturbance and recovery (discussed more completely in Chap. 7).
The consequence, however, of disturbance being bad for
the status quo is that it creates opportunities for newcomers,
both species and individuals. The effective utilization of
such opportunities requires successful recruitment and
growth of the newcomers. For corals, successful recruitment

M.W. Miller

is determined by a complex interplay of fecundity, fertilization, connectivity, settlement and post-settlement survival
(Ritson-Williams et al. 2009). Clearly, the community
observed at a given point of space and time represents the
balance of loss to recent disturbances and the relative progress of newcomers in recruitment and growth, which will be
referred to as recovery. In the classical conception of a coral
reef as a stable system with high coral cover and high community diversity, a favorable balance of disturbance and
recovery gave the ‘illusion’ of equilibrium.
In the past two to three decades, as coral reef ecosystems
and corals in particular have begun and proceeded quite far
down a course of decline, this balance of disturbance and
recovery processes appears to be shifting toward dominance
by the former. The progression of ecological theory during
this period has been dominated by the growing recognition
and discussion of tipping points, alternate stable states, and
resilience. Recovery processes may fail to return the community to a pre-disturbance state (i.e. failure of resilience)
either because recruitment and growth of newcomers are
failing or because the disturbances are too frequent, intense,
and/or diverse for recovery to run its course. The result may
be an alternate stable state if punctuated acute disturbances
are most important, or a slow, steady decline if chronic
disturbances dominate (Hughes et al. 2012). The trajectory
of reefs at Discovery Bay, Jamaica (Fig. 11.1) provide the
archetypal example of lost resilience in the face of both
acute (hurricane) and chronic (impaired grazing due to
overfishing and collapse of grazing urchin populations)
disturbances (Hughes 1994).
This chapter will evaluate trends in both disturbance and
recovery processes in the radically changing coral reef
environments of the ‘Anthropocene’.

11.2

Disturbances: Types and Impacts

Many different typologies of coral reef disturbance have
been discussed in previous works. Several of these differentiations are losing meaning in an era wherein human influence on otherwise ‘natural’ or ‘abiotic’ systems (e.g.,
climate or ocean carbonate equilibrium) is becoming predominant (Box 11.2). The dichotomy of acute vs. chronic
disturbance will be maintained in the current discussion as it
retains strong influence on both the recovery processes and
on the potential evolutionary responses that result. It should
be noted that various disturbance types may occur as both
chronic and as acute events, and hence interact and compound each other in complex ways.
Various modeling studies have projected effects of various disturbance types or frequencies on coral assemblages.
For example the model of Wakeford et al. (2008), based on
observed coral mortality, recruitment, growth, and competitive outcomes in a reef patch at Lizard Island between 1981

11

Coral Disturbance and Recovery in a Changing World

219

Fig. 11.1 Coral cover response to sequential disturbances in the
archetypal example of Discovery Bay, Jamaica. The severe acute
disturbance of Hurricane Allen (1) precipitated significant coral mortality, after which some recovery was evident, and at a pace that could
have returned coral cover (not necessarily community or population
structures) to the pre-Allen baseline in less than 15 years (dotted lines).
However, the acute mass mortality of Diadema antillarum (2) resulted

in massive macroalgal proliferation (a chronic disturbance) which
curtailed coral recovery. A following hurricane, Gilbert (3) continued
coral mortality. Subsequent recovery of D. antillarum (at least in small
patchy sites) has been reported to have decreased macroalgal cover and
greatly increased coral juvenile density in this region (Edmunds and
Carpenter 2001) (Redrawn from Hughes 1994)

and 2003, indicates that the actual assemblage was
maintained when mortality was concentrated in acute disturbance events (cyclones and/or predation outbreaks) up until
1997. After this date, the observed coral assemblage was
only emulated in the model by incorporating additional
chronic mortality factors into the model. These authors suggest a fundamental shift in the disturbance regime and/or
resilience capacity of this reef during the 1990s decade.

Depth and other habitat characteristics as well as recent
history strongly influence the amount of coral damage. For
example, Hughes and Connell (1999) delineate the sequence
of storm events and their relative impacts in different habitat
types in two long term data sets. The effects of repeated
storm impacts in both Heron Island, Australia, and the north
coast of Jamaica, varied strongly according to the habitat
type, the relative dominance of vulnerable (branching or
tabular) coral species, and, relatedly, the duration and nature
of recovery from the previous disturbance. In both study
regions, vast changes in coral composition as well as
reduced abundance resulted from storm disturbance when
tabular (generally Acropora spp.) corals dominated and little
change in composition (and much less change in abundance)
was wrought by storms when massive corals comprised the
bulk of the community (Hughes and Connell 1999).
Gardner et al. (2005) conducted a large meta-analysis of
hurricane effects on Caribbean coral reefs from 1980 to 2001.
They estimated that Caribbean reefs affected by a hurricane
during this period lost an average of 6 % coral cover per
annum in comparison to 2 % per annum for sites not affected
by storm damage, a significant difference largely attributable
to an average 17 % loss in coral cover in the year following a
hurricane impact. Variation in these rates of loss showed
positive correlation to storm strength and duration since the
previous storm impact. Gardner et al. (2005) also noted a
greater difference between the fate of hurricane impacted
vs. not-impacted sites in the 1980s decade in comparison to
the 1990s, when all sites showed similar rates of decline
suggesting non-hurricane factors came to dominate coral

11.2.1 Acute Physical Disturbance
Tropical storms and cyclones are the quintessential physical
disturbance, though various degrees of water motion (from
swell to tsunamis) and/or substrate disturbance (e.g.,
earthquakes or ship groundings) may have similar disturbance effects (i.e. killing coral and/or smashing substrate).
Their effects can be dramatic but patchy, with the more
severe events also causing additional physiographic or geological changes (Stoddart 1963; Connell et al. 1997). Events
causing damage to underlying substrate or flow regimes
further challenge the recovery potential and time frame.
However, over historical times, recovery from storm damage
to coral communities was presumed, and many aspects of
coral life history, dynamics and genetic structure were
attributed to the influence of storm events and their variable
effects in time and space (e.g., Hunter 1993; Hughes and
Connell 1999; Highsmith et al. 1980; Foster et al. 2013).
Tabular or branching coral species show greater susceptibility to storm damage than encrusting or mounding corals.

220

trends. On Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, comprehensive
monitoring of 214 sites between 1985 and 2012 yielded
estimates of average mortality of 1.63 % coral cover per
year to cyclones, which was marginally higher than the mortality estimates for predation (1.42 % per year) and substantially higher than that for bleaching (0.34 % per year) (De’ath
et al. 2012).
In more recent times, storm-induced coral disturbance has
often resulted in follow-on mortality rather than rapid recovery. Evidence is mounting of the linkage of physical disturbance with subsequent coral mortality from disease and/or
predation, at least in the Caribbean (Brandt et al. 2013;
Knowlton et al. 1981; Bruckner and Bruckner 1997) though
the mechanisms behind this interaction, particularly for disease, are not well documented. It is clear, however, that
continuing coral mortality following a storm, including mortality of potential fragment propagules, greatly hinders
recovery (Williams et al. 2008a). Additional ensuing threats
impairing post-storm recovery include the dispersal and
propagation of the excavating sponge, Cliona tennis
(Lopez-Victoria and Zea 2004) and increased impact from
generalist coral predators that may concentrate on reduced or
injured populations of preferred prey (Knowlton et al. 1990;
Bright 2009)
While the effects of storm disturbances may be increasing
over time, there is also the question of whether these disturbance events, themselves, are increasing in frequency or
intensity. Additional heat in the ocean/atmosphere system
may be expected to drive more tropical cyclones and,
indeed, Grinsted et al. (2012) report a significant correlation
of large Atlantic cyclone occurrence with warm years and a
significant increasing frequency of such events since 1923.
A significant increase in the number and proportion of strong
tropical cyclones, but not frequency of all cyclones, was
detected across all ocean basins over a 35 year period of
warming seas (Webster et al. 2005; Emanuel 2005). Meanwhile, Mumby et al. (2011) conducted a spatio-temporal
analysis of hurricane occurrence in the Caribbean and
showed that Atlantic storms from 1901 to 2010 have been
temporally clustered in certain areas, yielding lesser overall
reef damage/decline than if storms were randomly
distributed. However, the specter of more damaging storms
in the future, combined with apparently growing interactions
of physical disturbance with other sources of mortality
suggests worsening ultimate effects.

11.2.2 Acute Thermal Stress and Mass
Bleaching Events
Thermally induced mass bleaching events have become the
hallmark of global warming effects on coral reefs, but
regional-scale bleaching/mortality events can also result

M.W. Miller

Fig. 11.2 Cumulative warm thermal stress in Degree Heating Weeks
(DHW) over two decades averaged over the Caribbean basin (0.5 map
pixels containing coral reefs, bounded by 35 N, 55 W, and the coast of
the Americas). Severe regional mass bleaching events occurred in
1995, 1998, and 2005 (Source: Eakin et al. 2010)

from other environmental stressors such as cold temperatures
(Lirman et al. 2011) or low salinity runoff events (Haapkylä
et al. 2013). Coral bleaching, the breakdown of symbiosis
between the coral host and its zooxanthellae endosymbionts
resulting in lost energetic subsidy to the host, can occur
following a range of physiological stresses. Comprehensive
reviews of bleaching causes and consequences have been
provided by Brown (1997) and Baker et al. (2008). Mass
bleaching events can be predicted on the basis of cumulative
thermal stress measured as Degree Heating Weeks (DHW)
over the long term monthly maximum. Generally, coral
bleaching risk is considered to be elevated at doses above
4 DHW, i.e. 1  C for 4 weeks or 4  C for 1 week (Liu
et al. 2006). Recent trends in thermal stress dosage have
been increasing at large regional scales with considerable
variation at individual sites. Figure 11.2 shows annual maximum DHW averaged over the Caribbean region with larger
peaks evident over time corresponding to severe mass
bleaching events (Eakin et al. 2010). Similar increasing
regional trends in mean temperature or thermal stress dosage
have been documented in the Coral Triangle (Penaflor
et al. 2009), the Arabian Gulf (Riegl et al. 2011), and globally
(Lough 2000). Increasing temperature trends are expected to
continue with the frequency of mass bleaching disturbances
predicted to increase over the coming decades, possibly to
annual or nearly so (e.g., Donner et al. 2005) with dire
consequences for coral populations and coral reefs
(McClanahan et al. 2007; Hoegh-Guldberg 1999).
The first recognized global-scale mass bleaching events
were associated with El Niño warming events in 1982–1983
and 1997–1998. Additional basin-scale events were
documented in 2005 in the Atlantic/Caribbean (Eakin
et al. 2010) and 2010 throughout Southeast Asia and Arabian
Gulf regions (Riegl et al. 2011; Guest et al. 2012). Cumulative thermal stress events as well as corresponding bleaching

11

Coral Disturbance and Recovery in a Changing World

events in the Caribbean region appear to be intensifying over
time (Fig. 11.2; McWilliams et al. 2005).
Differential thermal bleaching susceptibilities among
taxa (Marshall and Baird 2000; McClanahan et al. 2007;
McField 1999) and among members within a species either
based on factors such as symbiont type, latitude or habitat
(Ulstrup et al. 2006), and prior thermal history (Guest
et al. 2012; Middlebrook et al. 2008; Thompson and Van
Woesik 2009) clearly influence the patterns of bleaching and
resultant mortality. Generally, colonies or taxa previously
exposed to moderately fluctuating or moderately extreme
temperatures appear to show greater thermal thresholds and
lesser severity of bleaching.
The direct mortality caused by bleaching is generally
poorly quantified, but represents the most severe aspect of
this disturbance. Meanwhile, bleaching itself represents disturbance as ‘damage’ (Box 11.1) which can manifest as
increased disease susceptibility (discussed below) or impaired
reproduction. Thermal stress and bleaching of parent colonies
have been shown to limit subsequent reproductive success,
primarily via reduced fecundity (Szmant and Gassman 1990;
Baird and Marshall 2002) and possibly reduced fertilization
(Omori et al. 2001). Baird and Marshall (2002) is one of the
few studies to quantify both mortality and reproductive
impacts by following the fate of bleached colonies of four
species after the 1998 bleaching event. Two Acropora species
(hyacinthus and millepora) showed greater whole colony
mortality than Porites lobata and Platygyra daedalea. These
two Acropora spp. also varied in their subsequent reproductive impairment with only 45 % of bleached A. hyacinthus
colonies gravid the following year, compared with 88 % for
A. millepora. Hence, bleaching susceptibility, associated mortality, and subsequent reproductive impairment are all known
to vary greatly among species.
Like physical disturbance, thermal stress and bleaching
are often associated with follow-on mortality from coral
disease. For example, bleached corals in the US Virgin
Islands suffered over 60 % mortality several months after
the 2005 bleaching event (Miller et al. 2009). Individual
bleached colonies also show greater likelihood of
manifesting disease mortality (Brandt and McManus 2009;
Muller et al. 2008). Ritchie (2006) describes a possible
mechanism for increased disease susceptibility of bleached
corals in that the usual antibiotic activity of mucusassociated microbes was found to be absent in mucus from
bleached colonies.

11.2.3 Acute Disease Outbreaks
The profound effect of acute diseases (those causing rapid
tissue mortality) on coral assemblages and coral reef
communities, especially in the Caribbean basin, in the past

221

three decades is difficult to overstate, yielding massive
changes in the overall makeup of coral communities. Beginning in the early-mid 1980s and with progressive extent and
effect through the next two decades (Sutherland et al. 2004)
disease has ravaged coral populations including the major
reef-builders, Acropora spp (Aronson and Precht 2001;
Gardner et al. 2003) and later Montastraea (now Orbicella)
spp. (Miller et al. 2009; Bruckner 2012). Impacts of disease
outbreaks in the Indo-Pacific region have been less severe,
but added scrutiny of coral disease phenomena throughout
the Indo-Pacific basin in recent years has revealed that coral
disease affects most regions at increasing prevalence and in
greater varieties with time (Raymundo et al. 2008). Coral
disease impacts have been reported even in the most remote
Pacific reefs (Williams et al. 2008b; Aeby 2005). Outbreaks
occur both in concert with other acute (discussed above) and
chronic disturbances such as nutrient or sewage pollution
(Kaczmarsky and Richardson 2011), but can also occur in
apparent isolation (Richardson et al. 1998; Nugues 2002;
Roff et al. 2011; Miller and Williams 2006; Williams
et al. 2008b).
The apparent disease-induced range-wide mass mortality
of grazing urchins, Diadema antillarum, also in the early
1980s, is the other disease event of profound importance in
the recent history of Caribbean reefs. The loss of grazing
capacity on most reefs was a major contributor to described
lack of recovery on these reefs (Fig. 11.1; Lessios 1988).

11.2.4 Acute Predator Outbreaks
The most influential predator on Indo-Pacific corals, the
crown-of-thorns seastar (COTS; Acanthaster planci)
undergoes dramatic population outbreaks which kill large
amounts of coral. COTS display strong and consistent
preferences among different coral prey, yielding highly
selective mortality of Acroporids and other tabular growth
forms in affected reefs with potentially strong effects on
coral community structure. COTS outbreaks are common,
regional scale acute disturbances across the Indo Pacific
region (Birkeland and Lucas 1990; De’ath and Moran
1998), though their relative influence may be underappreciated in regions with less rigorous monitoring (Baird
et al. 2013). Across Australia’s entire Great Barrier Reef, it
is estimated that COTS are responsible for an annual decline
of 1.43 % of total coral cover, second only to cyclone
mortality and over four times higher than mortality
attributed to bleaching (De’ath et al. 2012). Recent studies
provide strong evidence for the early hypothesis (Birkeland
1982) that local environmental factors, specifically nutrient
loads driving planktonic productivity fostering high larval
recruitment, are most responsible for outbreaks (Fabricius
et al. 2010; Brodie et al. 2005), as opposed to autogenous

222

genetic factors in ‘rogue’ populations which might lead them
to outbreak (Timmers et al. 2012). There is also some evidence that tropic cascades related to fishing may also
enhance COTS outbreaks (Sweatman 2008). These factors
point out the strong anthropogenic influence even in this
‘natural, biotic’ mechanism of acute disturbance.
While corallivores can be influential in some Caribbean
reefs, they do not seem to undergo the outbreak dynamics
associated with COTS or, to a lesser extent, Pacific
corallivorous gastropods, Drupella spp. (Turner 1994).
Outbreaks of Drupella snails have been reported to impose
up to 75 % coral mortality but such reports are rare relative
to COTS. Largely ecologically analogous corallivorous
snails in the Caribbean, Coralliophila abbreviata, can
impose substantial coral mortality, but acute predation
seems to be more related to coral population declines
(Knowlton et al. 1990), rather than corallivore population
increases. Fish can certainly also disturb corals, either by
predation or territorial activities (Chap. 10) but these are
generally of a chronic nature causing relatively small
amounts of mortality but potentially enhancing other
disturbances and causing some reproductive impairment
(e.g., Rotjan et al. 2006; Rotjan and Lewis 2009)

11.2.5 Chronic Disturbances
While certain sorts of chronic stressors may cause direct
mortality (e.g., severe sedimentation), most often, their disturbance effects are manifest as sub-lethal damage. From our
definition of disturbance (Box 11.1), this means that the
opportunity provided for other organisms may be indirect
(e.g., via lower production of offspring) or slower to manifest via delayed mortality. Such indirect effects of chronic
disturbance, particularly on reproduction and recruitment,
greatly influence the recovery side of our balance as
discussed in the next section.
It is also axiomatic that any acute disturbance can also be
experienced in background levels as a chronic effect. Wave
damage, predation, disease, and to some extent, bleaching
can all cause small scale disturbance/mortality which, due to
its ubiquitous patchiness over time and space, should recover
seamlessly. On the other hand, increasing frequencies of
acute disturbances, such as predicted annual occurrence for
thermal mass bleaching, may yield a dire situation of ‘constant acute’ disturbance, which perhaps should still be distinguished in effect from chronic disturbance.

11.2.5.1 Water Quality Decline
Anthropogenic, land-based inputs to the coastal ocean
broadly include sewage and runoff as the major routes of
introduction, but introduce a host of constituent stressors

M.W. Miller

including sediment, nutrients, pharmaceuticals, pesticides
and other toxicants, microbes, etc. Direct causal evidence
of coral mortality or damage is difficult to determine in open
ocean environments, but it is clear that this range of factors,
especially in combination, have a negative effect on corals
(Fabricius 2005). Evidence for combined interaction of poor
water quality (or a surrogate of nearby human population
density) with coral impairment and disease is increasing
(Haapkylä et al. 2011; Kline et al. 2006; Downs
et al. 2005; Aeby et al. 2011).
As Fabricius (2005) states ‘In most cases where terrestrial
runoff causes reef degradation, disturbances other than
eutrophication were the proximate causes of coral mortality,
and runoff effects only became obvious when hard corals
failed to reestablish after such disturbances’ (p. 134). Reproductive impairment, both via direct stress on the parent
colonies and on larvae themselves, may be the most influential effects of poor water quality (Richmond 1997).
Increased intensity of land use and coastal development in
many regions has clearly resulted in decreasing water quality
over time (McKergow et al. 2005), including the introduction of completely novel substances such as pharmaceuticals
(Richardson et al. 2005). Most sources of water quality
decline such as sewage, agriculture, and other land-use
changes are directly related to human population densities,
especially in coastal areas, but also inland. As such, these
chronic disturbances are expected to increase over time with
human population abundance and consumption levels. However, land-based pollution is also a factor that can be managed effectively and so has the potential to decline in wellmanaged localities.

11.2.5.2 Fishing and Trophic Disruption
A nigh-ubiquitous disturbance that affects coral reef
ecosystems is the trophic disruption that results from artificial removal of biomass by fishing. While corals are directly
removed in some locations, local protection and management are most often able to curb this direct disturbance and
so the effects of fishing on corals are largely indirect, and
hence, more difficult to quantify. For example areas where
grazers are intensively removed are more prone to ‘phase
shifts’ to persistent seaweed dominated reefs when acute
disturbances cause coral mortality (Jackson et al. 2001;
Hughes et al. 2007; Hughes 1994). Conversely, various
modeling studies have described how maintaining high
levels of grazing can mitigate other disturbances’ (e.g.,
hurricanes or bleaching mortality) effects on coral decline
(Edwards et al. 2010; Mumby et al. 2007). Similarly, some
evidence suggests that more diverse fish trophic webs in
no-take reserves can reduce the spread of coral diseases,
likely via reduced transmission by coral-feeding
butterflyfishes (Raymundo et al. 2009). The intensive, long

11

Coral Disturbance and Recovery in a Changing World

223

Fig. 11.3 Projected global
patterns of aragonite saturation
state (Ω) showing expected
progressive expansion and
intensity of chronic ocean
acidification disturbance
throughout tropical seas.
Simplistically, calcification
requires greater energetic
investment by corals under lower
levels of Ω (From HoeghGuldberg et al. (2007). Reprinted
with permission from AAAS)

standing, and ubiquitous changes in coral reef food webs
from overfishing have been posited to have wrought such
profound alterations of trophic structure that microbial and
organic carbon dynamics have been disrupted (Jackson
et al. 2001) which can also induce coral mortality and disease (Smith et al. 2006; Kline et al. 2006). Although manageable, fishing pressure is also likely to increase with
human population and is thus likely to grow in the foreseeable future.

11.2.5.3 Carbonate Chemistry Changes
Ocean acidification is the term used to describe the process
of absorption of excess CO2 from the atmosphere into the
ocean yielding alterations in the carbonate chemistry equilibrium of ocean waters. The resulting reduced pH and
saturation levels of aragonite (the carbonate mineral form
of which scleractinians build their skeletons) are expected to
impair coral calcification (Cohen and Holcomb 2009), possibly their resistance to physical disturbance (Chap. 4), and
their reproduction (though likely via indirect mechanisms
such as increased fertilization limitation (Albright
et al. 2010), altered settlement cues (Doropoulos
et al. 2012), and slowed post-settlement growth rates
(De Putron et al. 2010; Suwa et al. 2010; Nakamura
et al. 2011). Modelling projections (illustrated in Fig. 11.3)

clearly show the anticipated increase in severity and geographic extent of this stressor over the remainder of the
twenty-first century.

11.2.6 Ecosystem Effects of Disturbance
The dramatic disturbance-induced coral declines of recent
decades beg the question of how coral reef ecosystems are
affected. Certain obligate corallivores or coral-dwellers
(Stella et al. 2011) clearly suffer when coral is disturbed.
Live coral cover, itself, does significantly enhance reef fish
communities (Coker et al. 2012), though the loss of physical
structure probably has more profound effects and the maintenance of the skeletal structures of even dead coral contribute greatly to habitat value and ecosystem function of reef
habitats (Graham et al. 2006; Wilson et al. 2006). Indeed, the
more novel sources of disturbance mortality (bleaching and
disease) largely leave skeletal structures in place. However,
without living coral to maintain/replace this structure, erosive forces will inevitably whittle it away (Chap. 4). Graham
et al. (2008) in a meta-analysis of reef change across nine
regions of the Indian Ocean showed a strong correlation of
coral cover loss (the primary driver being the 1998 mass
bleaching) and loss of structural complexity within 7 years

224

M.W. Miller

of the acute disturbance. Large scale meta-analyses for
Caribbean reefs indicate a long term decline in the architectural complexity of Caribbean reefs (Alvarez-Filip
et al. 2009) and simultaneous declines in fish communities
that appear to be better explained by habitat degradation than
direct fishing pressure per se (Paddack et al. 2009). Combined with poorer cementation/accretion and reduced coral
growth rates under declining carbonate saturation
environments and potentially increased dissolution and
bioerosion rates due to acidification (Andersson and Gledhill
2013), the structural degradation of coral reefs and hence
degradation of carrying capacity for associated species is
likely to accelerate under increasing CO2 futures.

11.3

Recovery Processes

Recovery of reef ecosystems in the modern ecological literature has substantial overlap with the term ‘reef resilience’,
the speed or effectiveness with which a given reef returns to
a pre-disturbance state. There is broad consensus that fundamental ecological processes such as grazing, or other complex interactions affecting coral recruitment and growth are
the primary determinants of reef resilience. In the past few
decades, the literature is replete with examples of lack of
recovery, particularly on Caribbean but also Indo-Pacific
reefs. As early as 1997, a synthesis of reef recovery studies
indicated a more or less complete lack of recovery on disturbed West Atlantic reefs (Connell 1997). In addition to the
intensifying cycles of disturbance described above, the proliferation of macroalgae and lack of coral recruitment, particularly for reef-building species, are associated with poor
recovery. The fact of coral reef degradation throughout most
all regions of the world implies that the processes of coral
recovery lag the combined effects of disturbances. The previous section described many types of disturbance effects,
many of which are understood to be increasing individually,
and are most certainly increasing in combination. Whereas
acute disturbances often occur very rapidly (e.g., days to
weeks), are obvious, and relatively easy to quantify, the
processes whereby corals recover are slow (e.g., decades)
and important stages (e.g., coral larvae and post-settlers) are
difficult or impossible to observe directly. This means that
our general understanding of recovery processes and potential trends are much more poorly understood.
Graham et al. (2011) review ecological studies of reef
recovery from the 1960s to 2009, analyzing five categories
of predictors for reef recovery (in this case, measured as
coral cover); disturbance characteristics, reef characteristics,
reef connectivity, ecological characteristics and anthropogenic influences. Interestingly, they document an exponential increase in the number of published recovery studies in
the latest decade as well as in the diversity of instigating
acute disturbance types. Their analyses of reef studies with

positive recovery trajectories indicate that geographic region
(lowest in the Eastern Pacific, followed by the Caribbean),
management status of the reef (lowest in fully protected
MPAs, possibly an artifact of prior reef condition rather
than an effect of management itself), and the postdisturbance coral cover (faster recovery from 6 % to 10 %
cover than <5 % or >10 %) were the important factors in
influencing rate of coral recovery, which had an overall
mean of 3.56 % per year (95 % CI ¼ 2.89–4.43). The type
of disturbance and the physiographic reef type or zone had
limited influence on recovery rate, as did the adjacent human
population density. These characteristics are derived from a
subset of resilient reefs, however, and it would likely be
instructive to perform a similar analysis comparing similar
characteristics with instances where reefs failed to recover
over similar time scales. Indeed, Ateweberhan et al. (2013)
contrast recovery of coral cover after the 1998 bleaching
event between the remote, nearly pristine Chagos archipelago (less than a decade) and the Seychelles with higher
human disturbance (minimal recovery observed over
~15 years) despite similar latitude, pre-disturbance coral
cover, and disturbance related declines.
The importance of biogeographic variation in reef recovery processes is highlighted by Roff and Mumby (2012) who
discuss evidence and a range of explanatory hypotheses for
the apparent lesser recovery potential of Caribbean versus
Indo-Pacific reefs. The semi-enclosed Caribbean basin has
experienced more intensive human occupation and influence, including intensive fisheries extraction disrupting trophic structure over centuries (Wing and Wing 2001; Jackson
1997). However, the lower Caribbean species diversity in
guilds of both fast growing corals and reef herbivores yields
a lower functional redundancy. Hence, the sequence of acute
disturbances in the Caribbean which have rendered both
fast-growing acroporid corals and the important grazing
urchins functionally extinct in this region, has yielded a
basic loss in the recovery capacity of these reefs. Roff and
Mumby (2012) also compile evidence from a range of studies showing a dramatically higher rate of seaweed recruitment and productivity under experimental conditions of
reduced grazing in the Caribbean versus Indo-Pacific.
Despite this inherent robustness of Indo-Pacific reef resilience, the repeated patterns of coral decline across
subregions (Bruno and Selig 2007; De’ath et al. 2012;
Riegl et al. 2012) point to at least a similar trend of increasing imbalance with the pace of recovery lagging the pace of
cumulative disturbance.
Of course conclusions about the progress or trends in
coral recovery will depend also on the currency one uses.
While the most data are available on percent cover,
recovering population structure of long-lived organisms
will necessarily take a very long time (see Fig. 11.1). More
importantly, there are numerous examples that occasions of
apparent rapid recovery of coral cover to a pre-disturbance

11

Coral Disturbance and Recovery in a Changing World

225

level may mask fundamental changes in species composition, with sensitive species (often Acropora spp.) being
largely replaced by more tolerant ones (Berumen and
Pratchett 2006; Burt et al. 2008; Hughes and Connell 1999).

11.4

Coral Replenishment

The most basic processes of coral recovery involve the
recruitment of new propagules and the re-growth of remnant
tissue left from partial mortality on colonies. If the pattern
and scale of disturbance allows for this latter mechanism to
be effective, recovery can indeed be very rapid (one to a few
years) (Diaz-Pulido et al. 2009) or greatly accelerated
(Gilmour et al. 2013). The intensity and scale of many reef
disturbances dictates that recovery will depend on the influx
of new population members, likely larval recruits,
highlighting the importance and influence of larval supply
from upstream populations. Many, if not most, disturbances
also have direct effects on coral reproduction and recruitment success, further impairing coral recovery and widening
the potential imbalance in disturbance and recovery processes in coral reef systems. Climate change-related
disturbances likely affect coral replenishment by impairing
coral larval production (fecundity and fertilization), dispersal, settlement success and juvenile growth (summarized
in Birkeland et al. 2013). Early life phases of corals commonly show direct susceptibility to warm temperature stress
including reduced fertilization for some species, developmental abnormalities and reduced larval survivorship, and
reduced settlement success (Randall and Szmant 2009;
Polato et al. 2010; Negri and Hoogenboom 2011; Negri
et al. 2007). Trophic disturbance of reef systems (via fish
extraction or mass mortality events) generally impedes coral
replenishment by degradation of settlement habitat, especially via proliferation of benthic macroalgae (Kuffner
et al. 2006; Birrell et al. 2008). Disturbance from water
quality degradation and sedimentation can impede coral
replenishment both via larval supply (fecundity, larval survivorship), and via degradation of settlement habitat
(Fabricius 2005; Birrell et al. 2005).
At some scales, both chronic and acute disturbances
inherently impair coral replenishment by reducing the production of propagules via both mortality and physiological
stress (described in the disturbance sections above and
illustrated in Fig. 11.4). Evidence for stock-recruitment
relationships in coral populations is often obscured by multiple stressors and the potentially wide scale of dispersal. However, a positive stock-recruitment relationship of acroporid
corals driven largely by fecundity, rather than abundance, was
shown across broad scales of the Great Barrier Reef in the late
1990s (Hughes et al. 2000). Because corals are sessile, mass
mortalities from acute disturbances likely increase

Fig. 11.4 Hypothesized feedback of disturbance cycles leading to
coral decline. Acute disturbance primarily kills living coral with lesser
impacts by reducing coral replenishment whereas chronic disturbances’
primary influence is by reducing coral recovery

fertilization limitation by decreasing adult colony density
(Birkeland et al. 2013). Chronic disturbances such as trophic
disruption, declining water quality, ocean acidification, and
rising mean temperatures also exert physiological stress and
impair reproductive success across a range of early life stages.
Such feedbacks are influential in instances of lack of coral
recovery and suggest a reinforcing downward spiral in coral
status (Fig. 11.4).
There is ample empirical evidence of reduced coral recruitment or juvenile success in chronically disturbed sites (e.g.,
Salinas-de-Leon et al. 2013; Wittenberg and Hunte 1992).
There is also evidence of a temporal trend (generally decadal)
of recruitment failure and/or declining success of juvenile
corals (Guzner et al. 2012; Edmunds 2007; Vermeij
et al. 2011; Hughes and Tanner 2000). While the cause of
such declines is no doubt multifaceted, it bodes poorly for
coral recovery in a regime of increasing disturbances. However, there are also many cases, including some exceptional
cases in the Caribbean region, where effective coral recovery
from disturbance has been documented (Manfrino et al. 2013;
Graham et al. 2011). Low levels of local human influence are
often cited to account for recent examples of rapid coral
recovery (Manfrino et al. 2013; Ateweberhan et al. 2013;
Gilmour et al. 2013).

11.5

Implications

From the realization that coral disturbance regimes are worsening while recovery capacities are waning, it follows that
management strategies might beneficially focus on both of

226

M.W. Miller

Fig. 11.5 Example of multiple
acute and chronic disturbances at
the colony scale. This bleached
colony of Orbicella faveolata
also displays (a) recent partial
mortality from active disease, (b)
old, unrecovered partial mortality
from a prior unknown source, and
(c) active macroalgal
encroachment along colony
margin. A normally pigmented
coral of a hardier species, Porites
astreoides (d) is visible in the
background for reference (Photo
by M. Miller)

these processes. The management strategy coined ‘reef resilience’ stresses this point. The recognition of complex
interactions of disturbances and other factors that impair
recovery invokes a need for management focus on both
reducing local disturbances and managing for conditions
that may enhance recruitment and recovery of corals. For
example, land use and watershed management to reduce
nutrient and/or toxicant loading can bolster organismal tolerance and increase thermal thresholds which apply to both
bleaching disturbances (Wooldridge and Done 2009; Carilli
et al. 2010) and coral larval success (Negri and Hoogenboom
2011). Other examples of management strategies to enhance
replenishment most commonly include management actions
to maintain herbivory as a necessary factor for coral recruitment as well as designing reserve networks to enhance
connectivity and larval supply (Hughes et al. 2005; Nystrom
et al. 2008; Mumby et al. 2012; McClanahan et al. 2012).
However, these ‘managing-for-resilience’ strategies are still
based on the premise that if local, anthropogenic disturbance
regimes (but see Box 11.2) are appropriately managed, the
recovery processes of coral communities are still capable of
maintaining coral reefs within a range of states that sustain
ecosystem services (i.e. corals are still resilient).
There is also a growing suspicion that resilience of coral
species and assemblages is truly being lost in the onslaught
of co-occurring disturbances of increasing frequency and
intensity (Figs. 11.4 and 11.5). Loss of resilience suggests
a need for more proactive measures to regain balance of
disturbance and recovery and maintain biodiversity and ecosystem services provided by coral reefs. Parallel with the
resilience strategies, proactive strategies can also be

categorized as those mitigating disturbance impacts and
those manipulating recovery. For example, interventions
to increase the tolerance of organisms via selection for
genes involved in increased environmental tolerance
(Lundgren et al. 2013) or active manipulation of microbial
(Teplitski and Ritchie 2009; Atad et al. 2012) or dinoflagellate symbionts (but see Coffroth et al. 2010) could
enhance resistance to disturbances such as warm
temperatures, pathogens, or toxicant exposure. Meanwhile
most other proactive strategies relate to more fundamental
manipulations of recovery and recruitment processes,
including culture/restocking and ‘gardening’ for depleted
populations of both corals and key grazers such as
Diadema antillarum (Rinkevich 2008; Office of National
Marine Sanctuaries 2011), or ‘assisted migration’
interventions to aid corals in the colonization of new
habitats such as thermal refugia at higher latitudes (Riegl
et al. 2011; Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2008). While such
strategies may seem far-fetched or radical at the current
time, the rate of environmental change dictates a prompt
research agenda to validate strategies that might be successful and ensure they can be implemented in ways that
minimize risk of unintended consequences when and if
coral reef status reaches a point that they seem prudent or
necessary, if no less radical.
Acknowledgements Sincere thanks to C Birkeland and BE Brown for
their input and guidance in shaping this contribution. Review and
comments by DE Williams fostered improvements in the manuscript
and are greatly appreciated. Opinions expressed are my own and do not
represent official positions of NOAA nor the Southeast Fisheries Science Center.

11

Coral Disturbance and Recovery in a Changing World

References
Aeby GS (2005) Outbreak of coral disease in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. Coral Reefs 24(3):481
Aeby GS, Williams GJ, Franklin EC, Haapkyla J, Harvell CD, Neale S,
Page CA, Raymundo L, Vargas-Ángel B, Willis BL, Work TM,
Davy SK (2011) Growth anomalies on the coral genera Acropora
and Porites are strongly associated with host density and human
population size across the Indo-Pacific. PLoS One 6(2), e16887.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016887
Albright RA, Mason B, Miller M, Langdon C (2010) Ocean acidification compromises recruitment success of the threatened Caribbean
coral, Acropora palmata. Proc Natl Acad Sci 107:20400–20404.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1007273107
Alvarez-Filip L, Dulvy NKJA, Gill JA, Côte IM, Watkinson AR
(2009) Flattening of Caribbean coral reefs: region-wide declines
in architectural complexity. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 276:3019–3025
Andersson AJ, Gledhill D (2013) Ocean acidification and coral reefs:
effects on breakdown, dissolution, and net ecosystem calcification.
Ann Rev Mar Sci 5:321–348
Aronson RB, Precht WF (2001) White-band disease and the changing
face of Caribbean coral reefs. Hydrobiologia 460(1–3):25–38
Atad I, Zvuloni A, Loya Y, Rosenberg E (2012) Phage therapy of the
white plague-like disease of Favia favus in the Red Sea. Coral Reefs
31:665–670
Ateweberhan M, Feary DA, Keshavmurthy S, Chen A, Schleyer MH,
Sheppard CR (2013) Climate change impacts on coral reefs:
synergies with local effects, possibilities for acclimation, and management implications. Mar Pollut Bull 74(2):526–539
Baird AH, Marshall PA (2002) Mortality, growth and reproduction in
scleractinian corals following bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef.
Mar Ecol Prog Ser 237:133–141
Baird AH, Pratchett MS, Hoey AS, Herdiana Y, Campbell SJ (2013)
Acanthaster planci is a major cause of coral mortality in Indonesia.
Coral Reefs 32(3):803–812. doi:10.1007/s00338-013-1025-1
Baker AC, Glynn PW, Riegl B (2008) Climate change and coral reef
bleaching: an ecological assessment of long-term impacts, recovery
trends and future outlook. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 80(4):435–471.
doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2008.09.003
Berumen ML, Pratchett MS (2006) Recovery without resilience: persistent disturbance and long-term shifts in the structure of fish and
coral communities at Tiahura Reef, Moorea. Coral Reefs 25
(4):647–653
Birkeland C (1982) Terrestrial runoff as a cause of outbreaks of
Acanthaster planci (Echinodermata: Asteroidea). Mar Biol
69:175–185
Birkeland C, Lucas JS (1990) Acanthaster planci: major management
problem of coral reefs. CRC Press, Boca Raton
Birkeland C, Miller M, Piniak G, Eakin C, Weijerman M, McElhany P,
Dunlap M, Brainard RE (2013) Safety in numbers? Abundance may
not safeguard corals from increasing carbon dioxide. BioScience
63:967–974
Birrell CR, McCook LJ, Willis BL (2005) Effects of algal turfs and
sediment on coral settlement. Mar Pollut Bull 51:408–415
Birrell CL, McCook LJ, Willis BL, Diaz-Pulido GA (2008) Effects of
benthic algae on the replenishment of corals and the implications
for the resilience of coral reefs. Oceanogr Mar Biol: Annu Rev
46:25–63
Brandt ME, McManus JW (2009) Disease incidence is related to
bleaching extent in reef-building corals. Ecology 90(10):2859–2867
Brandt ME, Smith TB, Correa AMS, Vega-Thurber R (2013) Disturbance induced coral fragmentation as a driver of a coral disease
outbreak. PLoS One 8(2), e57164

227
Bright AJ (2009) The effect of swell-generated physical damage on
disease prevalence and asexual reproduction in the coral, Acropora
palmata (Lamarck). University of the Virgin Islands, St. Thomas,
USVI
Brodie J, Fabricius K, De’ath G, Okaji K (2005) Are increased nutrient
inputs responsible for more outbreaks of crown-of-thorns starfish?
An appraisal of the evidence. Mar Pollut Bull 51(1):266–278
Brown BE (1997) Coral bleaching: causes and consequences. Coral
Reefs 16:S129–S138
Bruckner AW (2012) Factors contributing to the regional decline of
Montastraea annularis (complex). Proceedings of the 12th International Coral Reef Symposium 11B:9–13
Bruckner AW, Bruckner RJ (1997) Outbreak of coral disease in Puerto
Rico. Coral Reefs 16:260
Bruno JF, Selig ER (2007) Regional decline of coral cover in the IndoPacific: timing, extent, and subregional comparisons. PLoS One
2(8), e711
Burt J, Bartholomew A, Usseglio P (2008) Recovery of corals a decade
after a bleaching event in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Mar Biol
154(1):27–36
Carilli JE, Norris RD, Black BA, Walsh SM, McField M (2010)
Century-scale records of coral growth rates indicate that local
stressors reduce coral thermal tolerance threshold. Glob Chang
Biol 16:1247–1257
Coffroth MA, Poland DM, Petrou EL, Brazeau DA, Holmberg JC
(2010) Environmental symbiont acquisition may not be the solution
to warming seas for reef-building corals. PLoS One 5(10), e13258.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0013258
Cohen AL, Holcomb M (2009) Why corals care about ocean acidification: uncovering the mechanism. Oceanography 22:118–127
Coker DJ, Graham NAJ, Pratchett MS (2012) Interactive effects of live
coral and structural complexity on the recruitment of reef fishes.
Coral Reefs 31(4):919–927. doi:10.1007/s00338-012-0920-1
Connell JH (1978) Diversity in tropical rain forests and coral reefs.
Science 1999:1302–1310
Connell JH (1997) Disturbance and recovery of coral assemblages.
Coral Reefs 16:S101–S113
Connell JH, Hughes TP, Wallace CC (1997) A 30-year study of coral
abundance, recruitment, and disturbance at several scales in space
and time. Ecol Monogr 67(4):461–488
Dayton PK (1971) Competition, disturbance, and community organization: the provision and subsequent utilization of space in a rocky
intertidal community. Ecol Monogr 41(4):351–389
De Putron S, McCorkle D, Cohen A, Dillon A (2010) The impact of
seawater saturation state and bicarbonate ion concentration on calcification by new recruits of two Atlantic corals. Coral Reefs
30:321–328. doi:10.1007/s00338-010-0697-z
De’ath G, Moran PJ (1998) Factors affecting the behaviour of crownof-thorns starfish (Acanthaster planci L.) on the Great Barrier Reef:
2: feeding preferences. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 220(1):107–126
De’ath G, Fabricius KE, Sweatman H, Puotinen M (2012) The 27-year
decline of coral cover on the Great Barrier Reef and its causes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci 109(44):17995–17999. doi:10.1073/pnas.1208909109
Diaz-Pulido G, McCook LJ, Dove S, Berkelmans R, Roff G, Kline DI,
Weeks S, Evans RD, Williamson DH, Hoegh-Guldberg O (2009) Doom
and boom on a resilient reef: climate change, algal overgrowth and coral
recovery. PLoS One 4(4):9. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0005239
Donner SD, Skirving WJ, Little CM, Oppenheimer M, Hoegh Guldberg
O (2005) Global assessment of coral bleaching and required rates of
adaptation under climate change. Glob Chang Biol 11(12):2251–2265
Doropoulos C, Ward S, Diaz-Pulido G, Hoegh-Guldberg O, Mumby PJ
(2012) Ocean acidification reduces coral recruitment by disrupting
intimate larval-algal settlement interactions. Ecol Lett 15:338–346.
doi:10.1111/j.1461-0248.2012.01743.x

228
Downs C, Fauth J, Robinson C, Curry R, Lanzendorf B, Halas J,
Halas J, Woodley C (2005) Cellular diagnostics and coral health:
declining coral health in the Florida Keys. Mar Pollut Bull 51
(5-7):558–569
Eakin CM, Morgan JA, Heron SF, Smith TB, Liu G, Alvarez-Filip L,
Baca B, Bartels E, Bastidas C, Bouchon C, Brandt M, Bruckner
AW, Bunkley-Williams L, Cameron A, Causey BD, Chiappone M,
Christensen TRL, Crabbe MJC, Day O, de la Guardia E, Dı́azPulido G, DiResta D, Gil-Agudelo DL, Gilliam DS, Ginsburg RN,
Gore S, Guzmán HM, Hendee JC, Hernández-Delgado EA,
Husain E, Jeffrey CFG, Jones RJ, Jordán-Dahlgren E, Kaufman
LS, Kline DI, Kramer PA, Lang JC, Lirman D, Mallela J,
Manfrino C, Maréchal J-P, Marks K, Mihaly J, Miller WJ, Mueller
EM, Muller EM, Orozco Toro CA, Oxenford HA, Ponce-Taylor D,
Quinn N, Ritchie KB, Rodrı́guez S, Ramı́rez AR, Romano S,
Samhouri JF, Sánchez JA, Schmahl GP, Shank BV, Skirving WJ,
Steiner SCC, Villamizar E, Walsh SM, Walter C, Weil E, Williams
EH, Roberson KW, Yusuf Y (2010) Caribbean corals in crisis:
record thermal stress, bleaching, and mortality in 2005. PLoS One
5(11), e13969. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0013969
Edmunds PJ (2007) Evidence for a decadal-scale decline in the growth
rates of juvenile scleractinian corals. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 341:1–13
Edmunds PJ, Carpenter RC (2001) Recovery of Diadema antillarum
reduces macroalgal cover and increases abundance of juvenile
corals on a Caribbean reef. Proc Natl Acad Sci 98(9):5067–5071
Edwards HJ, Elliott IA, Eakin CM, Irikawa A, Madin JS, McField M,
Morgan JA, van Woesik R, Mumby PJ (2010) How much time can
herbivore protection buy for coral reefs under realistic regimes of
hurricanes and coral bleaching? Glob Chang Biol. doi:10.1111/j.
1365-2486.2010.02366.x
Emanuel K (2005) Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over
the past 30 years. Nature 436:686–688
Fabricius K (2005) Effects of terrestrial runoff on the ecology of corals
and coral reefs: review and synthesis. Mar Pollut Bull 50:125–146
Fabricius K, Okaji K, De’ath G (2010) Three lines of evidence to link
outbreaks of the crown-of-thorns seastar Acanthaster planci to the
release of larval food limitation. Coral Reefs 29(3):593–605
Foster NL, Baums IB, Sanchez JA, Paris CB, Chollett I, Agudelo CL,
Vermeij MJA, Mumby PJ (2013) Hurricane-driven patterns of
clonality in an ecosystem engineer: the Caribbean coral
Montastraea annularis. PLoS One 8(1), e53283. doi:10.1371/jour
nal.pone.0053283
Gardner TA, Cote IM, Gill JA, Grant A, Watkinson AR (2003) Longterm region-wide declines in Caribbean corals. Science
301:958–960
Gardner TA, Cote IM, Gill JA, Grant A, Watkinson AR (2005)
Hurricanes and Caribbean coral reefs: impacts, recovery patterns,
and role in long-term decline. Ecology 86(1):174–184
Gilmour JP, Smith LD, Heyward AJ, Baird AH, Pratchett MS (2013)
Recovery of an isolated coral reef system following severe disturbance. Science 340(6128):69–71
Graham NA, Wilson SK, Jennings S, Polunin NV, Bijoux JP, Robinson
J (2006) Dynamic fragility of oceanic coral reef ecosystems. Proc
Natl Acad Sci 103(22):8425–8429
Graham NAJ, McClanahan TR, MacNeil MA, Wilson SK, Polunin
NVC, Jennings S, Chabanet P, Clark S, Spalding MD,
Letourneur Y, Bigot L, Galzin R, Ohman MC, Garpe KC, Edwards
AJ, Sheppard CRC (2008) Climate warming, marine protected areas
and the ocean-scale integrity of coral reef ecosystems. PLoS One 3
(8):9. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0003039
Graham NAJ, Nash KL, Kool JT (2011) Coral reef recovery dynamics
in a changing world. Coral Reefs 30(2):283–294. doi:10.1007/
s00338-010-0717-z
Grinsted A, Moore JC, Jevrejeva S (2012) Homogeneous record of
Atlantic hurricane surge threat since 1923. Proc Natl Acad Sci
109:19601–19605. doi:10.1073/pnas.1209542109

M.W. Miller
Guest JR, Baird AH, Maynard JA, Muttaqin E, Edwards AJ, Campbell
SJ, Yewdall K, Affendi YA, Chou LM (2012) Contrasting patterns
of coral bleaching susceptibility in 2010 suggest an adaptive
response to thermal stress. PLoS One 7(3), e33353. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0033353
Guzner B, Novoplansky A, Chadwick N (2012) Population dynamics of
the reef-building coral Acropora hemprichii as an indicator of reef
condition. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 333:143–150
Haapkylä J, Unsworth RKF, Flavell M, Bourne DG, Schaffelke B,
Willis BL (2011) Seasonal rainfall and runoff promote coral disease
on an inshore reef. PLoS One 6(2), e16893. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0016893
Haapkylä J, Melbourne-Thomas J, Flavell M, Willis BL (2013) Disease
outbreaks, bleaching and a cyclone drive changes in coral
assemblages on an inshore reef of the Great Barrier Reef. Coral
Reefs 32(3):815–824. doi:10.1007/s00338-013-1029-x
Highsmith RC, Riggs AC, D’Antonio CM (1980) Survival of
hurricane-generated coral fragments and a disturbance model of
reef calcification/growth rates. Oecologia 46(3):322–329
Hoegh-Guldberg O (1999) Climate change, coral bleaching and the
future of the world’s coral reefs. Mar Freshw Res 50(8):839–866
Hoegh-Guldberg O, Mumby PJ, Hooten AJ, Steneck RS, Greenfield P,
Gomez E, Harvell CD, Sale PF, Edwards AJ, Caldeira K,
Knowlton N, Eakin CM, Iglesias-Prieto R, Muthiga N, Bradbury
RH, Dubi A, Hatziolos ME (2007) Coral reefs under rapid climate
change and ocean acidification. Science 318:1737–1742
Hoegh-Guldberg O, Hughes L, McIntyre S, Lindenmayer DB,
Parmesan C, Possingham HP, Thomas CD (2008) Assisted colonization and rapid climate change. Science 321(5887):345–346.
doi:10.1126/science.1157897
Hughes TP (1994) Catastrophes, phase shifts, and large-scale degradation of a Caribbean coral reef. Science 265(5178):1547–1551
Hughes TP, Connell JH (1999) Multiple stressors on coral reefs: a longterm perspective. Limnol Oceanogr 44(3):932–940
Hughes TP, Tanner JE (2000) Recruitment failure, life histories, and
long-term decline of Caribbean corals. Ecology 81(8):2250–2263
Hughes TP, Baird AH, Dinsdale EA, Motschaniwskyj NA, Pratchett
MS, Tanner JE, Willis BL (2000) Supply-side ecology works both
ways: the link between benthic adults, fecundity, and larval recruits.
Ecology 81(8):2241–2249
Hughes TP, Bellwood DR, Folke C, Steneck RS, Wilson J (2005) New
paradigms for supporting the resilience of marine ecosystems.
Trends Ecol Evol 20(7):380–386
Hughes TP, Rodrigues MJ, Bellwood DR, Ceccarelli D, HoeghGuldberg O, McCook L, Moltschaniwskyj N, Pratchett MS, Steneck
RS, Willis B (2007) Phase shifts, herbivory, and the resilience of
coral reefs to climate change. Curr Biol 17(4):360–365. doi:10.
1016/j.cub.2006.12.049
Hughes TP, Linares C, Dakos V, van de Leemput IA, van Nes EH
(2012) Living dangerously on borrowed time during slow, unrecognized regime shifts. Trends Ecol Evol 28:149–155
Hunter CL (1993) Genotypic variation and clonal structure in coral
populations with different disturbance histories. Evolution
47:1213–1228
Jackson JBC (1997) Reefs since Columbus. Coral Reefs 16:S23–S32
Jackson JBC, Kirby MX, Berger WH, Bjorndal KA, Botsford LW,
Bourque BJ, Bradbury RH, Cooke R, Erlandson J, Estes JA, Hughes
TP, Kidwell S, Lange CB, Lenihan HS, Pandolfi JM, Peterson CH,
Steneck RS, Tegner MJ, Warner RR (2001) Historical overfishing and
the recent collapse of coastal ecosystems. Science 293(5530):629–638
Kaczmarsky L, Richardson L (2011) Do elevated nutrients and organic
carbon on Philippine reefs increase the prevalence of coral disease?
Coral Reefs 30(1):253–257
Kline DI, Kuntz NM, Breitbart M, Knowlton N, Rohwer F (2006) Role
of elevated organic carbon levels and microbial activity in coral
mortality. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 314:119–125

11

Coral Disturbance and Recovery in a Changing World

Knowlton N, Lang JC, Rooney MC, Clifford P (1981) Evidence for
delayed mortality in hurricane-damaged Jamaican staghorn corals.
Nature 294(5838):251–252
Knowlton N, Lang JC, Keller BD (1990) Case study of natural population collapse: post-hurricane predation on Jamaican staghorn corals.
Smithson Contrib Mar Sci 31:1–25
Kuffner IB, Walters LJ, Becerro MA, Paul VJ, Ritson-Williams R,
Beach KS (2006) Inhibition of coral recruitment by macroalgae
and cyanobacteria. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 323:107–117
Lessios HA (1988) Mass mortality of Diadema antillarum in the
Caribbean: what have we learned? Annu Rev Ecol Syst 19:371–393
Lirman D, Schopmeyer S, Manzello D, Gramer LJ, Precht WF, MullerKarger F, Banks K, Barnes B, Bartels E, Bourque A, Byrne J,
Donahue S, Duquesnel J, Fisher L, Gilliam D, Hendee J,
Johnson M, Maxwell K, McDevitt E, Monty J, Rueda D,
Ruzicka R, Thanner S (2011) Severe 2010 cold-water event caused
unprecedented mortality to corals of the Florida Reef Tract and
reversed previous survivorship patterns. PLoS One 6(8), e23047.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0023047
Liu G, Strong AE, Skirving WJ, Arzayus LF (2006) Overview of
NOAA Coral Reef Watch Program’s near-real-time satellite global
coral bleaching monitoring activities. Proceedings of the 10th International Coral Reef Symposium Okinawa:1783–1793
Lopez-Victoria M, Zea S (2004) Storm-mediated coral colonization by
an excavating Caribbean sponge. Climate Res 26(3):251–256
Lough JM (2000) 1997–98: unprecedented thermal stress to coral
reefs? Geophys Res Lett 27(23):3901–3904. doi:10.1029/
2000gl011715
Lundgren P, Vera J, Peplow L, Manel S, van oppen M (2013) Genotype
– environment correlations in corals from the Great Barrier Reef.
BMC Genet 14:9
Manfrino C, Jacoby CA, Camp E, Frazer TK (2013) A positive trajectory for corals at Little Cayman Island. PLoS One 8(10), e75432.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0075432
Marshall PA, Baird AH (2000) Bleaching of corals on the Great Barrier
Reef: differential susceptibilities among taxa. Coral Reefs 19
(2):155–163
McClanahan TR, Ateweberhan M, Graham NAJ, Wilson SK, Sebastian
CR, Guillaume MMM, Bruggemann JH (2007) Western Indian
Ocean coral communities: bleaching responses and susceptibility
to extinction. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 337:1–13
McClanahan TR, Donner SD, Maynard JA, MacNeil MA, Graham NA,
Maina J, Baker AC, Beger M, Campbell SJ, Darling ES (2012)
Prioritizing key resilience indicators to support coral reef management in a changing climate. PLoS One 7(8), e42884
McField MD (1999) Coral response during and after mass bleaching in
Belize. Bull Mar Sci 64(1):155–172
McKergow LA, Prosser IP, Hughes AO, Brodie J (2005) Sources of
sediment to the Great Barrier Reef world heritage area. Mar Pollut
Bull 51(1):200–211
McWilliams JP, Cote IM, Gill JA, Sutherland WJ, Watkinson AR
(2005) Accelerating impacts of temperature-induced coral
bleaching in the Caribbean. Ecology 86(8):2055–2060
Middlebrook R, Hoegh-Guldberg O, Leggat W (2008) The effect of
thermal history on the susceptibility of reef-building corals to thermal stress. J Exp Biol 211(7):1050–1056. doi:10.1242/jeb.013284
Miller MW, Williams DE (2006) Coral disease outbreak at Navassa, a
remote Caribbean island. Coral Reefs 26:97–101
Miller J, Muller E, Rogers C, Waara R, Atkinson A, Whelan KRT,
Patterson M, Witcher B (2009) Coral disease following massive
bleaching in 2005 causes 60 % decline in coral cover on reefs in the
US Virgin Islands. Coral Reefs 28:925–937
Muller EM, Rogers CS, Spitzack AS, van Woesik R (2008) Bleaching
increases likelihood of disease on Acropora palmata (Lamarck) in
Hawksnest Bay, St John, US Virgin Islands. Coral Reefs 27:191–195

229
Mumby PJ, Hastings A, Edwards HJ (2007) Thresholds and the resilience of Caribbean coral reefs. Nature 450(7166):98–101. doi:10.
1038/nature06252
Mumby PJ, Vitolo R, Stephenson DB (2011) Temporal clustering of
tropical cyclones and its ecosystem impacts. Proc Natl Acad Sci 108
(43):17626–17630
Mumby PJ, Bejarano S, Golbuu Y, Steneck RS, Arnold SN, van
Woesik R, Friedlander AM (2012) Empirical relationships among
resilience indicators on Micronesian reefs. Coral Reefs:1–14.
doi:10.1007/s00338-012-0966-0
Nakamura M, Ohki S, Suzuki A, Sakai K (2011) Coral larvae under
ocean acidification: survival, metabolism, and metamorphosis.
PLoS One 6(1), e14521. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0014521
Negri AP, Hoogenboom MO (2011) Water contamination reduces the
tolerance of coral larvae to thermal stress. PLoS One 6(5):e19703.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0019703
Negri AP, Marshall PA, Heyward AJ (2007) Differing effects of thermal stress on coral fertilization and early embryogenesis in four
Indo Pacific species. Coral Reefs 26(4):759–763. doi:10.1007/
s00338-007-0258-2
Nugues MM (2002) Impact of a coral disease outbreak on coral
communities in St. Lucia: what and how much has been lost? Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 229:61–71
Nystrom M, Graham NAJ, Lokrantz J, Norstrom AV (2008) Capturing
the cornerstones of coral reef resilience: linking theory to practice.
Coral Reefs 27(4):795–809. doi:10.1007/s00338-008-0426-z
Office of National Marine Sanctuaries (2011) Florida Keys National
Marine Sanctuary Condition Report 2011. U.S. Department of
Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
Office of National Marine Sanctuaries, Silver Spring, MD, 105 pp
Omori M, Fukami H, Kobinata H, Hatta M (2001) Significant drop of
fertilization of Acropora corals in 1999: an after-effect of heavy
coral bleaching? Limnol Oceanogr 46(3):704–706
Paddack MJ, Reynolds JD, Aguilar C, Appeldoorn RS, Beets J,
Burkett E, Chittaro PM, Clarke K, Esteves R, Fonseca AC, Forrester
GE, Friedlander AM, Garcı́a-Sais J, González-Sans
on G, Jordan
LKB, McClellan DB, Miller MW, Molloy PP, Mumby PJ,
Nagelkerken I, Nemeth M, Navas-Camacho R, Pitt J, Polunin
NVC, Reyes-Nivia MC, Robertson DR, Rodrı́guez-Ramı́rez A,
Salas E, Smith SR, Spieler RE, Steele MA, Williams ID, Wormald
CL, Watkinson AR, Côté IM (2009) Recent region-wide declines in
Caribbean reef fish abundance. Curr Biol 19:590–595
Penaflor EL, Skirving WJ, Strong AE, Heron SF, David LT (2009)
Sea-surface temperature and thermal stress in the Coral Triangle
over the past two decades. Coral Reefs 28(4):841–850. doi:10.1007/
s00338-009-0522-8
Polato N, Voolstra CR, Schnetzer J, DeSalvo MK, Randall CJ, Szmant
AM, Medina M, Baums IB (2010) Location-specific responses to
thermal stress in larvae of the reef-building coral Montastraea
faveolata. PLoS One 5, e11221
Randall C, Szmant A (2009) Elevated temperature affects development, survivorship, and settlement of the elkhorn coral, Acropora
palmata (Lamarck 1816). Biol Bull 217:269–282
Raymundo L, Couch C, Harvell CD (eds) (2008) Coral disease handbook: guidelines for assessment, monitoring & management. Coral
Reef Targeted Research & Capacity Building for Management,
St. Lucia. www.gefcoral.org
Raymundo LJ, Halford AR, Maypa AP, Kerr AM (2009) Functionally
diverse reef-fish communities ameliorate coral disease. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 106:17067–17070
Richardson LL, Goldberg WM, Kuta KG, Aronson RB, Smith GW,
Ritchie KB, Halas JC, Feingold JS, Miller SL (1998) Florida’s
mystery coral-killer identified. Nature 392(6676):557–558
Richardson BJ, Lam PK, Martin M (2005) Emerging chemicals of
concern: pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) in

230
Asia, with particular reference to Southern China. Mar Pollut Bull
50(9):913–920
Richmond RH (1997) Reproduction and recruitment in corals: critical
links in the persistence of reefs. In: Birkeland C (ed) Life and death
of coral reefs. Chapman & Hall, New York, pp 175–197
Riegl BM, Purkis SJ, Al-Cibahy AS, Abdel-Moati MA, HoeghGuldberg O (2011) Present limits to heat-adaptability in corals
and population-level responses to climate extremes. PLoS One 6
(9), e24802. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0024802
Riegl BM, Bruckner AW, Rowlands GP, Purkis SJ, Renaud P (2012)
Red Sea coral reef trajectories over two decades suggest increasing
community homogenization and decline in coral size. PLoS One 7
(5), e38396. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0038396
Rinkevich B (2008) Management of coral reefs: we have gone wrong
when neglecting active reef restoration. Mar Pollut Bull 56:1821–1824
Ritchie KB (2006) Regulation of microbial populations by coral surface
mucus and mucus-associated bacteria. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 322:1–14
Ritson-Williams R, Arnold SN, Fogarty ND, Steneck RS, Vermeij MJA,
Paul VJ (2009) New perspectives on ecological mechanisms affecting coral recruitment on reefs. Smithson Contrib Mar Sci 38:437–457
Roff G, Mumby PJ (2012) Global disparity in the resilience of coral
reefs. Trends Ecol Evol 27(7):404–413
Roff G, Kvennefors ECE, Fine M, Ortiz J, Davy JE, Hoegh-Guldberg O
(2011) The ecology of ‘Acroporid White Syndrome’, a coral disease
from the southern Great Barrier Reef. PLoS One 6(12), e26829.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0026829
Rotjan RD, Lewis SM (2009) Predators selectively graze reproductive
structures in a clonal marine organism. Mar Biol 156(4):569–577
Rotjan RD, Dimond JL, Thornhill DJ, Leichter JJ, Helmuth B, Kemp
DW, Lewis SM (2006) Chronic parrotfish grazing impedes coral
recovery after bleaching. Coral Reefs 25(3):361–368. doi:10.1007/
s00338-006-0120-y
Salinas-de-Leon P, Dryden C, Smith D, Bell J (2013) Temporal and
spatial variability in coral recruitment on two Indonesian coral
reefs: consistently lower recruitment to a degraded reef. Mar Biol
160(1):97–105
Smith JE, Shaw M, Edwards RA, Obura D, Pantos O, Sala E, Sandin
SA, Smriga S, Hatay M, Rohwer FL (2006) Indirect effects of algae
on coral: algae-mediated, microbe-induced coral mortality. Ecol
Lett 9:835–845
Sousa WP (1984) The role of disturbance in natural communities. Annu
Rev Ecol Syst 15:353–391
Stella JS, Munday PL, Jones GP (2011) Effects of coral bleaching on
the obligate coral-dwelling crab Trapezia cymodoce. Coral Reefs 30
(3):719–727. doi:10.1007/s00338-011-0748-0
Stoddart DR (1963) Effects of Hurricane Hattie on the British Honduras
Reefs and Cays, October 30–31, 1961. Atoll Res Bull 95:1–142
Sutherland JP, Karlson RH (1977) Development and stability of the
fouling community at Beaufort, North Carolina. Ecol Monogr
47:425–446
Sutherland KP, Porter JW, Torres C (2004) Disease and immunity in
Caribbean and Indo-Pacific zooxanthellate corals. Mar Ecol Prog
Ser 266:273–302

M.W. Miller
Suwa R, Nakamura M, Morita M, Shimada K, Iguchi A, Sakai K,
Suzuki A (2010) Effects of acidified seawater on early life
stages of scleractinian corals (Genus Acropora). Fish Sci
76(1):93–99
Sweatman H (2008) No-take reserves protect coral reefs from predatory
starfish. Curr Biol 18(14):R598–R599. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2008.05.
033
Szmant A, Gassman N (1990) The effects of prolonged “bleaching” on
the tissue biomass and reproduction of the reef coral Montastraea
annularis. Coral Reefs 8(4):217–224
Teplitski M, Ritchie K (2009) How feasible is the biological control of
coral diseases? Trends Ecol Evol 24:378–385
Thompson D, Van Woesik R (2009) Corals escape bleaching in regions
that recently and historically experienced frequent thermal stress.
Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 276(1669):2893–2901
Timmers MA, Bird CE, Skillings DJ, Smouse PE, Toonen RJ (2012)
There’s no place like home: Crown-of-Thorns outbreaks in the
central Pacific are regionally derived and independent events.
PLoS One 7(2), e31159. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031159
Turner SJ (1994) The biology and population outbreaks of the
corallivorous gastropod Drupella on Indo-Pacific reefs. Oceanogr
Mar Biol Annu Rev 32:461–530
Ulstrup KE, Berkelmans R, Ralph PJ, van Oppen MJH (2006) Variation
in bleaching sensitivity of two coral species across a latitudinal
gradient on the Great Barrier Reef: the role of zooxanthellae. Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 314:135–148
Vermeij MJ, Bakker J, Nvd H, Bak RP (2011) Juvenile coral abundance
has decreased by more than 50 % in only three decades on a small
Caribbean island. Diversity 3(3):296–307
Wakeford M, Done TJ, Johnson CR (2008) Decadal trends in a coral
community and evidence of changed disturbance regime. Coral
Reefs 27:1–13
Webster PJ, Holland GJ, Curry JA, Chang H-R (2005) Changes in
tropical cyclone number, duration, and intensity in a warming
environment. Science 309:1844–1846
Williams DE, Miller MW, Kramer KL (2008a) Recruitment failure in
Florida Keys Acropora palmata, a threatened Caribbean coral.
Coral Reefs 27:697–705
Williams GJ, Aeby GS, Davy SK (2008b) Coral disease at Palmyra
Atoll, a remote reef system in the Central Pacific. Coral Reefs 27
(1):207–207. doi:10.1007/s00338-007-0314-y
Wilson SK, Graham NA, Pratchett MS, Jones GP, Polunin NV
(2006) Multiple disturbances and the global degradation of coral
reefs: are reef fishes at risk or resilient? Glob Chang Biol
12(11):2220–2234
Wing SR, Wing ES (2001) Prehistoric fisheries in the Caribbean. Coral
Reefs 20(1):1–8
Wittenberg M, Hunte W (1992) Effects of eutrophication and sedimentation on juvenile corals. 1. Abundance, mortality and community
structure. Mar Biol 116(1):131–138
Wooldridge SA, Done TJ (2009) Improved water quality can
ameliorate effects of climate change on corals. Ecol Appl
19(6):1492–1499

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks
and Constraints of Life-History Traits

12

Charles Birkeland

Abstract

The geologic record suggests a diverse array of reef-building corals will survive increasing
CO2, but the relative prevalence of different types will shift and the reefs will become
degraded and eroded. Although many corals may not go extinct, if pH decreases effectively, reef ecosystem services will deteriorate because bioerosion will accelerate and, for
some coral species, net skeletal construction will require more energy when the aragonite
saturation state decreases. A similar pattern of many genera of reef-building scleractinian
corals surviving, but with relatively little reef accretion, was seen through the roughly
140 million years from the Late Jurassic to the late Paleogene when the calcite seas (Mg/Ca
mole ratio <2) and pH <7.8 were unfavorable for aragonitic reef accretion. The geologic
record suggests that the corals most vulnerable to extinction were the fast-growing
branching species because the traits that provide fast growth have tradeoffs with traits
that provide tolerance of stressful environments. Iteroparous animals such as corals are
adapted for survival under stressful conditions at the expense of fecundity. Surveys have
recorded widespread decreases in living coral cover, but the less visible decrease in
fecundity from stress may be more insidious to population recovery. Reduced fecundity
and less dense population distribution can act synergistically to produce Allee effects in
sessile animals such as corals. Natural coral-reef ecosystems give the appearance of
inverted trophic pyramids, but when fished down by about 80 %, recovery has usually
not happened, possibly because the larger individuals in the populations were a major
source of fecundity. Although biomass of eukaryotes appear to be in inverted trophic
pyramids, the turnover and energy is in the form of standard pyramids and although large
individuals in the upper trophic levels are especially sensitive to exploitation, subsistence
economies can be maintained by harvesting the medium-sized individuals. Large
individuals matter more than population biomass because of the distinct roles of large
individuals in ecological processes maintaining coral-reef ecosystems and the relatively
large reproductive potential of big fishes. The functional traits of both the coral-reef
ecosystem and its component animals provide a greater potential for exploitation by
globalization in a service-based economy than with an extractive economy, as exemplified
by Palau.
Keywords

Fecundity  Extinction  Tradeoffs  Slot limits  Big fish

C. Birkeland (*)
Department of Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa,
Honolulu, HI 96822, USA
e-mail: charlesb@hawaii.edu
# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5_12

231

232

12.1

C. Birkeland

Fecundity and the Loss of Community
Resilience

In 1928, a relatively dense population of pearl oysters
Pinctada margaritifera was found on Pearl and Hermes
Reef in the Northwest Hawaiian Islands. About 150,000
oysters were taken during the next 2 years. A survey was
done the following year, 1930, and again in 1994, 2000, and
2003. Although pearl oysters were still present and
reproducing, the overall population density was still similar
in 2003 to that right after the harvest in 1930 (Keenan
et al. 2006). For species in which the adults are sessile,
fertilization success decreases when the population density
falls below a threshold (Fig. 11.4; Sect. 11.4; Birkeland
et al. 2013). Although fecundity may be at normal levels in
individuals in the population, the reproductive potential of
the population as a whole may become too low to provide
enough successful recruitment beyond the cost of mortality
of larval and juvenile stages to allow the population to
expand and recover to its previous size. Many marine species are “boom and bust” (Uthicke et al. 2009) and episodic
abundant recruitment of normally rare species can occasionally allow benthic coral-reef invertebrates such as sponges,
corallimorpharians, didemnid tunicates, and Acanthaster
planci to swamp the usual rates of larval and juvenile mortality and allow the species to recover to the higher level.
Hughes et al. (2000) found that the amount of recruitment to
coral populations on the Great Barrier Reef was not
associated with the number of adult colonies (living coral
cover) but with fecundity of the existing colonies. In corals,
fecundity decreases as the colony is stressed (Sect. 12.2.2)
and the potential of coral communities to provide increased
recruitment that exceeds the normal rates of larval and
juvenile mortality and thereby recover from disturbance
may decrease with stresses and with added energy demands
of climate change, lower ocean pH, and effects of human
activities.
Although fishes are motile and therefore not as vulnerable
to decreased fertilization when their populations decline,
once below a threshold population size, fish are also usually
unable to meet the normal rates of larval and juvenile mortality and many populations show no sign of recovery even
decades after the fishing pressure was removed (Sect. 12.5;
Hutchings and Reynolds 2004). The lower reproductive and
recovery potential of motile fish populations may result from
the selected harvest of the larger individuals. Fecundity
increases exponentially with body size in fish. The fish
associations of coral reefs are characterized in their natural
state as inverted trophic pyramids with the top trophic level,
piscivores, making up four fifth of the biomass (Friedlander
and DeMartini 2002; DeMartini et al. 2008; Sandin
et al. 2008; Fenner 2014). Fishing effort focuses primarily

on the larger individuals which are especially vulnerable to
modern fishing technology (Fenner 2014). Once the larger
individuals are gone, the fecundity is greatly reduced. There
are “no quick fixes” (Craig 2005) and the inverted trophic
pyramids have generally not reappeared (Sect. 12.5). Many
coral reefs lost these natural characteristics of coral-reef
systems hundreds of years ago (Jackson 1997; Wing and
Wing 2001). In the last half century, most populations of
large fish have not recovered even after the fishing pressure
was removed (Sect. 12.5). Hutchings and Reynolds (2004)
analyzed more than 230 populations of fishes with a median
decrease in population size of 83 % and found that most
exhibit little or no change for at least 15 years after the
collapse.

12.2

Natural Selection Favors Survival over
Reproduction in Corals

12.2.1 Unreliable Recruitment Leads to Multiple
Reproductive Attempts
Lamont C. Cole (1954) explained how age at which reproduction begins is one of the most important characteristics
determining the potential of a species to increase rapidly in
abundance. Starting reproduction soon, e.g., within a year,
gives a species a potential for exponentially greater number
of offspring after several years than species that take two or
more years to mature. If the offspring of the species are also
reproducing when the parents would potentially reproduce a
second time, then the selective importance of the parents
would be relatively low after the first reproduction because it
would be just one of a number of progenitors. For example, a
Chinook salmon can produce 15,000 eggs. If it were probable that one percent of its first batch of offspring survived to
reproduce, the importance of the parent’s contribution to
future generations from a second year’s reproduction
would be only 1/150 of the importance of its first reproduction. If the offspring carried genes that do not favor future
reproduction and fitness of the elderly, the 150 could have
passed on these genes without selection against them. For a
second example, if human parents often successfully started
families by early to mid-20s, and their offspring were also
generally successful in starting families by their early to
mid-20s, then the selective pressure to maintain fecundity
after their mid-40s or early 50s (i.e., postponing menopause), or avoiding Parkinson’s or Alzheimer’s disease
would not be strong. Natural selection for rapid population
growth strongly favors reproducing successfully as soon as
possible, with little selective pressure towards reproducing
after the next generation is reliably established. In contrast to
species adapted to rapidly expand populations, most of the

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

Fig. 12.1 A Porites (cf. lutea) colony in American Samoa. It must be
quite old because Porites mounds grow an order of magnitude slower
than some branching corals and this colony began life at about 14 m
(46 ft) depth with less light than the shallower habitats would allow
(Photo courtesy of Larry Basch)

dominant animals on coral reefs take longer than a year to
mature and then live to reproduce multiple times.
An analysis of data from 251 species of fishes (Longhurst
2002) showed that as recruitment success becomes less
reliable, the traits of late maturity, increased longevity, and
iteroparity substantially increases (Murphy 1967; Schaffer
1974; Jennings et al. 2001). The number of years of reproductive activity typical of a species might indicate the usual
degree of risk of failure to produce successful recruitment
and the length of life and number of reproductive attempts to
accommodate the risk. In complex coral-reef communities
with large standing stocks and relatively low concentrations
of nutrient input, intense and ubiquitous predation and competition make recruitment hazardous and unreliable for
many species. Since many reef-building corals can live for
decades (Fig. 12.1), it seems reasonable that when stressful
or disruptive environmental conditions prevail, committing
resources towards survival until a time in which conditions
for recruitment are more likely to be successful should be
favored by natural selection. Coral-reef fishes are also
exceptionally long-lived, in contrast to larger, fastergrowing, pelagic fishes (Sect. 12.5.3) and the traits of offspring (egg size, egg quality, larval size, larval quality,
length of time before dying of starvation) of many species
of coral-reef fishes actually increase with the mother’s age
(Hixon et al. 2013). Perhaps early reproductive success is not
likely, so it is worth “bet-hedging”.
If settling planulae and juvenile corals are just as vulnerable to stressful conditions as adults, then natural selection
might favor adult corals that survive until favorable
conditions occur and then reproduce many times. The
planulae or juveniles of 1 year may not survive if conditions
are stressful. Immature immune systems (Frank et al. 1997)

233

and lack of an adequately developed protective microbial
association (Apprill et al. 2009; Sharp et al. 2010) make
juvenile corals especially susceptible to harmful microbes
(Vermeij et al. 2009; Marhaver et al. 2013). Newly settled
coral recruits are especially vulnerable to lower seawater pH
(Webster et al. 2013), lower availability of carbonate ions
(Kleypas et al. 1999a, b; Albright et al. 2008), reduction of
aragonite supersaturation (Cohen and Holcomb 2009), and
greater difficulty for the precipitation of calcium carbonate
skeletons associated with increased CO2 (Albright
et al. 2010). Low pH of seawater can especially affect
coral recruits during their first CaCO3 deposition. For certain
coral species, crustose coralline algae attract recruits (Morse
et al. 1988), but increased CO2 also adversely affects crustose coralline algae (Kuffner et al. 2008), thereby adversely
affecting coral recruitment (Doropoulos et al. 2012; Webster
et al. 2013).
In fact, planulae settling near adult colonies of their own
broadcast-spawning species have lower survival because of
harmful microbes that are associated with the adults
(Marhaver et al. 2013). Although elegant experiments in
both field and laboratory have shown that broadcastspawning species are vulnerable to microbes associated
with adult colonies of their own species (Marhaver
et al. 2013), brooding corals may have an advantage of
inoculation. The planulae of Heliopora coerulea are brooded
on the surface of the adult colony for 6–14 days (Babcock
1990). During these days, the large (3.7 mm long) bright
white planulae attract several species of butterflyfishes that
prey upon them for extensive periods of time (at least
30 min, Villanueva and Edwards 2010). In the converse of
the Janzen-Connell model in which species diversity is
favored by seeds and seedlings being less favored to survive
near adults of their species because of species-specific
predators and pathogens attracted to adults (Marhaver
et al. 2013), it is the larval Heliopora that attract predators.
The larvae of brooding Pocillopora damicornis have been
seen to successfully settle and live next to adult colonies of
P. damicornis transplanted on a terra cotta brick into heavily
sedimented Ylig Bay, Guam, where the species was not
otherwise found (pers. obs.). Likewise, over three hundred
spat were observed to have settled on a plastic tray to which
a single adult P. damicornis was attached in a water table at
the University of Guam Marine Laboratory. The advantages
in inoculation of brooding larvae over the vulnerabilities of
broadcast-spawning might be analogous to breast-feeding in
humans over feeding infants on formulae in bottles.

12.2.2 Tradeoff Between Survival
and Fecundity
An often accepted definition of coral-reef “resilience” is
“. . .the ability of reefs to absorb recurrent

234

disturbances. . .and rebuild coral-dominated systems”
(Hughes et al. 2007). This definition combines two processes, “absorb” (tolerance, acclimatization, adaptation)
and “rebuild” (reproduce, successfully recruit, repair, heal)
that often trade off against each other. For example, the
decrease of available energy because of turbidity and/or
the increased energy expenditure for shedding sedimentation
results in a reduction in gametogenesis (Kojis and Quinn
1984). The expenditure for repair of tissue damage can take
enough energetic resources to prevent gametogenesis for
several years (Lirman 2000). When conditions become
stressful and the adult coral requires additional energy to
survive, gametogenesis is often reduced to provide the extra
energy needed for adult survival (Kojis and Quinn 1985;
Van Veghel and Bak 1994). When corals recover from stress
that caused bleaching, it can be 4 years before they spawn
again (Levitan et al. 2014). The metabolic energy expenditure for recovery of the adult colony from bleaching in
response to warm seawater is also paid for by reduction in
fecundity (Michalek-Wagner and Willis 2001; Ward
et al. 2002), gamete quality (Omori et al. 2001), or gametogenesis the following year (Szmant and Gassman 1990).
Likewise, energy spent for survival of the colony in physiological response to elevated levels of nutrients (Ward and
Harrison 1997, 2000) results in fewer larvae or eggs per
colony. Increased ammonium stopped planulation in the
brooding coral Pocillopora damicornis. Planulation resumed
3 months after the ammonium input was halted. Increased
ammonium caused a significant reduction in the size of eggs
spawned by the coral Montipora capitata (Cox and Ward
2002). There is a general reduction in gametogenesis and
larval development along a gradient of increased eutrophication (Tomascik and Sander 1987; Tomascik 1991; Hunte
and Wittenberg 1992; Wittenberg and Hunte 1992). Kojis
and Quinn (1984) suggested variation in coral fecundity can
be used to monitor environmental stress on corals.
Chronic disturbances brought about by increased CO2,
such as ocean warming, ocean acidification, and lowering of
the aragonite saturation state, have been projected to move
continuously outside the historical bounds at any given site
on Earth by 2069 (18 years s.d., Mora et al. 2013). This
trend will probably not be reversed for about 1,000 years
after the anthropogenic emissions stop (Archer and Brovkin
2008; Solomon et al. 2009). Ultimately, it is a proper combination of survival and gametogenesis that will be favored
in surviving corals. But selection for survival responds to
current environmental factors that are changing rapidly and
may select against the proper combination of characteristics
needed in the future. The tradeoff of increased survival at a
cost of reduction in fecundity that is frequently observed
these days does not appear to accommodate the general
increase in the chronic nature of disturbances (Chap. 11).
With long term chronic change, survival of adult colonies or

C. Birkeland

clones by acclimatization (physiological adjustment of the
colony), does not necessarily enhance adaptation (population genetic adjustment).

12.2.3 Chronic Stress Potentially Leads by
Positive Feedback Processes to Decline
in Recruitment and Connectivity
If stressful conditions are chronic, a positive feedback system can develop that drives the system into a continuous
decrease in corals (Fig. 11.4, Sect. 11.4). Continuous energy
loss with physiological stress or repair lowers fecundity
which in turn leads to fewer larvae and fewer successful
recruits and thereby fewer adult colonies. Fewer adult
colonies then leads to a self-reinforcing (positive feedback)
sequence because fewer sessile adults diminishes both population fecundity and success in fertilization. The decrease
in fertilization success results from fewer adults because a
lower number of adult colonies most often lowers population
density of adult colonies which, because coral colonies are
sessile, leads to a greater average distance between colonies.
Field observations of a broadcast-spawning species
indicated that if the effective distance between colonies
falls below one spawning colony of a species within
100 m2, the probability for fertilization would be nearly
zero (Levitan et al. 2004). If only 20–30 % of the corals of
a species spawn on a particular night (Levitan et al. 2004),
the lowest absolute population density for successful fertilization would be more like 3 or 4 colonies per 100 m2.
Lower fecundity also leads to less connectivity among
populations (Fig. 12.2). Although many, perhaps the majority, of coral species have potential larval pelagic duration
periods of weeks (Harrigan 1972), some over 200 days
(Harrigan 1972; Graham et al. 2008), most of these same
species show maximum settlement within the first 3 days
(Harrigan 1972). For example, the planulae of Pocillopora
damicornis can survive for at least 212 days, but an average
of 24 % settle within the first 4–8 h and the majority (70 %)
settle within first 24 h (Harrigan 1972). In the near future, the
warming of seawater may further shorten substantially the
pelagic larval duration of coral planulae. Harrigan (1972)
noted the average free-swimming period for P. damicornis
planulae in Palau (26–30  C) is half of that in Hawaii
(24–27  C) and Harrigan’s laboratory records provided evidence for shortened pelagic duration in warmer water.
Although coral reefs are not completely self-recruiting,
genetic studies have indicated that a substantial portion of
larvae often recruit back to their population of origin
(Sammarco and Andrews 1989; Swearer et al. 1999, 2002;
Jones et al. 1999, 2005, 2009; Warner and Cowen 2002;
Poulin et al. 2002; Cowen et al. 2000, 2006; Almany
et al. 2007; Gerlach et al. 2007; Planes et al. 2009;

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

Fig. 12.2 A large proportion of planulae recruit near their population
of origin. As the fecundity of the population is substantially reduced by
stress or mortality, the absolute number of larvae that are transported
great distances decreases and so stress or mortality also decreases
connectivity (Figure is modified from Steneck 2006). The horizontal
dotted line represents the number or recruits necessary to meet local
mortality, so the source population fecundity must be protected to
sustain local populations. Natural selection favors fidelity to the parental population, but incidental “leakage” to distant sites, though selected
against, is probably sufficient to spread risks from local disasters among
descendants (Strathmann et al. 2002)

Underwood et al. 2009; Shanks and Shearman 2009;
Harrison et al. 2012; Golbuu et al. 2012; Lopez-Duarte
et al. 2012). In addition to the tendency of planulae to settle
near home, the rates of mortality of coral larvae are especially high early in life, and so the connectivity at regional
scales is less than assumed (Graham et al. 2008). Furthermore, at least in some cases, the probability of successful
dispersal declines substantially after 1 km (Buston
et al. 2011). The distance of population connectivity is not
as reliably predicted by pelagic larval duration as is usually
assumed (Weersing and Toonen 2009). Even for species
with larvae that have long-pelagic duration, successful
long-distance dispersion is a byproduct of large parental
populations (Fig. 12.2; Strathmann et al. 2002).
Even when planulae succeed in reaching a disturbed area,
survival of coral recruits is severely reduced by
unwelcoming conditions such as sedimentation and prevalence of algae (Fabricius 2005). Rates of successful settlement and metamorphosis of corals are nearly zero in areas
with sediment. Macroalgae and filamentous turfs preempt
available space, trap sediment, intercept light, physically
abrade the small coral recruit, transmit coral diseases and
allelopathic chemicals, increase the growth of microbes on
the surface mucus of corals and potentially affect the small
recruits in additional ways (Littler and Littler 1997; Szmant
2002; Nugues et al. 2004; Kuffner and Paul 2004; Fabricius
2005; Smith et al. 2006; Birrell et al. 2008; Kline et al. 2006;
Ritson-Williams et al. 2009). But negative settlement clues
that trump positive settlement cues may be an adaptation to
preempt mortality of coral recruits from sedimentation, algal
dominance, or other fatal factors.

235

Coral communities develop quickly and well on flat
basalt with no topographic complexity (Fig. 12.3), a substratum that obviously attracts coral recruits. Roughened
plexiglass sometimes attracts more successful coral recruits
than does the surrounding CaCO3 reef surface (pers. obs.
with Birkeland 1977; Birkeland et al. 1981). Pocillopora
damicornis often grows on rope, pilings, cement and other
artificial structures in harbors (pers. obs.) and Jokiel (1990)
found corals attached to pumice and other floating objects. It
may be that planulae are not actually attracted to anthropogenic artificial materials or to basalt or pumice. Rather, these
materials lacked negative warning cues associated with
factors on disturbed reefs. In experiments with biofilms
associated with materials from the Great Barrier Reef
(GBR), Prescott et al. (2014) found that Acropora millepora
and Pocillopora damicornis settled significantly more on
untreated laboratory biofilms than on biofilms that had
developed in the presence of particulate organic matter or
sediment on the GBR. Her DNA analysis of the microbial
communities on the surfaces on which the planulae favored
for settlement and those on which they apparently avoided
for settlement and metamorphosis indicated that the patterns
of association were mostly negative, i.e., the negative
associations were strong and determinant while positive
association were weak and apparently trumped by the negative associations. Signals of dangers might have more immediate and strong selective value than signals of potentially
favorable sites. Passing a potentially favorable site to search
for another might often be favored over death. Corals are
probably not selectively settling on plexiglass, basalt, rope
and pumice, but may be settling because the biofilms are not
of the types associated with negative factors on disturbed
reefs.
The effects of coastal runoff on coral reefs have been
widely studied and clearly have negative impacts on reefs
(see Fabricius 2005; Fabricius et al. 2013 for reviews). These
include documented declines in coral larval settlement and
metamorphosis (Hodgson 1990; Babcock and Davies 1991;
Gilmour 1999; Birrell et al. 2005; Fabricius et al. 2003;
Kuffner et al. 2006). The mechanisms that allow avoidance
of coral larval settlement under poor water quality
conditions are just starting to be investigated. The findings
of Prescott et al. (2014) indicate that the spatial distribution
of A. millepora and P. damicornis larval settlement and
metamorphosis are guided by negative cues rather than
positive settlement cues.
In an array of controlled field and laboratory experiments,
Dixson et al. (2014) determined that coral larvae from three
species of Acropora and larvae from six families of reef
fishes all showed significant recruitment preferences for
water samples from a marine protected area with abundant
coral over water samples from an unprotected area
dominated by macroalgae. The larvae of fishes from all six

236

C. Birkeland

Fig. 12.3 A coral community, mainly composed of Acropora spp.,
rapidly colonized and became established on a 70,000 m2 lava flow. A
volcano covered the site with lava on 9 May 1988. These photographs
were taken in November 1994. Tomascik et al. (1996) calculate the

tabulate Acropora colonies must have grown by 30 cm y1 (a radial
extension of 15 cm1). Acropora spp. have no defense to lava, but they
can recolonize and grow rapidly, becoming the dominant genus of coral

families showed very similar strong preferences for association with Acropora over Porites and over Pocillopora.
Whereas Acropora is sensitive to stresses (Sect. 12.3),
Porites is renowned for its relative tolerance of conditions
of stress, and Pocillopora, although also stress-sensitive,
tended to be a rapid colonizer and therefore potentially
indicative of recent disturbance. Dixson et al. (2014)
interpreted larval behavior as selecting Acropora as an indicator of a healthy undisturbed reef community. The fishes
from all six families were also strongly selective for association with some genera of benthic algae over others.

(Sect. 12.2.2) and the fewer larvae tend to replenish only
populations nearer the reproductive source and seed
populations at lesser distances from the source. Along with
climate change, pollution, sedimentation, and other aspects
of environmental stress that reduce fecundity on individual
coral colonies, increased patchiness and distance between
habitats suitable for successful recruitment brought about by
coastal construction and overfishing of herbivores augment
the effect of lower fecundity in decreasing connectivity
among populations of corals (Steneck 2006).
Veron (1995) proposed that this periodic decrease in
connectivity might explain the geographic variations
observed in dominant and widespread species of corals that
form “species complexes” (Fig. 12.4), such as Orbicella spp.
and Acropora spp. Since adult corals are sessile, like plants,
the genetic connectivity depends on dispersion of gametes
and larvae rather than behavioral coming together of adults.
Veron championed the concept of “reticulate evolution” for
“species complexes”. When the environment is favorable to
corals and fecundity is high in areas of strong water currents,
closely related species tend to disperse more widely
(Fig. 12.2) and interbreed, bringing about more uniform,
genetically integrated species. Alternatively, when
conditions are stressful and fecundity is low, populations

12.2.4 Environmental Stress May Facilitate
Reticulate Evolution
The numbers of larvae that potentially self-recruit or recruit
to sites farther away are proportional; the absolute numbers
are based on proportion times the fecundity of the reproductive source population (Fig. 12.2). The numbers of larvae are
also affected by pelagic larval duration and survival. As
water temperatures increase, the larvae may develop faster
and/or abnormally. During times of environmental stress to
corals, the fecundity of corals tends to decrease

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

237

12.2.5 Constraints of Biology on Management

Fig. 12.4 Veron’s (1995) diagram of the blending together through
hybridization and separation by isolation, then further separation by
genetic drift or local selective forces, of closely related coral species
(in a “species complex”) through time in reticulate (“netlike”) evolution. The blending together might be facilitated by faster large-scale
water currents and/or by more benign conditions favoring high fecundity or, separation might be facilitated by warmer waters causing more
rapid larval development and thereby less time in the water column, by
stressful conditions reducing fecundity (Fig. 12.2) or more stagnant
water conditions (# Australian Institute of Marine Science and CRR
Pty Ltd [2000]. The Australian Institute of Marine Science does not
necessarily endorse any modification to that material)

may tend to become isolated and genetically diverge by
genetic drift or by local selective forces. Isolation can be
further enhanced by habitat deterioration causing patchiness
and reduced pelagic larval development time reducing
connectivity.
Molecular genetic evidence and patterns of natural
hybridization are consistent with the concept of reticulate
evolution (Kenyon 1997; Hatta et al. 1999; Diekmann
et al. 2001; van Oppen et al. 2001; Frank and Makody
2002). However, these studies were on Acropora or
Madracis which were already known to be “species
complexes” so it is not yet known whether metapopulations
of broadcast- spawners become more genetically distinct or
“structured” under stressful conditions when fecundity is
low, appropriate habitat is more patchily separated and
scarce, and planulae spend less time in the water column as
temperatures rise.

Fundamental forces acting against coral reef ecosystems
today, e.g., growth in human populations multiplied by the
per capita burden of increased growth in economic demands
and needs for natural resources, and the resulting global
environmental effects of seawater warming, lowering of
seawater pH, and climate changes seem to be considered
too daunting to address directly. Coral-reef managers almost
always focus actual efforts towards manageable local processes, attempting to control overfishing, sedimentation, and
pollution, etc., in hopes that these procedures will increase
the local resilience of corals to global changes. Particular
areas are selected for protection with the thought that fecundity will be substantial in protected areas and so these
populations can replenish downstream disturbed areas.
We cannot rely entirely on improving local situations and
setting aside protected areas, depending on sufficiently
developed resilience to stress and replenishment of
populations by larvae from upstream sources. There are
two basic aspects of coral biology that are not supportive
of large-scale downstream connectivity. First, although
planulae of many coral species can potentially survive for
over 200 days and potentially drift thousands of kilometers,
it is a characteristic of coral biology that a major portion of
the actual surviving larvae replenish local or nearby
populations (Sect. 12.2.3). Second, the areas outside the
protected areas that are disturbed and have undergone
phase shifts can be unfavorable for successful larval recruitment (Sect. 12.2.3; Dixson et al. 2014; Prescott et al. 2014).
We must begin to search for effective ways to directly
address the deteriorating global conditions. As Ove HoeghGuldberg has said, “With all due respect to those
contributing effort and funding towards protecting coral
reefs, the millions of dollars that are being spent will be of
no avail unless there is a concentrated effort to obtain
explicit progress in reducing CO2 emissions”.

12.3

Selection Favors Rapid Growth over
Survival in Acroporids

12.3.1 Fast Growth Favored by Less Complexity
This section starts by documenting the observation that
corals of the genus Acropora have jettisoned their ancestors’
usual mechanisms of defense and tolerance that would have
favored survival, possibly in exchange for rapid growth.
This seems to have also happened at other times in the
Mesozoic, in other scleractinian families (Sect. 12.3.2).
Ancestors of Acropora probably included stress-tolerant
encrusting acroporid corals such as Astreopora that were
capable of surviving the Cretaceous/Paleogene (K-Pg)

238

C. Birkeland

Fig. 12.5 A community of Acropora spp. on Ngederrak Reef in Palau. (a) In 1999, the coral community had been devastated by predation by
Acanthaster planci in 1979. (b) By 2005, the Acropora spp. (mostly Acropora muricata) took over by rapid growth

mass extinction (formerly called the Cretaceous/Tertiary
[K-T] mass extinction), but when environmental conditions
again favored reef production, Acropora may have evolved
by losing the defenses or tolerances typical of most
scleractinians in exchange for rapid growth (Fig. 12.3).
A striking example of the lack of investment in defense
by Acropora spp. is their vulnerability to predation. Despite
the diversity of corallivores (314 species of invertebrates
from 5 phyla or 24 families (Stella et al. 2011) and 128 species of fishes from 11 families (Cole et al. 2008)), only 28 of
the genera of reef-building Scleractinia have been recorded
as prey, leaving 83 genera that appear to be entirely avoided
as prey (Stella et al. 2011). Defense against predation
appears to be the norm for corals. Yet nearly all phyla of
corallivores easily prey on Acropora spp., and among the
important groups of corallivores, Acropora is actually preferred. Acropora species are the preferred prey of the seastar
Acanthaster planci, decapod crustaceans, gastropods such as
Drupella spp. and Coralliophila spp., the polychaete
Hermodice
carunculata,
the
polyclad
flatworn
Amakusaplana acroporae (Rawlinson and Stella 2012),
and fishes such as blennies Exallias brevis, damselfish
Stegastes planifrons, and 69 species of butterflyfishes
Chaetodon. Considering the magnitude of the effects of
predation on Acropora (Fig. 12.5a) it is surprising that natural selection has not favored resistance to predators; but
Acropora can grow back rapidly (Fig. 12.5b).
Acropora spp. are also especially susceptible to diseases
such as the white-band disease which, since the early 1980s,
has substantially reduced the abundance of Acropora
palmata and Acropora cervicornis throughout the greater
Caribbean. Other reef-building scleractinians are affected
by disease, but Acropora spp. are among the most seriously
affected (Aronson and Precht 2001). It is possible that being
favored prey for several phyla of corallivores facilitates
infection by disease and recruitment of bioeroders by
increasing the frequency of tissue penetration and the baring
of skeleton, respectively.

Nearly all genera of corals are susceptible to bleaching
when exposed to extraordinarily warm temperatures, but
Acropora is ranked among the most susceptible (Marshall
and Baird 2000; McClanahan et al. 2007). The hydrocoral
genus Millepora is sometimes the only reef-building genus
that is more susceptible than the scleractinian Acropora
(Marshall and Baird 2000). Acropora was a dominant
genus throughout the Indian Ocean until it suffered major
losses in the 1997/1998 bleaching event (McClanahan
et al. 2007).
The elevated morphology of branching and tabular
Acropora species and their porous skeletons make them
particularly susceptible to the strong waves of hurricanes
or typhoons (Hughes and Connell 1999; Fig. 12.6a), but
they grow back rapidly (Fig. 12.6b). Fast-growing corals
were shown by Comeau et al. (2014) to be more sensitive
to ocean acidification than were slow-calcifiers.
Even the larval stage of Acropora species appears to be
less adapted for survival than the larvae of other coral
genera. Graham et al. (2008) quantified the survival of larvae
from five genera of broadcast- spawning scleractinians.
Although larvae of the representative acroporid Acropora
latistella lived as long as 209 days, the median survival was
4 days. The larvae of the other genera also lived a maximum
of about 200 days, but their median survivals were substantially longer. For example, the larvae of Goniastrea aspera
lived a maximum of 215 days, but the median survival was
138 days.
Denis et al. (2013) found that fast growth was prioritized
in Acropora in a tradeoff against regeneration of tissue. The
energy and biochemical materials saved by not developing
as many effective survival mechanisms against predation,
disease, extraordinarily warm seawater, or hurricanes as do
most scleractinian corals, perhaps allowed Acropora spp. to
allocate more metabolic energy for rapid growth. The tissues
of branching corals such as Acropora and pocilloporids
average less than a third the thickness of the tissue of
massive corals (Loya et al. 2001) and the biomass as

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

239

Fig. 12.6 A community of mostly Acropora hyacinthus with a few A. cytherea and other Acropora spp. on Transect 5 in Fagatele Bay, American
Samoa. Although Acropora colonies are susceptible to hurricanes, rapid growth enables them to quickly become dominant following disturbance

measured by ash-free dry weight of Acropora spp. was lower
than the biomasses of other genera of corals tested
(Thornhill et al. 2011). The Caribbean Acropora spp. show
lower metabolic rates, lower rates of protein turnover, and
less capacity to acclimatize than some mound corals, but are
able to grow substantially more rapidly (Gates and Edmunds
1999). The skeleton of Acropora spp. is extraordinarily
porous (Gladfelter 1982) and grows an order of magnitude
faster than other genera measured (Gladfelter et al. 1978).
Initially, it would be reasonable to surmise that less investment in tissue biomass and repair may facilitate faster
growth by allocation of more metabolic energy or nutrients
to growth.
Pocillopora spp., to a lesser extent than Acropora spp.,
are also fast-growing, branching corals with thin tissue
(Loya et al. 2001) and substantially lower organic content
of tissue than the other coral general tested (Glynn and
Krupp 1986). Yet Pocillopora spp. are still preferred prey.
How could Acropora and Pocillopora be preferred prey
when their tissues are relatively thin and possibly less nutritious? Glynn and Krupp (1986) found that although
Pocillopora tissue had low organic content, it provided the
highest energetic return to the predator. The tissues of
Acropora and Pocillopora are superficially located on the
skeleton and therefore may be more accessible, and fewer
complex secondary metabolites for defense in the tissue may
cause them to be less metabolically resistant.
But what is the resource involved in the tradeoff between
survival and fast growth? Light and nutrients are critical
resources required by the zooxanthellae that fuel coral
growth and calcification. Nevertheless, there is typically a
superabundant supply of light in shallow water over coral
reefs where Acropora spp. are dominant. Moreover, corals
do not respond to changes in nutrients as immediately and
strongly as do more simple organisms, i.e., organisms that
are less complex physiologically and more distinctly autotrophic or heterotrophic. The growth rates of purely

heterotrophic animals, such as mussels, barnacles,
bryozoans, and many sponges, and purely autotrophic
algae, are strongly associated with the amount of food or
nutrients in the water column (Widdows et al. 1979;
Ceccherelli and Rossi 1984; Rose and Risk 1985; Page and
Hubbard 1987). The growth rates of corals do not respond so
quickly and substantially to nutrient input (Kinsey and
Davies 1979; Koop et al. 2001). Although adult coral
colonies can live well in areas of nutrient input such as
upwelling, the recruitment of corals is very difficult in
these areas because the recruits of simple heterotrophic
animals and algae respond more immediately and substantially to nutrient pulses, grow at substantially greater rates,
and can plow away or overgrow recruits of corals which do
not respond as quickly and substantially (Birkeland 1977).
Simplicity may be an important a factor in competition
for space because it facilitates speed of response to either
nutrients or calories from photosynthesis. The symbiotic
system of a holobiont (the combination of coral animal,
dinoflagellates, and prokaryotes) is too complex to respond
as quickly to a pulse of nutrients as do benthic autotrophic
algae and sessile heterotrophic animals. Single-celled algae
in the phytoplankton can rapidly increase with input of
nitrogen and phosphorus, but the density of single-celled
algae in the cells of corals is relatively constant within any
set of environmental conditions associated with depth.
Enhancing the growth rate of zooxanthellae can upset the
complex physiological balance in the symbiosis and the
corals might dampen the response of the system by expelling
the excess zooxanthellae (Muller-Parker and D’Elia 1997).
Simplicity has two aspects. First, complexity requires that
metabolic processes have more regulations and timeconsuming steps. Second, complexity in terms of additional
secondary metabolites requires a greater expense of production. Organisms that are less complex morphologically
and/or invest fewer resources into secondary metabolites
for defense are generally able to respond more quickly to

240

pulses in resource availability and grow faster than
phylogenetically related species that are more complex.
The structurally simple green alga Ulva curvata responded
to inputs of ammonium with more effective uptake and more
rapid growth than did the more structurally complex green
alga Codium fragile (Ramus and Venable 1987). Algae with
relatively simple morphology generally have higher net productivity per unit biomass and a potential for more rapid
response and growth than do algae with more complex
structure (Littler and Littler 1980). Diatoms tend to be
favored as food for many animals and can grow up to three
times as fast as dinoflagellates of the same size under similar
conditions (Banse 1982). Although diatoms can produce
toxins and are motile with microfibrils, dinoflagellates tend
to be more complex, producing secondary compounds that
result in toxic red tides and ciguatera, and likely expend
more energy on motility driven by two large flagellae.
Many dinoflagellates are also more complex because they
are mixotrophic (capable of both autotrophy and heterotrophy in the same organism). Mixotrophy requires extra
energy to maintain both trophic processes in the same system (Stoeker 1999; Dolan and Pérez 2000). Mixotrophy is
advantageous in nutrient-poor environments where solar
energy is unlimited (such as shallow-water coral reefs), but
organic carbon and dissolved inorganic carbon are limiting
(Hallock 1981, 2001). An increase in dissolved inorganic
nitrogen not only shifts the advantage to more rapidly growing simple autotrophs and heterotrophs, but it throws the
more complex mixotrophic system out of balance and can
stimulate bleaching in corals (Wooldridge 2009).
Simple systems are normally advantageous in nutrientrich environments. In environments with low resource availability or stressful conditions, plants that are favored have
slow growth rates and major investments in antiherbivore
defenses because they must defend what they already built
at such great cost (Coley et al. 1985). In contrast, when
resources are abundant or environmental conditions are
benevolent, organisms often tend to invest in rapid growth
and increased fecundity at the expense of defense. For
corals, rapid increase in colony surface area and number
of polyps can potentially produce a rapid increase in fecundity and the increased number of early potential progeny
might be favored. So while most corals are adapted to
survive during periods of stress, corals in the genus
Acropora are especially vulnerable to predation, disease,
unusually warm seawater, and hurricanes. Yet they have
often been the dominant corals because of their rapid growth
and elevated morphology (Fig. 12.3). While most corals
invest in survival (tolerance) at the expense of reproduction
(recovery), corals of the genus Acropora invests in rapid
growth (recovery) at the expense of survival (tolerance).
This is consistent throughout the history of scleractinians
since the Triassic.

C. Birkeland

12.3.2 Fast Growth Favored over Survival
in Productive Times
There have been three periods especially favorable for
scleractinian reef-building: the Late Triassic, the Middle
Jurassic, and the Neogene (Kiessling 2009). These periods
of prevalent reef-building are associated with “aragonite
seas” (Sect. 2.7, 2.9.3, 2.9.4, and 2.9.5; Stanley and Hardie
1998) and with the prevalence of relatively rapidly growing
corals. During mass extinctions, rapidly growing corals did
not survive. Survivors were generally massive or moundshaped corals. Conversely, about 15 million years after the
Triassic mass extinction and 30 million years after the
Cretaceous-Paleogene mass extinction in aragonite seas, a
large number of new scleractinian genera originated and
reef-building accelerated while the survivors of the mass
extinctions showed substantial rates of elimination. The
conditions favoring increased rates of reef-building were
beneficial for newly evolved fast-growing corals, while
these conditions were detrimental for stress-tolerant,
slower-growing survivors of mass extinctions.
On Late Triassic (Norian and Rhaetian) reefs,
Retiophyllia spp. may have been somewhat ecologically
analogous to Acropora spp. on modern reefs in that it was
a “very speciose branching (phaceloid, see Box 12.1 and
Fig. 12.7) genus” (Caruthers and Stanley 2008) that was one
of the dominant, reef framework-building scleractinians. In
the Late Triassic, “Some branching [phaceloid] corals probably grew rapidly, and reached over 10 m high, but bore thin
branches only 5–10 mm in diameter” (Wood 1999, p. 104).
Retiophyllia spp. were widespread, found in Japan, central
and northeast Asia, Indonesia, Russia, the Caucasus, the
Alps, Europe, and western North and South America from
Alaska, Yukon, Vancouver Island, Oregon, Idaho, Nevada,,

Box 12.1: Branching Corals
Although erect corals in the Triassic and Jurassic were
mostly “phaceloid” (each branch produced by a single
polyp), or sometimes “dendroid” (single-polyp
branches coming off a common stem), they are sometimes referred to as “branching” or “ramose” corals.
“Branching” corals are presently considered more precisely as corals with each branch being continuously
covered by a sheet of polyps, i.e., “multiserial erect”.
Branching corals become more prevalent abruptly in
the late Cretaceous (Turonian Age), but Oculina was
the only branching coral that survived the Cretaceous/
Paleogene mass extinction. Acropora, Pocillopora,
and other extant genera of branching corals originated
in the late Paleocene, early Eocene, or more recently.

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

Fig. 12.7 The morphology of the predominant erect corals through the
geologic record (Box 12.1)

northern Chile, and Peru (Caruthers and Stanley 2008).
These fast-growing dominant corals fell victim to the mass
extinction at the end of the Triassic.
The corals that survived the Triassic/Jurassic mass
extinction were solitary or massive or smaller phaceloid
types and did not appear to be fast-growing or dominant.
Of the 20 genera that passed from the Triassic to the Jurassic,
one (Alakiria) went extinct in the first age that followed
(Hettangian). It may have been what Jablonski (2002) called
a “dead clade walking”. Another genus, Dimorphastraea,
persisted into the Late Cretaceous. The remaining
18 scleractinian genera lived about 15 million years, and
each went extinct when conditions became favorable for
reef-building corals (Lathuilière and Marchal 2009), beginning in the late Early Jurassic when the Jurassic
scleractinians were becoming diverse, with at least
100 new coral genera having originated by the Middle Jurassic (Heckel 1974). The time of greatest rate of origination of
scleractinian genera (Kiessling and Barin-Szabo 2004) and
greatest rate of reef-building (Kiessling 2009) in the Mesozoic era was in the latter half of the Jurassic period. Corals
with the physiological capabilities to survive the Triassic
mass extinction were unable to survive in conditions exceptionally favorable to newly evolved scleractinians. One possible explanation is that the usually solitary, massive or
encrusting survivors were crowded out by the relatively
fast-growing Jurassic corals (Fig. 12.8). However, although
competition for space between corals can affect their
distributions and community structure (Cox 1986; Pandolfi

241

et al. 2002), I have never documentation of corals driven to
extinction by competition.
Although reef-building corals in the Jurassic grew substantially slower than modern corals, averaging about a third
the growth rate (Leinfelder 2001), the dominant phaceloid
corals were still relatively fast-growing in their time. A main
reef-builder throughout the Tethys region in the Middle
Jurassic was Thamnastria dendroidea which often formed
dense monospecific thickets. “The growth of branches was
directed upwards, but also frequently sideward, forming an
overtopping morphology. . .. Thamnasteria dendroidea is
therefore interpreted as an “aggressive coral”. . . Compared
with other Mesozoic (Late Jurassic) corals . . . its growth rate
is very high” (Helm and Schȕlke 2000). Leinfelder
et al. (2012) found extensive meadows of erect
Calamophylliopsis spp. or thickets of Actinastrea
crassoramosa in Late Jurassic coral communities. When
reef construction is active, “aggressive” erect corals seem
to be prevalent.
Near the end of the Jurassic, the increase in volcanism
with more rapid seafloor spreading caused high rates of CO2
emissions while magnesium was taken up in the hot basalt,
lowering the Mg/Ca ratio in the seawater and shifting the
seawater from aragonitic to calcitic (Sect. 2.5, 2.7, Fig. 2.1;
Stanley and Hardie 1998). With the shift to calcite seas, there
was a substantial drop in production of coral reefs for about
140 million years from the later Jurassic throughout the
Cretaceous and through to the early Paleogene.
However, as explained by Kleypas et al. (2001), a diverse
coral community may be performing well ecologically even
while performing poorly geologically (Fig. 12.3). While the
scleractinian fauna in the Cretaceous produced unimpressive
reefs compared to those in aragonitic seas, the rudist
bivalves produced volumes of massive calcium carbonate
relatively rapidly. These three-dimensional hard substrata
above the sediment allowed scleractinian corals to increase
in diversity and maintain widespread distribution throughout
(Götz 2003). The corals, in turn, helped stabilize the rudists
by binding them together (Götz 2003). In modern times,
crustose coralline algae (CCA) form algal ridges in areas
of consistent wave action and are an agent of binding of
coral skeletons while in the Cretaceous, scleractinian corals
were more prevalent in areas of consistent wave action and
were an agent of binding and stabilization of rudist shells
(Götz 2003).
When volcanism decreased and the seafloor spreading
slowed, the Mg built up to Mg/Ca > 2 and the oceans
became aragonitic during the Oligocene, about 30 million
years ago, and reefs began to develop more vigorously.
Although Acropora originated in the Later Paleocene –
Early Eocene, it did not begin dominating reef frameworks
until the Oligocene (Wallace and Rosen 2006) when atmospheric pCO2 dropped below 500 ppm and seawater pH rose

242

C. Birkeland

Fig. 12.8 In conditions favorable to growth of coral reefs, the faster growing branching corals sometimes overwhelm the more slowly growing
massive corals. This process affects community structure and local distribution of species, but it is not known whether it ever leads to extinction

to over 8.0 (Pearson and Palmer 200) and reef production
became vigorous.
As with 18 of the 20 scleractinian genera that survived the
Triassic/Jurassic mass extinction but went extinct in the
Middle Jurassic when the scleractinians were greatly
increasing in diversity and major reef construction was
occurring, the family Actinacididae survived the K-Pg
mass extinction and continued for 30–40 million years
until the Oligocene when conditions for vigorous reef
growth and domination by branching species began to
occur, at which time this scleractinian families went extinct.
At least 11 scleractinian genera from several families also
went extinct in the Oligocene and at least 10 genera went
extinct in the Miocene when reef production was increasing
and at least 40 new scleractinian genera were originating
(Fig. 12.9; Wells 1956).
Edinger and Risk (1995) attribute extinctions in the Oligocene and Miocene in the greater Caribbean to be caused
by a major increase in upwelling, and this is may be true, but
some of these genera also went extinct in other oceans at
about the same time. For example, Antiguastrea that
originated in the Jurassic also went extinct in the Miocene
in Australasia, southern Europe and northern Africa (data in
corallosphere.com at the British Museum of Natural History). Trochoseris that originated in the Cretaceous also
went extinct in the eastern tropical Pacific (Lopez-Pérez
2005). Lamellastraea went extinct in east Asia
(corallosphere.com) and Leptomussa in Italy (Wells 1956).

Actinacis, Siderofungia, Stylangia, Cyathoseris, and
Rhizangia all originated in the Cretaceous and went extinct
in Europe or Asia when reef-building was accelerating and
new genera were originating (Wells 1956). Budd (2000)
listed 21 new genera of scleractinians that appeared in the
Caribbean in the Oligocene to the middle Miocene, while
15 genera went extinct. Another six genera originated in the
late Miocene.
Scleractinians seem to be improving over time in their
abilities to survive mass extinctions in comparison to other
marine invertebrates. In contrast to the poor showing in the
Triassic/Jurassic mass mortality of scleractinian coral genera
(27 % survival, i.e., 20 survived out of 73, Lathuilière and
Marchal 2009), 70  4 % of scleractinian genera and over
half the species survived the K-Pg mass extinction
(Kiessling and Baron-Szabo 2004). The general extinction
of marine genera was about 47 % for both the Triassic/
Jurassic and K-Pg extinctions (Bambach et al. 2004), so
the scleractinians shifted from one of the most vulnerable
groups to among the more resilient. Not only did some of the
massive and encrusting corals that developed in the Cretaceous survive the K-Pg mass extinction, but also the
Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum, the Pliocene-Pleistocene accelerated turnover and extinction in the greater
Caribbean (Budd et al. 1996), and they are still prevalent
on contemporary coral reefs (Fig. 12.9). Nine of the
scleractinian genera of corals that prevailed from the Cretaceous to the present were previously grouped together in the

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

Fig. 12.9 Geologic history
shows that mound or encrusting
corals are more frequently seen to
be the survivors of mass mortality
events, and the dominant, fastgrowing, branching species more
often go extinct with events of
mass extinction, then new genera
of branching corals originate in
the geologic period following the
mass extinction. The data are
mainly from Wells 1956. The
genera in parentheses are from
Ma 1959. Additional genera
mentioned by Veron (1995) and
Paulay (1997) with question
marks are included with question
marks and no parentheses. At
least a dozen extant survivors
from the Cretaceous are not listed
because they are deepwater or
solitary

Massive or
encrusting

Phaceloid
Branching

family Faviidae (Wells 1956; Veron 2000), but these nine
genera have now been distributed among four families by
genetic analyses (Budd et al. 2012). Jackson and McKinney
(1991) documented that corals have become more
“integrated” in colony morphology with time, but the potential relationship of survival with integrated colonial morphology still needs to be determined. New genera of
solitary (Scolymia, Homophyllia, Heterocyathus, some
fungiids) and phaceloid (Caulastrea, some Galaxea, some
Lobophyllia) corals have originated in the Cenozoic so the
less “integrated” corals keep returning anew.
The 54 scleractinian genera from the Cretaceous that are
briefly described in Wells (1956) are typically solitary, massive, encrusting, or phaceloid. However, Jackson and
McKinney (1991) reported a sudden increase in branching
corals in the final 10–15 million years of the Cretaceous; a
sudden increase of branching corals to percentages of the
coral community without precedent. Nevertheless, the corals

243

Survived Mesozoic

Originated Cenozoic

LAZARUS CORALS

FAUSTIAN CORALS

Stephanocoenia
Madracis
Astreopora
Siderastrea
Dichocoenia
(Dendrogyra)
Cycloseris ?
Astrangia
Hydnophora
Favia
Diploria
Montastraea
Diploastrea
(Favites)
(Goniastrea?)
Leptoria
(Leptastrea)
(Oulastrea)
(Plesiastrea)
Goniopora
(Alveopora)
Porites ?
Heteropsammia ?
Heliopora
Cladocora
Oculina

Stylophora
(Paleocene)
Pocillopora (Eocene)
Acropora
(Eocene)
Seriatopora (Miocene)
Anacropora (recent)
Palauastrea (recent)
Paraclavarina (recent)

surviving the K-Pg mass extinction were generally solitary,
massive or encrusting (Fig. 12.9). Oculina might be considered branching or dendroid and Cladocora might be considered phaceloid, but neither counts as a good representative of
“aggressive” branching reef-builders and are often without
zooxanthellae (Bernecker and Weidlich 2005).
Some massive or encrusting scleractinians that survived
the Cretaceous-Paleogene mass extinction (Fig. 12.9) are
called “Lazarus taxa” by Wood (1999) and Rosen (2000).
The fast-growing, branching corals that have attributes that
allow them to dominate the scene today, originated after the
mass extinction. They were given the traits that allow them
to dominate and live gloriously, but they are the first to die,
reminding us of the story of Faust. Van Woesik et al. (2012)
noted that dominant and widespread branching corals in the
Caribbean in the Pliocene, Stylophora and Pocillopora,
became extinct in the Pleistocene, indicating that being
abundant and widespread does not protect species from

244

extinction. Likewise, Pandolfi et al. (2001) reported on the
extinction of two widespread and dominant corals and the
survival of some of the rare species within the recent
82,000 years.
Ultimately, the best “strategy” for selection would be the
best combination of survival and reproduction. But natural
selection does not act as a “strategy” for the future, but rather
works at the individual colony level, favoring traits that
provide more successful recruitment in the present. Natural
selection on dominant corals during benevolent times seems
to favor the increase in rate of growth at the expense of
defense and/or tolerance because the more rapid increase
in surface area can increase the number of polyps, and
thereby increase fecundity. Tabletop morphology of some
Acropora allows for increase in diameter of up to 30 cm per
year through radial expansion (Tomascik et al. 1996) and the
cylindrical branches of arborescent Acropora allow polyps
over the entire surface in contrast to encrusting or mound
corals can have polyps on only the unattached surface. We
are used to considering competition for space to be a major
selective force in the evolution of corals, but in the case of
Acropora, competitive superiority might be a spinoff of
rapid growth and elevated morphology selected for
increased fecundity, i.e., the rapid production of greater
numbers of potential offspring.
While proximal selection was indirectly successful in
making the Acropora species dominant, the ultimate effect
of reducing investment in defense and tolerance may result
in the dominant species being more susceptible to extinction
with change in climate (Birkeland et al. 2013) as it seems to
have done with erect, dominant corals, in the Mesozoic. On
the other hand, the slower-growing, more tolerant corals that
survived the mass extinctions seem to have sometimes
continued to live for millions of years only to go extinct
when the environment becomes especially favorable for
reef-growth and new genera of scleractinians arise.
Investments in tolerance may have cost them rapid growth
and thereby made them susceptible to being crowded out by
new families of more rapid-growing dominants in times of
major reef growth. The fast-growing dominant corals go
extinct when times are bad (e.g., mass extinctions), while
some of the especially tolerant corals go extinct when times
get especially good for reef production.
Favoring rapid growth at the expense of survival in
Acropora, just as favoring survival at the expense of fecundity in other corals, may have allowed sessile species like
corals to survive when disturbances or stressful conditions
were acute, but brief. But when stressful conditions become
chronic (Chap. 11), as with the influence of overfishing and
coastal construction, sedimentation, pollution and increased
CO2, resulting from the growth of human populations, the
periods of time between successful reproduction and recruitment may become too long for these corals to persist.

C. Birkeland

12.4

We May Keep the Corals but Lose
the Reefs

12.4.1 Many Coral Species May Not Go Extinct
What doesn’t kill you makes you stronger. (Friedrich Nietzsche)

Although coral reefs are likely to continue to deteriorate and
become less topographically complex for the foreseeable
future (Kleypas et al. 1999a, b; Alvarez-Filip et al. 2009;
Fabricius et al. 2011; Kennedy et al. 2013), no longer
providing environmental services such as optimal habitat
for fish and providing protection against wave action as sea
level rises, we need not assume most corals will go extinct.
Many studies document the increased tolerance of corals to
stressful conditions by acclimatization (physiological or
behavioral adjustments of individual colonies) or adaptation
(genetic adjustment of populations). In a series of major
bleaching events in the eastern tropical Pacific (Glynn
et al. 2001; Podestá and Glynn 2001; Jimenez et al. 2001;
Cortes and Jimenez 2003; Zapata and Vargas-Ángel 2003),
French Polynesia (Adjeroud et al. 2009), Great Barrier Reef
(Maynard et al. 2008), and Phuket, Thailand (Dunne and
Brown 2001), corals appeared to become more tolerant of
warm temperatures with experience (Brown 1997a, b; Coles
and Brown 2003; Brown and Cossins 2011; Palumbi
et al. 2014; Barshis Chap. 7). Indeed, corals closer to the
equator have higher thermal limits than do populations of the
same species in subtropical parts of their range (Coles and
Jokiel 1978; Oliver and Palumbi 2009, 2011). Berkelmans
(2002) determined stress-response thresholds for bleaching
from 13 sites on the Great Barrier Reefs across 22 of
latitude over 10–12 years and concluded that thermal adaptation had taken place over both small (10s of km) and large
(100s–1,000s of km) scales of distance.
The ability of diverse assemblages of corals to survive
frequent exposures to high water temperatures is common
(Brown 1997a; Berkelmans and Willis 1999). In shallow
pools on the small island of Ofu in American Samoa,
the water temperature can fluctuate by 6.3  C daily,
reaching 34.5  C (Craig et al. 2001). Although Millepora
spp., Acropora spp., and some corals of other genera occasionally bleach at Ofu, 85 species of coral seem to generally
thrive in these pools of fluctuating temperatures. The
85-species assemblage in these pools is comparable to the
diversity on the reef front. Coles (1997) observed that a
robust assemblage of 24 species of corals occupying
50–75 % of the substrata seemed to survive daily
fluctuations of 8.2  C with no signs of stress. Riegl
et al. (2011) documented that in the central region of the
Arabian/Persian Gulf, corals did not bleach until exposed to
temperatures above 34  C for 8 weeks, with three of the
weeks above 35  C.

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

Some of the presently predominant genera of reefbuilding corals that lived in the Cretaceous (Sect. 12.3.2;
Fig. 12.9) probably lived at seawater temperatures 32–36  C
(Poulsen et al. 1999, 2001; Wilson et al. 2002; Schouten
et al. 2003; Littler et al. 2011; DeCarlo et al. 2015) or
possibly as high as 42  C (Bice et al. 2006) and also at
lower pH, often 7.4–7.6 (Pearson and Palmer 2000; Zeebe
2001; Hönisch et al. 2012) in calcite seas (Mg/Ca mole ratio
<2). The source of massive CO2 input was the extensive and
chronic volcanism that was producing new seafloor and
pushing apart the Americas from Europe and Africa. This
was compounded by the volcanism that was producing the
Deccan Traps at the end of the Cretaceous and the bolide that
hit the Yucatan Peninsula during this time.
Likewise, during the Paleocene and early Eocene, atmospheric pCO2 was 2,000–3,500 ppm and sea surface pH was
between 7.4 and 7.6 (Pearson and Palmer 2000) as it was in
the Mesozoic (Hönisch et al. 2012). This time, the input of
CO2 by volcanism was augmented by the rapid input of
about 2  1012 metric tons of C into the atmosphere as
methane which assisted the rapid lowering of pH and massive dissolution of sea-floor carbonate (Zachos et al. 2005).
Seawater temperatures increased 5  C in the tropics and but
reached 24–26  C near the North Pole (Moran et al. 2006).
The increase in seawater temperature was several times
greater in polar latitudes than in the tropics and this brought
about a lesser latitudinal gradient in seawater temperatures.
This suggests that there may be some kind of “ocean thermostat” that puts limits on tropical seawater temperature
rise, at least in some areas (Kleypas et al. 2008). If seawater
in much of the tropics in the Cretaceous was 32–36  C, then
the future limits to tropical seawater temperatures in large
basins (i.e., oceanic atolls and islands) lie within the range to
which modern corals can adapt (Riegl et al. 2011) .
The two dozen or so genera of reef-building
scleractinians represent about 17 families that have survived
the harsh conditions of the Cretaceous, the CretaceousPaleogene mass extinction, the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal
Maximum and are still predominant on modern reefs. It
seems reasonable to have hope that some descendants will
adapt to the “norm” (diverse scleractinians without reefs)
and not go extinct. This does not apply to fast-growing
species that originate after mass extinctions. They are more
prone to extinction (Sect. 12.3.2).
Montastraea is first found in the Upper Jurassic
(~150 mya), Diploastrea in the Early Cretaceous (Aptian
Age, ~115 mya) (Wells 1956), and Heliopora in the
Cenomanian Cretaceous (~95 mya) (Eguchi 1948). Skeletal
morphology is not a reliable way to categorize coral genera
(Budd et al. 2012), yet they are most likely ancestors to the
genera with their names. For example, although Heliopora
in the Lower Cretaceous is not morphological distinguishable from Heliopora coerulea in the present (Eguchi 1948;

245

Colgan 1984), it is almost certain that the species has
evolved to the extent that if biochemical data were available
for comparison, they would be considered different species.
Nevertheless, the continuous fossil record indicates that
representatives of a number of genera of reef-building
scleractinians survived a long history of extensive stressful
times and mass extinctions (Wells 1956) and so it seems
reasonable to hope that some will survive the present trajectory because their genome may contain substantial relics
from their ancestors. This would not necessarily apply to
those genera that shed defenses and tolerances when they
originated in favorable times (Sect. 12.3.2).
Since corals previously experiencing stress often acclimatize or adapt to become more tolerant (Palumbi
et al. 2014), Steve Palumbi and his lab are planning to
transplant selected coral colonies that have adjusted to
higher temperatures or other stresses to set up “designer
reefs”, groups of experienced colonies that are likely to
survive where the ordinary corals might not (Mascarelli
2014; van Oppen et al. 2015). Likewise, Hernández-Delgado
and Suleimán-Ramos (2014) have also been maintaining a
community-based program of coral farming and outplanting
for reef rehabilitation in Puerto Rico. Transplanting colonies
bypasses the problems of connectivity, i.e., reduced fecundity, reduced fertilization of gametes from sessile adults as
disturbance thins their population densities, shortening of
development time in warmer water, early and local settlement behavior of many larvae despite potential for long
pelagic duration, and reduced acceptability of disturbed
habitats for successful recruitment (Sect. 12.2.3). However,
paleontology indicates that although corals can adapt physiologically to the effects of CO2 (such as temperature) and
survive, they have not been able to adapt the relative rates of
bioerosion and calcification to the effects of low pH and
Mg/Ca mole ratio <2 so it seems likely that many genera of
corals will survive, but reefs will deteriorate.

12.4.2 Reef Structure Will Deteriorate, as in
the Cretaceous and Paleogene
Like obesity, a massive reef accumulation may be the result of
remaining stationary for too long under good conditions.
(RW Buddemeier and RA Kinzie III (in Kleypas et al. 2001))

If the temperatures of tropical seas become warmer and the
pH of shallow seawater becomes lower, most corals may not
go extinct in the near future (Sect. 12.4.1), but bioerosion
will certainly increase (Chap. 4), accretion by some corals
may decrease, and the topographic complexity will decline
(Alvarez-Filip et al. 2009; Fabricius et al. 2011), causing
many reef ecosystem services to deteriorate. Glynn and
Manzello (Chap. 4) explain that coral reefs are in a dynamic

246

and delicate balance between CaCO3 deposition and
bioerosion and dissolution. With increased atmospheric
pCO2, the uptake of CO2 by the ocean lowers the pH of
seawater and accelerates bioerosion while sometimes also
reducing the rate of calcification. With decreased pH, rates
of bioerosion do increase in low-nutrient waters (Wisshak
et al. 2012), but in high-nutrient waters (>1 μM nitrate),
bioerosion increases tenfold (DeCarlo et al. 2015). Lower
pH decreases the saturation state of aragonite, i.e., decreases
the ease by which corals secrete calcium carbonate. Models
predict that calcification rates of corals will decrease by
3018 % in 30–50 years (Kleypas et al. 1999a, b). No matter
how successful we will be in abruptly halting local problems
such as overfishing, sedimentation, pollution, etc., the
increased rates of bioerosion with possibly reduced rates of
calcification will lead to severely reduced structural habitat
complexity, and ecosystem services of coral reefs. Adapting
to ocean acidification by itself is facing an indifferent
non-responsive physical factor, but adapting to bioeroders
is coevolving in an arms race. There has already been a
Caribbean region-wide substantial loss of topographic complexity in the past four decades (Alvarez-Filip et al. 2009),
and so although no corals have gone extinct in the Caribbean, the reefs are becoming substantially degraded and less
functional ecologically.
Are coral reefs now returning to a “normal” situation in
which reef-building is negligible (Kleypas et al. 2001)? The
past interglacial period was extraordinarily favorable for
scleractinian reefs, and not typical of the 224 million years
of scleractinian existence (Hay et al. 1997; Buddemeier and
Kinzie 1998; Pearson and Palmer 2000; Berner and
Kothavala 2001; Kleypas et al. 2001). The late Jurassic
through the late Paleogene was roughly 140 million years
in which the Mg/Ca mole ratio of seawater was below
2 (Stanley and Hardie 1998), and so bioerosion increased
tremendously (Vermeij 1987) and accretion of coral (aragonite) reefs became reduced (Stanley and Hardie 1998;
Kiessling 2009). Although the diversity of reef-building
genera of scleractinians increased (Sepkoski 2002; Kiessling
and Szabo 2004), atmospheric concentrations of CO2 were
higher than today (may have ranged between 600 and
2,400 ppm), seawater temperatures may have ranged
between 32 and 36  C and seawater pH was usually between
7.4 and 7.6 (Pearson and Palmer 2000), so conditions were
not favorable for substantial reef accretion. In the present, as
the pH in warm surface ocean waters is likely to drop,
bioerosion will certainly increase while accretion of reefs
by corals may become more costly energetically.
Kleypas et al. (2001) emphasize that there is not a correlation between how well a coral community is performing
biologically and how well it is performing geologically
(building reefs). In the calcite seas of the Cretaceous, other
creatures such as rudist bivalves provided three-dimensional

C. Birkeland

substrata that corals could use (Götz 2003). Sepkoski (2002)
and Kiessling and Baron-Szabo (2004) found scleractinian
diversity to be high in the Cretaceous, and even if there were
sources of error in Sepkoski’s compilations, the general
pattern of diverse scleractinians with eroded minor reefs
was the situation during most of the existence of
scleractinians. Now as the atmosphere, and then the oceans,
take up more CO2, corals may return to the “norm” of
diverse assemblages of scleractinian corals on eroded reefs
with minor rates of accretion. The basic message is that we
have just been through about 10,000 years of abnormally
prolific reef-building, but scleractinians may now return to
the pattern in the later Mesozoic. Although a drop in Mg/Ca
mole ratio to less than 2 and a drop in pH are very different
chemical processes, they may have the same effects of
accelerating bioerosion while reducing scleractinian reef
accretion.
Corals do quite well without reefs (Fig. 12.3). Corals
recruiting to basalt, plexiglass, pumice and many other
substrata do as well, and sometimes better, than recruits to
coral reefs (Sect. 12.2.3). The past few thousand years have
been extraordinarily favorable for reef accretion and preservation (Kleypas et al. 2001) and this favorable period is
representative of only 10 % of the past few million years
(Hay et al. 1997). Since the origin of scleractinian corals
about 224 million years ago, there have been only three
periods of major reef construction (Kiessling 2009). However, the greatest diversity of scleractinian corals developed
during a time in the later Cretaceous when most of the
calcium carbonate structures were being formed by bivalve
molluscs (rudists). Reefs are not an extended phenotype of
corals like nests are of birds or dams are of beavers (Dawkins
1982), but are a byproduct of long period of good conditions
(Buddemeier and Kinzie 1998).

12.5

Importance and Vulnerability of Big
Fishes on Coral Reefs

12.5.1 Previous Stocks and Their Failure
to Recover
Undisturbed coral reefs can appear to be characterized by
inverted trophic biomass pyramids with up to 80 %
(DeMartini et al. 2008) or 85 % (Sandin et al. 2008) of the
fish biomass in the top level of piscivores and with fishes in
all lower trophic levels pooled together constituting only
15–20 %. Although there is controversy as to whether
inverted trophic biomass pyramids actually exist (Sect.
1.1), the disparate array of methods for surveying fishes all
converge (Rizzari et al. 2014) on the same conclusions that
population densities of large fishes are inversely related to
the population densities of humans (Friedlander and

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

DeMartini 2002; DeMartini et al. 2008; Sandin et al. 2008;
Nadon et al. 2012; Fenner 2014). The apex predators are the
initial focus of the fishing activities and the larger fishes are
especially vulnerable to modern fishing technology
(reviewed in Fenner 2012, 2014). A few fishermen are able
to change the trophic structure of a coral-reef ecosystem in
very little time with modest effort (Fenner 2014), but the
return of large fishes and the recovery of the inverted trophic
pyramid usually takes decades if it happens at all (Hutchings
and Reynolds 2004; Abesamis et al. 2014). Even subsistence
fishing significantly reduced the upper trophic levels and
total vertebrate biomass on coral reefs in the Caribbean at
least 1,300 years ago (Wing and Wing 2001). By the 1800s,
there had been a major decrease in large coral reef and
seagrass-associated vertebrates and by the 1950s, the predatory and herbivorous coral-reef fishes of the greater Caribbean were mostly of small size (Jackson 1997).
The Nassau grouper Epinephelus striatus was historically
one of the most important food fishes in the western tropical
Atlantic. It served as a main source of food and income for
shore communities throughout the greater Caribbean
(Sadovy 1993). Spawning aggregations consisted of as
many as 100,000 individuals (Smith 1972). Now, in the
greater Caribbean, some spawning aggregations have
disappeared. In Bermuda, the catch of Nassau grouper
declined by 93 % in 14 years (Sadovy 1993). Nassau
groupers used to reach a weight of 22.7 kg (50 lbs) or
more, but now most are taken as juveniles. The World
Conservation Union (IUCN) considers the Nassau grouper
endangered.
Despite the loss of larger individuals in Caribbean coralreef fish stocks, as recently as the early 1980s the biomasses
of populations of coral-reef fishes were still estimated to be
as high as 160–200 metric tons km2 in the Atlantic (Randall
1963; Munro 1983) and as high as 93–237 metric tons km2
in the Pacific (Goldman and Talbot 1976; Williams and
Hatcher 1983). The mean harvests on reefs of a couple of
small islands in the central Philippines over a 5-year period
were found to be 11.4 and 16.5 metric tons km2 year1
(Alcala and Luchavez 1982). The shoreline fishery of American Samoa has yielded up to 26.6 metric tons km2 year1
(Wass 1982). Despite the reduction in stocks of larger fishes
on coral reefs, the standing stocks of coral-reef fishes are still
about 30–40 times greater than standing stocks on demersal
fishing grounds in Southeast Asia, the Mediterranean, or
other temperate regions (Russ 1984).
Although the biomasses of fish populations on coral-reefs
three or four decades ago remained high in many places,
coral-reef fish stocks in many locations dropped by 70–80 %
and have remained low since the 1980s. The development of
fishing technology made catching fishes easier, so the catchper-unit-effort (CPUE) often underestimates the actual
decrease of reef fish populations in the past three decades.

247

The CPUE of the shoreline fishery of American Samoa
dropped 70 % between 1979 and 1994 while the number of
common fishes decreased by 75 % and the relative
abundances among fishes changed drastically, with a
decrease in commercially preferred fishes (Craig
et al. 1995). Likewise, in fisheries monitored over a 4-year
period in the Philippines, the numbers of adult fishes
dropped 80 % and the number of species known to reach
adulthood dropped 33 % (McManus et al. 1992). The CPUE
on a bank south of Jamaica also declined by 82 % over a
15-year period (Koslow et al. 1988). The Guam nearshore
fisheries CPUE decreased 78 % between 1985 and 1997
(Birkeland 1997). Data in Sandin et al. (2008) show that
the biomass of reef fishes at Tabuaeran dropped by 68 % and
at Kiritimati dropped 75 % in the past two decades. The
stocks of coral-reef fishes in the main Hawaiian Islands are
at most 20–25 % of what they were a century ago (Shomura
1987; Harman and Katekaru 1988; Smith 1993).
Once the drop in the range of about 80 % in standing
stocks of reef fishes occur, the recovery may take decades if
at all (Abesamis et al. 2014). The Bolbometopon muricatus
were spectacular on Guam in the mid-1970s, but were essentially eliminated by overfishing in the late 1970s and still
almost none are found 34 years later. The scenario is similar
in American Samoa. Craig (2005) noted that corals recover
from hurricanes, Acanthaster, and bleaching, but the fish
populations are not recovering. A visiting marine ecologist
commented that American Samoan reefs were like a lovely
mansion of corals, but the mansion was empty. Where are
the fishes? Like many coral reefs around the world, there are
actually still many colorful small fishes; it is the big fishes
that are gone. Craig (2005) noted there is “no quick fix” and
that what we see today is “a shadow of former population
abundances”. This pattern is not unique to coral reefs.
Hutchings and Reynolds (2004) analyzed data from more
than 230 fish populations that had a median breeding population reduction of 83 % from known historical levels and
found little or no change in abundance for at least 15 years.
The diverse stocks of fishes on coral reefs are impressive,
especially the stocks in relatively untouched areas that
appear to have an inverted trophic biomass structure. This
unfortunately encourages the investment into fishery-based
economies. A journal The Economist stated that commercial
trade in large coral-reef fish is a “gold rush”, a boom and
bust, “. . .an extractive industry that eventually exhausts the
resource it exploits” (Anonymous 2000).

12.5.2 Influence of Large Fishes on Community
Structure
Coral reefs operate differently than do large-scale pelagic
current systems in which concentrated pulses of nutrient

248

input from upwelling act as physical oceanographic drivers
of the foodweb. If the pelagic fishes are overharvested, it
does not necessarily cause long-term fundamental changes
in the system and the populations can replenish themselves
with the next upwelling. The relatively low diversity system
(two trophic levels between primary production and humans
Sect. 1.1) of pelagic fisheries in eastern oceans is relatively
simply based on nutrient input from upwelling and are
relatively unstable because of the dependency on nutrient
input. When there is a major El Niño Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) which dampens upwelling, there is a failure of the
anchoveta and tuna fisheries, hundreds of thousands of
seabirds and at least hundreds of sea lions and seals die,
but the system is resilient and recovers with the return of
nutrient input from upwelling. Although the pelagic system
is unstable because of its dependence on nutrient input, it is
resilient because it does not depend on species interactions
to prevent shifting to alternative states.
In the more complex and diverse coral-reef ecosystems,
internal biological interactions such as grazing, predation,
and competition have dominant roles in community structure. This may provide the communities of coral reefs with
general stability because herbivores can potentially control
the algae and predators can potentially control outbreaks of
herbivores or corallivores. But diverse systems are less resilient because they can fall into alternative stable states. If
herbivores are overfished, algae can take over and dominate
when a disturbance decreases the cover of living coral and
the algal dominance can persist by the effects of algae on
coral recruitment (Sect. 12.2.3). There is no alternative
steady state in most simple systems. Since coral-reef systems
are complex, with species interactions that can maintain the
stability of the system, they are less resilient to overfishing
or severe disturbances because it is these species interactions
that prevent the system from shifting to alternative states.
Long-term studies by McClanahan (2014) on the coast of
Kenya found that the piscivores regained their biomass after
about 20 years of protection, but the biomass of herbivorous
fishes was slow to recover and the functional groups in the
coral-reef system had still not fully recovered after 35 years
of protection. Even if the biomass of herbivores is recovered,
the “functional groups” may not recover unless the large
individuals are present. Even at lower trophic levels, the
size of the individual fish is of key importance. Parrotfishes
below 15–20 cm in length nibble at algae to feed themselves,
but those above 15–20 cm in length scape or excavate the
substratum, removing algae and creating bare substrata
appropriate for successful coral larval recruitment
(Bruggemann et al. 1996; Bonaldo and Bellwood 2008;
Lokrantz et al. 2008; Ong and Holland 2010).
Hunting the largest individuals not only affects the coralreef ecosystem, but also has direct and indirect effects on the
other fishes associated with targeted fish. Reducing the size

C. Birkeland

and abundance of the predatory fishes led to the fishes at
lower trophic levels to increase in average size and longevity
(Ruttenberg et al. 2011), and to be in generally better condition. Sex change for protogynous species occurred at a larger
body size when there were fewer apex predators (DeMartini
et al. 2005). For a given body length, fishes at lower trophic
levels had greater body mass, greater liver mass, and more
energy reserves on reefs in which the predators at upper
trophic levels were less common (Walsh et al. 2012).
The reason for the lower energy reserves and lower body
and liver mass per unit length in coral-reef fishes on reefs
where the top predators are in their natural abundances is
likely to be the high risk of predation restricting the time and
distance the potential prey species forages for food away
from refuges from predation. Thus the removal of top
predators potentially affects the benthic community by
allowing the herbivores to forage greater distances from
shelter and thereby increasing the distances that barren
grounds or haloes separate reefs from seagrass (Randall
1965). Although herbivorous fishes become more predominant where the higher trophic levels have been fished down,
this does not mean that the herbivores have higher biomass.
The herbivores might also be fished down, but not to the
extent of the top predators (Friedlander and DeMartini
2002).
Natural, undisturbed coral reefs are typically
characterized by what appears to be an inverted trophic
biomass pyramid, where upper trophic levels consist of
large predators with relatively slow turnover, and the
populations of fishes at lower trophic levels of herbivorous
and planktivorous fishes consist of fewer and smaller fishes
(DeMartini et al. 2008). The inverse pyramid is sustained
because top predators have relatively slow turnover and the
lower trophic levels (prey) have relatively rapid turnover.
But this makes the system especially vulnerable to
overharvesting of the slow-growing species in the upper
trophic levels. It is the diversity of consumers and the large
number of trophic levels that provide the mechanisms
behind the unique structure of coral reefs of large gross
primary production and mediocre net production or fisheries
yield (Fig. 1.1; Sect. 1.1).

12.5.3 Importance of Large Fishes
to Population Sustainability
The number of years of reproductive activity typical of a
species indicates the usual degree of risk of failure to produce successful recruitment (Sect. 12.2.1). Analyses of data
from 251 species of fishes showed that as recruitment success became more variable, the traits of late maturity,
increased longevity, and iteroparity substantially increased
(Longhurst 2002). Recruitment to complex coral reefs is

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

249

hazardous for larval or juvenile fishes. Planktivorous fishes
form a “wall of mouths” during the day (Hamner et al. 1988)
and scleractinian corals, zoanthids, and anemones form a
“wall of mouths” at night (Fabricius and Metzner 2004).
There have been many studies of the effects of predation
by resident fishes on the survival of newly arrived juveniles
(Hixon 1991; Hixon and Beets 1993; Hixon and Carr 1997;
Holbrook and Schmitt 2002; Hoey and McCormick 2004;
Dixson 2011) and on the effects of competition among the
recruits (Holt 1984, 1987; Jones 1997; Hixon 1991;
Holbrook and Schmitt 2002). The proportion of successfully
settled Haemulon favolineatum surviving through the first
year was determined to be 0.008 (Ogden 1997). The survival
of successfully settled Acanthurus lineatus through their first
year has been found to be 0.007 (Craig 1995), but once
established as an adult, it can live 42 years (Choat and
Robertson 2002).
The hazardous and unreliable successful recruitment on
coral reefs is probably the reason that coral-reef fishes are
adapted to live long enough to attempt reproduction many
times (Sect. 12.2.1). Acanthurids often live to 30 or 40 years
(Choat and Robertson 2002) as do some lutjanids (Newman
et al. 1996). Individuals of the genera of groupers

(Serranidae) such as Epinephalus, Mycteroperca and
Cephalopholis live 30–50 years, 33 years and 26 years,
respectively. The relatively short-lived Plectropomus spp.
still live over a decade (Ferreira and Russ 1994). The
holocentrid Myripristis amaena becomes mature after
6 years and lives at least 14 years (Dee and Parrish 1994).
Even damselfishes and parrotfishes have lifespans generally
between 5 and 20 years, with Stegastes acapulcoensis having a maximum age of 32 years (Meekan et al. 2001).
Bolbometopon muricatum takes about 7–8 years to reach
sexual maturity at about 60 cm length, with a lifespan of
about 40 years (Hamilton et al. 2008; Hamilton and Choat
2012).
The larger individuals among coral-reef fishes are particularly important, not only for maintaining ecosystem structure, but for sustaining their own populations. The fecundity
of fishes increases exponentially with body size (Fig. 12.10);
and so in natural populations where recruitment is sparse and
uncertain and small fishes are at risk of being consumed by
predators, the selective pressure strongly favors large body
size, long life, and multiple reproductions. When the species
that formerly had a refuge in size is now the prey of humans,
however, the probability of living long enough to reproduce

Fig. 12.10 Fecundity increases exponentially with body length in fish.
One 61-cm female red snapper (lutjanid) produces the same number of
eggs as 212 females at 42 cm each, or 12.5 kg of large snapper produces
the equivalent number of eggs as 233 kg of medium-sized snappers.

Each smaller snapper is 69 % the length of the larger one (Bohnsack
1998). The reproductive potential of a population is disproportionately
affected when fishermen target large individuals. This is especially true
for protandrous species

250

Fig. 12.11 There is a strong selective advantage for a top predator to
grow large because fecundity increases exponentially with body size.
When the top predator becomes prey to humans, selection turns to
favoring early reproduction. Effective reserves protect the intraspecific
genetic diversity of populations (Bohnsack 1998)

at a large size becomes small (Fig. 12.11); and selective
pressure can shift to favoring rapid growth, early reproduction, and smaller size.
In contrast, recruitment to fisheries in pelagic systems is
relatively reliable with the exception of periods of ENSO
every few years and so lifespans of less than a decade should
allow the adult fish populations to reproduce relatively reliably in abundance during non-ENSO years. Pelagic fishes
such as mahimahi (Coryphaena hippuros) often live 2 years
and grow to 14 kg (31 lb) on the In contrast, recruitment to
fisheries in pelagic systems is relatively reliable with the
exception of periods of ENSO every few years and so
lifespans of less than a decade should allow the adult fish
populations to reproduce relatively reliably in abundance
during non-ENSO years. Pelagic fishes such as mahimahi
(Coryphaena hippuros) often live 2 years and grow to 14 kg
(31 lb) on the average, and can live a maximum of 4 or
5 years and grow to a maximum of 39.5 kg (87 lb). The
pelagic Thunnus albacares (yellowfin tuna) has a lifespan of
up to 6.5 years (Lehodey and Leroy 1999) and can grow to
over 181 kg (almost 400 lb).
Pelagic fishes possibly grow faster in part because they
continually search for dense concentrations of food and
sometimes have the opportunity to consume food much
more intensely than do coral-reef predatory fishes. When
tuna find a mass of fish, they devour their prey intensely,
consuming as much as 25 % of their body weight in one day,
which partially explains their rapid growth. Coral-reef fishes

C. Birkeland

cannot find prey in such concentrations because the topographic complexity provides refugia for their prey and so
they feed on an occasional individual prey that wanders too
far from their shelter. The introduced predatory reef fish
Cephalopholis argus on the island of Hawaii, where it
grows faster than in its native range, is found to consume
on the average 0.8 % of its body weight per day (Dierking
2007). Groupers generally grow slowly, rarely over 0.5 kg
per year. Yellowfin tuna can average 28 kg per year or
56 times faster growth than coral-reef groupers. When we
compare the rate of growth and found to consume on the
average 0.8 % of its body weight per day (Dierking 2007).
Groupers generally grow slowly, rarely over 0.5 kg per year.
Yellowfin tuna can average 28 kg per year or 56 times faster
growth than coral-reef groupers. When we compare the rate
of growth and potential longevity of coral-reef fishes such as
Acanthurus lineatus that can live 42 years (Choat and
Robertson 2002) to grow to a maximum size of 2.7 lb
(1.24 kg), we can perceive how the ratio of fisheries yield
per unit gross primary productivity for the Peruvian upwelling can be about 20–60 times greater than is this ratio for
coral reefs (Fig. 1.1; Nixon 1982). There are some
exceptions. The larger marlin and bluefin tuna can live
25 and 40 years, respectively. Bluefin tuna take several
years to reach maturity and, like large coral-reef fishes, are
more vulnerable to overfishing and most populations have
decreased over 90 %.
Even the larger individuals of smaller species on coral
reefs are important for fecundity. For example, the
yellowstripe goatfish Mulloides flavolineatus is a schooling
predator of small, soft-bodied invertebrates in the sand. It
reaches sexual maturity within 1 year after hatching and has
a long period of repeated spawnings each year. The local
fishermen on Guam probably do not realize that fishing
pressure has been drastically reducing the reproductive
potential of the goatfish each year. By 1991, the reproductive
potential of M. flavolineatus was only 5 % of its unfished
potential (Davis 1992). By harvesting the larger individuals
of even the smaller, more rapidly maturing fishes, a greater
portion of the breeding stock is taken than is perceived by
fishermen.
Although the importance of larger individuals may have
been taken into account by Pacific islanders who knew the
natural history of their fishes centuries ago, in modern times
this is a particular problem because state fishing regulations
are often not based on the natural histories of the fishes
concerned and therefore allow the taking of important species such as parrotfishes before they have a chance to reproduce for the first time (Howard 2008). Important additional
components of this loss of sustainability are the development
of technologies such as refrigeration that allowed the switch
from local subsistence to a global market economy. New

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

251

Fig. 12.12 One night’s catch of Bolbometopon muricatum at Tetapare Island in the Solomon Islands (Photo courtesy of Richard J. Hamilton)

technologies such as scuba and underwater lights provided
the means to overharvest large species such as
Bolbometopon muricatum while they sleep, eliminating previous natural refuges for breeding stock (Fig. 12.12;
Hamilton and Choat 2012).
Westerners’ tendencies to focus harvesting on the largest
individuals is as deleterious as the elimination of natural
refuges and the switch to a global market. This can reduce
the potential for population replenishment by drastically
lowering fecundity, shortening the reproductive season,
thus preventing the “bet-hedging” that allow some of the
larvae to encounter favorable conditions, and in some cases
reducing the average growth rate and endurance strength of
larvae (Berkeley et al. 2004a, b; Bobko and Berkely 2004;
Hixon et al. 2013). Overharvesting of larger individuals can
also lead to the loss of genetic heterogeneity, potentially
leading to reduced adaptability (Hauser et al. 2002). In
recent decades, selective fishing pressure on the larger
(older) individuals has caused a rapid evolution of smaller
body size and lower fecundity in some harvested populations
(Handford et al. 1977; Ricker 1981; Olsen et al. 2004).

12.5.4 What Does This Mean for Management
Practices?
Isolated peoples can be in situations in which they must
exploit coral reefs for subsistence. How should fish be
taken while still maintaining the integrity of coral reef
systems? Fish should be exploited with two forms of
moderation: the use of slot limits on sizes taken and shift
the focus from harvesting the capital to harvesting the

interest or yield (Fig. 12.13). Slot limits guide the taking of
intermediate size classes of a species, but leaving the largest
individuals as highly fecund brood stock and leaving the
juveniles to manifest their potential for rapid growth.
The yellow tang Zebrasoma flavescens is the economically most important aquarium fish in Hawaii and it is
compelling to surmise that its spectacular success may be
facilitated by effective slot limits. Well over 200,000 yellow
tang are taken from the Kona Coast of Hawaii each year by
the aquarium trade (280,125 in 2013 [William Walsh
unpubl. data]). About 89,000 are taken as prey by roi
(Dierking 2007), the introduced predatory grouper,
Cephalopholis argus. This is an approximate total of
370,000 taken in 2013. Of course, this is an approximation
and it must vary from year to year, but it does indicate that
the population of yellow tang has been sustaining itself well.
On a 217-km continuous reef, the take would be over 1,700
yellow tang per km of coastline per year.
This sustainability has certainly been aided by the establishment of zones in which some of the brood stock of
aquarium fishes cannot be taken and there also must be
habitat and oceanographic conditions favorable for recruitment. But the yellow tang still stands out as more productive
than the other species in these environmental conditions
taken for the aquarium trade and taken by predatory fishes.
Part of the reason for the sustainability and extremely productive success of this system might be because both roi, the
introduced predator, and the aquarium industry favor
medium-sized individuals over the larger and the smaller
individuals. Meyer and Dierking (2011) documented that
Cephalopholis argus on the Kona Coast fed mainly on
prey between 3 and 15 cm length (n ¼ 135), while yellow

252

Fig. 12.13 Traditionally, the optimal harvest was considered to be to
the left of the maximum sustainable yield (MSY). Overfishing has
sometimes been defined by fishery councils under the MSA as
spawning biomass reduced to 20 % of its unfished level. The fishery
would be more stable if the same yield is taken from the right of the
maximum sustainable yield (Courtesy of Joan Roughgarden. Modified
and redrawn from Roughgarden and Smith 1996 with permission
Copyright (1996) National Academy of Sciences, USA)

tang grow to 20 cm (Randall 2007). The aquarium trade also
finds medium-sized yellow tang (8–15 cm) more marketable
for household aquariums than older larger individuals
(15–20 cm). By leaving the larger individuals which have
the exponentially greater fecundity, and also leaving the
smaller individuals which have the greatest proportional
growth rates, harvesting the intermediate size classes is the
most sustainable (Fig. 12.10).
Of 117 definitions of “overfishing” reviewed by an international panel of experts for the National Marine Fisheries
Service, essentially all of them allowed fishing to reduce the
stock well below the point of maximum sustainable yield
(Darcy and Matlock 1999). For fishery councils operating
under the Magnusen-Stevens Act (MSA), it is not uncommon for overfishing to be considered to begin when the
spawning biomass is reduced to 20 % of its unfished level.
This might not be appropriate for coral-reef fisheries
because, as indicated by the longevity and multiple years
of spawning typical of reef fishes (Sect. 12.2.1), successful
replenishment of the fisheries catch may not be as reliable
for coral-reef fisheries as for the target stocks on which
theory is based. Roughgarden and Smith (1996) pointed
out that when the limits to fishing down the population to
the left of MSY (maximum sustainable yield), there is lower
reproductive stock and theory indicates that this leads to a
very unstable ecological equilibrium, “as difficult to maintain as balancing a marble on top of a dome”. A coral-reef
fisheries should be managed to promote stability because of
the unreliability of successful recruitment. If the take is
limited to the right of MSY, where the reproduction is
affected by crowding, the fishery is “as easy to maintain as
keeping a marble near the base of a bowl”. Figure 12.13
illustrates how the fisheries yield is potentially the same on

C. Birkeland

either side of MSY, but if we harvest the capital (line A) as in
most commercial fisheries, the system is very unstable and
difficult to manage. If we harvest the interest (line B) as in
many indigenous subsistence fishers, the system is stable
with “natural insurance” (Roughgarden and Smith 1996). A
caveat for any fisheries theory that refers to MSY is that it is
a moving target that is difficult to observe. A quantitative
estimate of MSY requires a lot of data repeatedly because it
changes frequently. Indigenous subsistence fishers did not
need a quantitative estimate of MSY. They could observe if
the larger individuals were still present.
Bob Johannes (1998) once pointed out that data-less
resource management was the most effective approach to
the complex and unpredictable interactions of resource management. For example, to adequately survey Indonesia for
fish abundance or biomass would require over 400 man-years
and the system being surveyed would change before the
survey was complete. Are the quantitative values of abundance or biomass relevant? A hundred kilograms of small
goatfish may have an order of magnitude lower fecundity
than the same biomass of fewer larger goatfish. A hundred
kilograms of parrotfishes <20 cm in length would have
relatively little effect on the benthos while the same biomass
of fewer larger parrotfishes would be removing algae and
clearing substrata for coral recruitment. The information that
is necessary to evaluate potential replenishment of marine
resources should rely not on statistical analyses of surveys of
biomass or population densities of stock or assessments of
CPUE, but rather on the straightforward observation of
whether the big ones are still there.

12.5.5 Coral Reef Ecosystems Are Not
for Export, but Rather for a Service
Economy
Although coral reefs have the greatest gross productivity of
any ecosystem in the tropical seas, the sustainable fisheries
yield and net system productivity are relatively low
(Fig. 1.1). Far less than 1 % of the gross primary productivity
of a natural coral reef is converted to production that is
meaningful for human consumption (Hatcher 1997). The
ratio of fisheries yield per unit gross primary productivity
for the Peruvian upwelling is about 20–60 times greater than
is this ratio for coral reefs (Fig. 1.1; Nixon 1982). The
average ratio of gross productivity (P) to respiration (R) is
close to 1 (P/R ¼ 1) and the positive excess production,
or potential yield from the system, is very close to zero
(Sect. 1.1).
The number of trophic levels in food-webs decreases as
nutrient input increases. Hallock (1987) explains
mechanisms by which chronically low-levels of nutrient
input leads to habitat and species diversity. Ryther (1969)

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

assigned one or two steps between phytoplankton and man to
upwelling systems and acknowledged that the upwelling
regions of the world have the shortest food-webs. Grigg
et al. (1984) assigned six trophic levels to coral reefs, probably the most complex of marine systems. Much of the
assimilated energy is lost in respiration at each step in the
food-web so that it is understandable that there would be less
excess production in a system with six trophic levels than in
a system with two.
There was a widespread concern in Bermuda that the
coral reefs were deteriorating because of commercial fishing, even though the fisheries economy and number of people employed in extractive fisheries was small compared
with tourism. Tourism and recreation related in Bermuda
grossed more than $9 million in 1988. The hotel owners,
charter-boat fishermen, dive and tour-boat operators and
other businesses felt the incomes of many were threatened
by the activities of a few fishermen. In 1990, considering
evidence that the catches were declining substantially and
the reef communities were deteriorating, the Government of
Bermuda offered payment of up to $75,000 per fishermen, in
addition to compensating them for hardware such as pots and
winches, in order to close the coral reefs of Bermuda to pot
fishing (Butler et al. 1993). This was not popular with commercial fishermen and was considered by some to be draconian. But with the establishment of a number of offshore fishaggregation devices, some fishermen found alternative
livelihoods with recreational charter fishing, offshore
longlining for pelagic fishes, and deep-water trapping for
crabs and prawns. Unlike fishing on coral reefs which is
naturally subsidized by alternative species when the preferred
species become scarce, the alternative fisheries each targeted
certain types of fish and therefore was relatively self-limiting,
requiring healthy stocks in order to have a viable fishery.
The money exchanged in world tourism in 1992 was 1.9
trillion, over 27 times the 70 billion of the world marine
fisheries revenue (Weber 1993). In 2012, international tourism alone grossed 1.3 trillion, about 16 times the world
marine fisheries which grossed 80 billion. To participate
in the world economy, the islands of Oceania can be
highly competitive for the high spenders in tourism, while
geography (transportation costs for export fishery products),
ecology (low sustainable yield and effects of overfishing on
ecosystem processes), and biology (life-history characteristics of the species) work against commercial export fisheries
from coral reefs. The infrastructure for commercial fisheries
(processing, refrigeration, transportation) is more expensive
and risky than the commitment to ecotourism. The cost of
airfares are paid by the tourists themselves and create local
employment, in contrast to the subtraction of air transport
costs from the profit on exported fish sales. Analogous to the
great diversity and biomass of species supported by reefs in
regions of low rates of nutrient input, a greater number of

253

people and jobs can be supported sustainably by coral reefs
if economies are based on the natural attributes of the species
and ecosystem.
I have been told by fisheries scientists that once a fish is
dead, it does not matter whether it is used for subsistence or
commercial export. But it takes at least an order of magnitude more fish to support a few commercial fishermen than it
does to support a population by subsistence because most of
the proceeds from the sale of fishes goes to supporting the
marketing and transportation infrastructure. Coral-reef
resources can sustain a much greater number of people or
careers in the world economy if used in nonexportive
enterprises. The nonexportive, service-oriented approaches
of Bermuda and Palau (Sect. 12.6.3) are compatible with the
attributes of coral-reef ecosystems and species, and with the
demands of the growing human populations, growing
economies, and urbanization.
Much of the great increases in marine fisheries of the
world in the 1950s and 1960s came from the shift in emphasis in fisheries from the predatory fishes to the more plentiful
fishes lower in the food-web. The catch of anchoveta
(Engraulis ringens) in the Peru upwelling increased from
about 200,000 metric tons in 1955 to 12 million tons in 1970,
a 60-fold increase (Larkin 1978). In view of these successes,
Grigg et al. (1984) suggested a series of important principles
of resource management of coral reefs, in which the first was
“To maximize efficiency, harvest at levels of sustained yield
as low on the food chain as possible. Cropping predators
would increase potential yield.” Likewise, at a UNESCO
meeting in Sri Lanka, I heard that local fishermen would
prefer not having coral reefs because the slower growth of
the resident fishes provided less turnover and therefore less
sustainable yield, the higher diversity made harvesting and
processing less efficient, the residency made replenishment
less reliable, and the reefs themselves were a hazard to
navigation. If our objective is to feed the growing human
population, coral-reef fisheries are too easily overharvested,
are too diverse for economically efficient processing, and
unlike the pelagic fisheries, overfishing can affect the ecosystem. Although the Palauans and Bermudans agree that
coral reefs are susceptible to overfishing and do not provide
for a sustainable export economy, they had a rational view
that coral reefs actually provide a solid economic basis for
globalization with a service-based economy.

12.5.6 Palau, an Exemplary Case of Coral-Reef
Management
I believe the evolution of a social system that was built around
knowledge has been the true treasure of Palauans. This, in my
opinion, is also why Palau has had such great leaders and will
continue to benefit for many years to come. (Gerald W. Davis)

254

Palauans display a more successful insight than any other
people of which I am aware into adapting their solid understanding of the natural history of their resources to the
changing conditions imposed by globalization of economics.
Their policies of resource use appear to be developed by a
society with knowledge of how ecosystem processes of coral
reefs (Sect. 1.1) and life-history characteristics of animals in
coral-reef communities (Sect. 12.5.3) are more sustainable
and profitable with a subsistence and service –based economy (tourism) than with an export-based economy. On only
a few hundred meters of reef at Blue Corner and nearby
Ngemelis Dropoff, Palau earned about $7,000 per day on the
average and up to $14,000 per day in peak season from
diving tours back in 1992 (C. Cook, The Nature Conservancy – Palau Office, pers. comm.). A major contribution
towards these earnings was a large humphead wrasse that
allowed tourist photographers to approach closely. The
Palauans were aware that this fish was much more profitable
economically as a continuous tourist draw at thousands of
dollars per day than it would be as a one-time fisheries yield,
and so shooting this individual wrasse for sale in the fish
market would have been socially unacceptable. Even
dog-tooth tuna and grey reef sharks came close to
photographers at Blue Corner. Diving activities by tourists
brought in over $12 million to Palau in 1992 (not counting
additional expenditures such as hotels, meals, and transportation). In 2010, scuba tourism brought $85 million to Palau
(Vianna et al. 2010), and at least 50 % of tourists are scuba
divers and close to 90 % go snorkeling or swimming
(N. Singeo – Palau Visitors Authority, pers. comm.)
(Figs. 12.14 and 12.15).
With its Shark Haven Act of 2009, Palau had the remarkable insight to set up the first major sanctuary for sharks,
banning all fishing for sharks throughout its 600,000 km2
exclusive economic zone (EEZ). A study by the Australian
Institute of Marine Biology found that 39 % of Palau’s gross
domestic product ($218 million) was from scuba-tourism
($85 million) and 21 % ($17.9 million) of diving tourists
said their primary purpose for choosing Palau was specifically to see sharks. Vianna et al. (2010) estimated that the
main tourist dive sites hosted approximately 100 sharks.
Therefore, they concluded an individual live shark brings
in about $179,000 in revenue per year in the tourist industry,
or a lifetime value of about $1.9 million, compared to $108
as a fisheries catch. The tax revenues to Palau from scubadiving activity during which the observation of sharks was
the major objective was 24 times higher than the total
revenues from the fishing industry (Vianna et al. 2010).
Because of their economic and biological insight in
developing a service-based economy rather than an
extraction-based economy for coral reefs, Palau was given
the prestigious Future Policy Award of 2012 for the best
ocean policy of all nations. Palau’s intelligent practice of

C. Birkeland

Fig. 12.14 “Tame” Cheilinus undulatus humphead wrasse that allows
tourists to photograph it at Blue Corner, Palau (Photo courtesy of David
Burdick)

bringing in substantially more revenue with relatively little
capital investment, as well as the understanding that the lifehistory of sharks makes them especially vulnerable to harvest, encouraged similar actions by other nations. In 2010,
the year following Palau’s Shark Haven Act, the Maldives
established their 90,000 km2 EEZ as a shark sanctuary and
Hawaii became the first state in the US to prohibit the sale of
shark fins. In 2011, the rest of Micronesia (the Marshalls,
Kosrae, Pohnpei, Chuuk, Yap, the Commonwealth of the
Northern Marianas, and Guam), Tokelau, Honduras, and the
Bahamas established shark sanctuaries throughout their
EEZs. French Polynesia (4.7 million km2) and the Cook
islands (1.9 million km2) followed suit in 2012 and the
British Virgin Islands in 2014. The Bahamas now advertises
itself to tourists as the shark-diving capital of the world.
Scuba-diving and snorkeling on coral reefs form a major
base of the economies of a several countries. Over 31,000
tourists observe the reefs of Bonaire with scuba annually and
the revenue from scuba-related tourism brings in about $23
million each year, about half their gross domestic product.
The annual expenditure in reef protection by Bonaire is
$0.67 million per year (NOAA Coral Reef Valuation Database), so the return on investment is substantially better than
it would be for extractive fisheries. Service-based economies
are not only substantially more profitable both in total
income and in the ratio of profit to investment, but they are
more sustainable for coral reefs because of the life-history
characteristics of coral-reef species (Sect. 12.5.3).
Charter-boat sport-fishing of offshore pelagic fishes
brings in considerably more money per fish than direct
sales of fish. I knew a person who moved to Guam from
Florida in hopes of making a living as a commercial fisherman. The expense of ice, diesel fuel, marketing, upkeep of
the boat, docking fees, and the cost of living on Guam made
it too difficult to compete with fishers in the Philippines who

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

255

Fig. 12.15 Carcharinus amblyrhynchos (grey reef sharks) and Caranx sexfasciatus (bigeye trevally) at a popular tourist dive site Siaes Corner,
Palau (Photos courtesy of David Burdick)

could live and operate on substantially less. Philippine
fishers could undersell fishers on Guam despite the added
daily cost of air-freighting their fish to the market. Therefore, the person I knew supported his goal of occasionally
being a commercial fisherman by actually making his
income by chartering his boat for offshore sport-fishing.
In 1980, Japan AID contributed 11 diesel fishing boats
and other fishing gear to Palau to promote export of reef
fishes. After a year, thousands of dollars were being
exchanged in the marketing of reef fishes, but after expenses
in operating the boats, marketing and processing the fish, the
fishermen were netting only US$ 0.20 per fish. In the export
business, fishermen would have to sell about 5 kg of reef fish
to purchase 0.2 kg of canned tuna at the supermarket. It was
clear that exporting fishes was far less profitable, and well as
being in competition with subsistence fishing, recreational
fishing, tourism, and selling fishes to local restaurants and
hotels.
In view of the more sustainable economic use of
resources in subsistence and tourism than in export of biomass, the Government of Palau has passed legislation called
the “Marine Protection Act of 1994” to gradually phase out
the export of coral-reef fishes. “The purpose of this Act is to
promote sustainability and develop marine resources of the
Republic while also preserving the livelihood of the commercial fishermen of the Republic.” At this time, commercial export of reef-fishes from Palau is illegal during the
months of March through July which are the spawning
seasons for important reef-fish species. The local fishermen
are encouraged to switch completely to other forms of
endeavor, e.g., chartering for sport fishing or selling fish
locally to hotels and restaurants. The money stays in Palau
when the fish are sold locally, the fisherman can make a lot
more money per fish by cutting the costs of shipping and

middlemen, and the quality of fish in the local hotels and
restaurants is greater when they do not have to compete with
the export market.
Palau has a strong tradition of a marine tenure system.
Resource management regulations may still be put in place
by traditional chiefs in each state. A traditional closure is
called a “bul”. In support of this tradition, the constitution of
the Government of Palau recognizes that each state has the
responsibility to manage all activities within their lagoons,
inshore areas, and reefs extending 12 nautical miles seaward
of the shore. The national government holds an advisory role
to the state on all matters of resource management. Access to
fish within a state is granted by the traditional leader’s
authority.
When a local community establishes restrictions, this
helps the Government understand what policies are needed
by the local communities. In 1988, before the banning of
exports of coral-reef invertebrates (other than those produced by aquaculture) and reef-fishes during their breeding
seasons, a “bul” on the export of sea cucumbers was promoted by groups of women who collected them for subsistence (Gerald Davis, pers. comm.). Sea cucumbers are a very
popular and commercially valuable food in Asian countries.
An Asian entrepreneur came to Palau and began exporting
the more valuable species. This quickly depleted the stocks.
Women who glean the reefs for subsistence realized how
these commercial exports were substantially reducing their
abilities to take food home. Their lobbying for a “bul” on the
exportation of sea cucumbers made the Government of Palau
aware of the need for regulations in cooperation with the
local communities (Gerald Davis, pers. comm.). The Marine
Protection Act of 1994 was thereby developed from a
responsible tradition of cultural regulation of local
resources.

256

Communication between villages and the Government of
Palau has been remarkably two-way. Just as the Government
pays attention to a local “bul”, the people pay attention to
their leaders. The seawater warming of 1997–1998 caused
substantial coral mortality. The coral was replaced by algae
which inhibited coral recruitment. Tommy Remengesau, Jr.,
then Vice President of Palau, published advice in the local
newspaper to avoid taking herbivorous fishes for food, but
rather take predators or omnivores, because the herbivores
can control algae and this should facilitate coral recruitment.
He also asked people not to step on living corals because in
doing so they would damage the brood stock needed for
recovery of coral populations. The reefs recovered substantially, so perhaps his advice was heeded. He also initiated the
Micronesia Challenge in which Palau and the other nations
of Micronesia all pledge to conserve effectively at least 30 %
of their nearshore marine resources and 20 % of their terrestrial resources by 2020. In 2014, the President of Palau
announced his intention to establish the first nation-wide
marine sanctuary that fully protects more than 80 % of its
EEZ. Remengesau, now President of Palau, was winner of
the Champions of the Earth award by the United Nations for
the policies of Palau that promise to sustain economic resilience while maintaining natural resources.
There has also been a two-way communication between
Palauan cultural knowledge of the natural history of the
coral-reef resources and western science. Bob Johannes
(1981) championed the knowledge of Micronesian
fishermen and quoted other scientists as well who noted
that local fishermen know more about the natural history of
their resources than is known in science. The Palauans have
special talents to combine traditional culture and economics
with science and natural history to get the best results. They
accept technical support with an open mind. For example,
Noah Idechong received an education in economics, but he
grew up knowing Palauan fisheries and was awarded a Pew
Fellowship in 1997 to work on marine conservation.
National Marine Fisheries Service awarded him a grant to
develop a sustainable sport fishery that provided the best use
of the inshore fishery resources of Palau.
Noah led the founding of the Palau Conservation Society
(PCS), a nongovernmental organization with the goal of
solidifying the local communities’ capacities for stewarding
their natural resources. PCS takes the comprehensive
(marine and terrestrial) ecosystem approach and helped to
develop the Protected Areas Network (PAN) in cooperation
with the local communities and the national government of
Palau. PAN sites are the Palauan commitment towards the
Micronesia Challenge. The Palauan Government established
a Green Fee, a fee that is paid by anyone leaving Palau.
Diving tourists are nearly always happy to pay a coral-reef
resource management tax as long as it is directly used for the
stated purpose rather than to general government account.

C. Birkeland

The Green Fees of Palau are restricted to a PAN Fund.
States, communities or private protected areas may apply
for support to develop and manage a PAN site. PCS worked
with the government, states and the NOAA Pacific Islands
Fisheries Science Center to develop criteria for management
plans and monitoring protocols.
The other peoples of the Caroline Islands (Yap, Chuuk,
Pohnpei, Kosrae and their numerous associated atolls) also
have solid knowledge of their resources. In Yap, they
directly manage their terrestrial resources by planting vegetation or raising livestock or poultry to replace what is
harvested, but they manage their harvesting of marine
resources indirectly by managing their fishing practices
because they know they must depend on the whims of
natural processes to replace what they harvest. Traditional
social organizations of marine tenure, rights of harvest,
control of fishing methods vary among the many islands
and atolls. However, Palau stands out as leading in adapting
management of resources to the changing global economy.
The most important value of coral reefs in the lives of
local people is usually not recognized by outsiders. This is
the stabilizing effects of reefs on social structure. Fishing is
often a cooperative activity in which each of the family
members has a clearly recognized role. It has been discerned
from interviews of fishermen in Palau that fishing activities
help solidify the roles and importance of members of the
family. It has been said that reefs may be more important in
providing the opportunity for fishing activities than in
providing the catch. Fishing and reef-gleaning are often
perceived as fun and wholesome. In cases where large
developments such as resorts or military bases obstruct
access of local people to traditional fishing or reef-gleaning
areas, the effects cannot be overcome simply with jobs
providing wages by which food can be purchased. As social
structure deteriorates, the numbers of suicides and criminal
acts increase. The economic costs of such societal maladies
are rarely taken into account in the evaluation of coral reefs,
but these costs of the deterioration of coral reefs are ultimately paid by all of us.

References
Abesamis RA, Green AL, Russ GR, Jadloc CRL (2014) The intrinsic
vulnerability to fishing of coral reef fishes and their differential
recovery to fishery closures. Rev Fish Biol Fisheries. doi:10.1007/
s11160-014-9362-x
Adjeroud M, Michonneau F, Edmunds PJ, Chancerelle Y, Lison de
Loma T, Penin L, Thibaut L, Vidal-Dupiol J, Salvat B, Galzin R
(2009) Recurrent disturbances, recovery trajectories, and resilience
of coral assemblages on a South Central Pacific reef. Coral Reefs
28:775–780
Albright RA, Mason B, Langdon C (2008) Effect of aragonite saturation state on settlement and post-settlement growth of Porites
astreoides larvae. Coral Reefs 27:485–490

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

Albright RA, Mason B, Miller M, Langdon C (2010) Ocean acidification compromises recruitment success of the threatened Caribbean
coral, Acropora palmata. Proc Natl Acad Sci 107:20400–20404
Alcala AC, Luchavez T (1982) Fish yields of the coral reef surrounding
Apo Island, Negros Occidental, Central Visayas, Philippines. Proc
4th Internat Coral Reef Sym, Manila l: 69–73
Almany GR, Berumen ML, Thorrold SR, Planes S, Jones GP (2007)
Local replenishment of coral reef fish populations in a marine
reserve. Science 316:742–744
Alvarez-Filip L, Dulvy NK, Gill JA, Côté IM, Watkinson AR (2009)
Flattening of Caribbeancoral reefs: region-wide declines in architectural complexity. Proc Roy Soc B 276:3019–3025
Anonymous (2000) What price coral? Economist. Nov 4: 87–89
Apprill A, Marlow HQ, Martindale MQ, Rappe MS (2009) The onset of
microbial associations in the coral Pocillopora meandrina. ISME J
3:685–699
Archer D, Brovkin V (2008) The millennial atmosphere lifetime of
anthropogenic CO2. Clim Change 90:283–297
Aronson RB, Precht WF (2001) White-band disease and the changing
face of Caribbean coral reefs. Hydrobiologia 460:25–38
Babcock R (1990) Reproduction and development of the blue coral
Heliopora coerulea (Alcyonaria: Coenothecalia). Mar Biol
104:475–481
Babcock R, Davies P (1991) Effects of sedimentation on settlement of
Acropora millepora. Coral Reefs 9:205–208
Bambach RK, Knoll AH, Wang SC (2004) Origination, extinction, and
mass depletion of marine diversity. Paleobiology 30:522–542
Banse K (1982) Cell volumes, maximal growth rates of unicellular
algae and ciliates, and the role of ciliates in the marine pelagial.
Limnol Oceanogr 27:1059–1071
Berkeley SA, Chapman C, Sogard SM (2004a) Maternal age as a
determinant of larval growth and survival in a marine fish, Sebastes
melanops. Ecology 85:1258–1264
Berkeley SA, Hixon MA, Larson RJ, Love MS (2004b) Fisheries
sustainability via protection of age structure and spatial distribution
of fish populations. Fisheries 29:23–32
Berkelmans R (2002) Time-integrated thermal bleaching thresholds of
reefs and their variation on the Great Barrier Reef. Mar Ecol Prog
Ser 237:309–310
Berkelmans R, Willis BL (1999) Seasonal and local spatial patterns in
the upper thermal limits of corals on the inshore Central Great
Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs 18:219–228
Bernecker M, Weidlich O (2005) Azooxanthellate corals in the late
Maastrichtian-early Paleocene of the Danish basin: bryozoan and
coral mounds in a boreal shelf setting. In: Freiwald A, Roberts JM
(eds) Cold-water corals and ecosystems. Springer, Berlin, pp 3–25
Berner RA, Kothavala Z (2001) GEOCARB III: a revised model of
atmospheric CO2 over Phanerozoic time. Am J Sci 301:182–204
Bice KL, Birgel D, Meyers PA, Dahl KA, Hinrichs K-U, Norris RD
(2006) A multiple proxy and model study of Cretaceous upper
ocean temperatures and atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Paleoceanography 21:PA2002. doi:10.1029/2005PA001203
Birkeland C (1977) The importance of rate of biomass accumulation in
early successional stages of benthic communities to the survival of
coral recruits. Proc 3rd Int Coral Reef Sym, Miami 1: 15–21
Birkeland C (1997) Status of coral reefs in the Marianas. In: Grigg RW,
Birkeland C (eds) Status of coral reefs in the Pacific. Univ Hawaii
Sea Grant College Program, Honolulu, pp 91–100
Birkeland C, Rowley D, Randall RH (1981) Coral recruitment patterns
at Guam. Proc 4th Int Coral Reef Sym, Manila 2: 339–344
Birkeland C, Miller MW, Piniak GA, Eakin CM, Weijerman M,
McElhany P, Dunlap M, Brainard RE (2013) Safety in numbers?
Abundance may not safeguard corals from increasing carbon dioxide. Bioscience 63:967–974
Birrell CL, McCook JL, Willis BL (2005) Effects of algal turfs and
sediment on coral settlement. In: Hutchings PA, Haynes D (eds),

257

Proceedings of catchment to reef: water quality issues in the Great
Barrier Reef Region conference. Mar Poll Bull, doi: 10.1016/j.
marpolbul.2004.10.022
Birrell CL, McCook LJ, Willis BL, Diaz-Pulido GA (2008) Effects of
benthic algae on the replenishment of corals and the implications
for the resilience of coral reefs. Oceanogr Mar Biol Ann Rev
46:25–63
Bobko SJ, Berkeley SA (2004) Maturity, ovarian cycle, fecundity, and
age-specific parturition of black rockfish (Sebastes melanops). Fish
Bull US 80:881–884
Bohnsack JA (1998) Application of marine reserves to reef fisheries
management. Aust J Ecol 23:298–304
Bonaldo RM, Bellwood DR (2008) Size-dependent variation in the
functional role of the parrotfish Scarus rivulatus on the Great Barrier
Reef, Australia. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 360:237–244
Brown BE (1997a) Coral bleaching: causes and consequences. Coral
Reefs 16:129–138
Brown BE (1997b) Disturbances to reefs in recent times. In: Birkeland
C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman & Hall, New York, pp
354–379
Brown BE, Cossins AR (2011) The potential for temperature
acclimatization of reefcorals in the face of climate change. In:
Dubinsky Z, Stambler N (eds) Coral reefs: an ecosystem in transition. Springer Science, New York, pp 421–433
Bruggemann JH, van Kessel AM, van Rooij JM, Breeman AM (1996)
Bioerosion and sediment ingestion by the Caribbean parrotfish
Scarus vetula and Sparisoma viride: implications of fish size, feeding mode and habitat use. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 134:59–71
Budd AF (2000) Diversity and extinction in the Cenozoic history of
Caribbean reefs. Coral Reefs 19:25–35
Budd AF, Johnson KG, Stemann TA (1996) Plio-Pleistocene turnover
and extinctions in the Caribbean reef-coral fauna. In: Jackson JBC,
Budd AF, Coates AG (eds) Evolution and environment in tropical
America. Univ Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 168–204
Budd AF, Fukami H, Smith ND, Knowlton N (2012) Taxonomic
classification of the reef coral family Mussidae (Cnidaria:
Anthozoa: Scleractinia). Zool J Linnean Soc 166:465–529
Buddemeier RW, Kinzie RA III (1998) Reef science: asking all the
wrong questions in all the wrong places? Reef Encount 23:29–34
Buston PM, Jones GP, Planes S, Thorrold SR (2011) Probability of
successful larval dispersal declines fivefold over 1 km in a coral reef
fish. Proc Roy Soc Lond B Biol Sci 279:1883–1888
Butler JN, Bulnzett-Blerkes J, Barnes JA, Ward J (1993) The Bermuda
fisheries: a tragedy of the commons averted? Environment 35:7–41
Caruthers AH, Stanley GD Jr (2008) Systematic analysis of Upper
Triassic silicified scleractinian corals from Wrangellia and the
Alexander Terrane, Alaska and British Columbia. J Paleont
82:470–491
Ceccherelli VU, Rossi R (1984) Settlement, growth and production of
the mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis. Mar Ecol Progr Ser
16:173–184
Choat JH, Robertson DR (2002) Age-based studies. In: Sale PF
(ed) Coral reef fishes: dynamics and diversity in a complex ecosystem. Academic, New York, pp 57–80
Cohen AL, Holcomb M (2009) Why corals care about ocean acidification: uncovering the mechanism. Oceanography 22:118–127
Cole LC (1954) The population consequences of life history phenomena. Q Rev Biol 29:103–137
Cole AJ, Pratchett MS, Jones GP (2008) Diversity and functional
importance of coral-feeding fishes on tropical coral reefs. Fish
Fish 9:286–307
Coles SL (1997) Reef corals occurring in a highly fluctuating temperature environment at Fahal Island, Gulf of Oman (Indian Ocean).
Coral Reefs 16:269–272
Coles SL, Brown BE (2003) Coral bleaching – capacity for
acclimatization and adaptation. Adv Mar Biol 46:183–223

258
Coles SL, Jokiel PL (1978) Synergistic effects of temperature, salinity
and light on the hermatypic coral Montipora verrucosa. Mar Biol
49:187–195
Coley PD, Bryant JP, Chapin FS III (1985) Resource availability and
plant antiherbivore defense. Science 230:895–899
Colgan M (1984) The Cretaceous coral Heliopora (Octocorallia,
Coenothecalia) – a common Indo-Pacific reef builder. In: Eldredge
N (ed) Living fossils. A casebooks in earth sciences. Springer,
Berlin/Heidelberg/New York, pp 266–271
Comeau S, Edmunds PJ, Spindel NB, Carpenter RC (2014) Diel pCO2
oscillations modulate the response of the coral Acropora hyacinthus
to ocean acidification. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 501:99–111
Cortés J, Jiménez C (2003) Corals and coral reefs of the Pacific of Costa
Rica: history, research and status. In: Cortés J (ed) Latin American
coral reefs. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 361–385
Cowen RK, Lwiza KMM, Sponaugle S, Paris CB, Olson DB (2000)
Connectivity of marine populations: open or closed? Science
287:857–859
Cowen RK, Paris CB, Srinivasan A (2006) Scaling of connectivity in
marine populations. Science 311:522–527
Cox EF (1986) The effects of a selective corallivore on growth rates
and competition for space between two species of Hawaiian corals.
J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 101:167–174
Cox EF, Ward S (2002) Impact of elevated ammonium on reproduction
in two Hawaiian scleractinian corals with different life history
patterns. Mar Pollut Bull 44:1230–1235
Craig P (1995) Life history and harvest of the surgeonfish Acanthurus
lineatus in American Samoa, Biol Rept Ser No 77. Dept Mar
Wildlife Res, American Samoa, 30 pp
Craig P (2005) overfished coral reefs in American Samoa: no quick fix.
Reef Encount 33:21–22
Craig P, Green A, Saucerman S (1995) Coral reef troubles in American
Samoa. SPC Fish Newsl 72:33–34
Craig P, Birkeland C, Belliveau S (2001) High temperatures tolerated
by a diverse assemblage of shallow-water corals in American
Samoa. Coral Reefs 20:185–189
Darcy GH, Matlock GC (1999) Application of the precautionary
approach in the national standard guidelines for conservation and
management of fisheries in the United States. ICES J Mar Sci
56:853–859
Davis GW (1992) Biology of Mulloides flavolineatus. Study 3 in studies of Guam’s recreationally-important fish, Job Progress Report for
Project No FW-2R-28, 10 pp
Dawkins R (1982) The extended genotype. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, p 307
DeCarlo TM, Cohen AL, Barkley HC, Cobban Q, Young C,
Shamberger KE, Brainard RE, Golbuu Y (2015) Coral
macrobioerosion is accelerated by ocean acidification and nutrients.
Geology 43:7–10
Dee AJ, Parrish JD (1994) Reproductive and trophic ecology of the
soldierfish Myripristis amaena in tropical fisheries. Fish Bull
92:516–530
DeMartini EE, Friedlander AM, Holzwarth SR (2005) Size at sex
change in protogynous labroids, prey body size distributions, and
apex predator densities at NW Hawaiian atolls. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
297:259–271
DeMartini EE, Friedlander AM, Sandin SA, Sala E (2008) Differences
in fish-assemblage structure between fished and unfished atolls in
the northern Line Islands, central Pacific. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
365:199–215
Denis V, Guillaume MMM, Goutx M, de Palmas S, Debreuil J, Baker
AC, Boonstra RK, Bruggemann JH (2013) Fast growth may impair
regeneration capacity in the branching coral Acropora muricata.
PLoS ONE 8(8):e72618. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0072618
Diekmann OE, Bak RPM, Stam WT, Olsen JL (2001) Molecular
genetic evidence for reticulate speciation in the coral genus

C. Birkeland
Madracis on a Caribbean fringing reef slope. Mar Biol
139:221–233
Dierking J (2007) Effects of the introduced predatory fish
Cephalopholis argus on native reef fish populations in Hawaii.
PhD dissertation, Univ Hawaii, 115 pp
Dixson DL (2011) Risk assessment by larval fishes during settlement
site selection. Coral Reefs 31:255–261
Dixson DL, Abrego D, Hay ME (2014) Chemically mediated behavior
of recruiting corals and fishes: a tipping point that may limit reef
recovery. Science 345:892–897
Dolan JR, Pérez MT (2000) Costs, benefits and characteristics of
mixotrophy in marine oligotrichs. Freshw Biol 45:227–238
Doropoulos C, Ward S, Diaz-Pulido G, Hoegh-Guldberg O, Mumby PJ
(2012) Ocean acidification reduces coral. Ecol Lett 15:338–346
Dunne RP, Brown BE (2001) The influence of solar radiation on
bleaching of shallow water reef corals in the Andaman Sea,
1993–1998. Coral Reefs 20:201–210
Edinger EN, Risk MJ (1995) Preferential survivorship of brooding
corals in a regional extinction. Paleobiology 21:200–219
Eguchi M (1948) Fossil Helioporidae from Japan and the South Sea
islands. J Paleontol 22:362–364
Fabricius KE (2005) Effects of terrestrial runoff on the ecology of
corals and coral reefs: review and synthesis. Mar Pollut Bull
50:125–146
Fabricius KE, Metzner J (2004) Scleractinian walls of mouths: predation on coral larvae by corals. Coral Reefs 23:245–248
Fabricius K, Wild C, Wolanski E, Abele D (2003) Effects of transparent exopolymer particles (TEP) and muddy terrigenous sediments
on the survival of hard coral recruits. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci
57:613–621
Fabricius KE, Langdon C, Uthicke S, Humphrey C, Noonan S,
De’ath G, Okazaki R, Muehllehner N, Glas MS, Lough JM (2011)
Losers and winners in coral reefs acclimatized to elevated carbon
dioxide concentrations. Nat Clim Chang 1:165–169. doi:10.1038/
NCLIMATE1122
Fabricius KE, Cséke S, Humphrey C, De’ath G (2013) Does trophic
status enhance or reduce the thermal tolerance of scleractinian
corals? A review, experimental and conceptual framework. PLoS
ONE 8(1):e54399. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0054399
Fenner D (2012) Challenges for managing fisheries on diverse coral
reefs. Diversity 4:105–160
Fenner D (2014) Fishing down the largest coral reef fish species. Mar
Pollut Bull. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.04.049
Ferreira BP, Russ GR (1994) Age validation and estimation of growth
rate of the coral trout Plectropomus leopardus (Lacepede 1802) from
Lizard Island, Northern Great Barrier Reef. Fish Bull 92:46–57
Frank U, Mokady O (2002) Coral biodiversity and evolution: recent
molecular contributions. Can J Zool 80:1723–1734
Frank U, Oren U, Loya Y, Rinkevich B (1997) Alloimmune maturation
in the coral Stylophora pistillata is achieved through three distinctive stages, 4 months postmetamorphosis. Proc R Soc B 264:99–104
Friedlander AM, DeMartini EE (2002) Contrasts in density, size, and
biomass of reef fishes between the northwestern and the main
Hawaiian islands: the effects of fishing down apex predators. Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 230:253–264
Gates RD, Edmunds PJ (1999) The physiological mechanisms of
acclimatization in tropical reef corals. Am Zool 39:30–43
Gerlach G, Atema J, Kingsford MJ, Black KP, Miller-Sims V (2007)
Smelling home can prevent larval dispersal of reef fish larvae. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:858–863
Gilmour J (1999) Experimental investigation into the effects of
suspended sediment on fertilisation, larval survival and settlement
in a scleractinian coral. Mar Biol 135:451–462
Gladfelter EH (1982) Skeletal development in Acropora cervicornis:
I. Patterns of calcium carbonate accretion in the axial corallite.
Coral Reefs 1:45–51

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

Gladfelter EH, Monahan RK, Gladfelter WB (1978) Growth rates of
five reef-building corals in the northeastern Caribbean. Bull Mar Sci
28:728–734
Glynn PW, Krupp DA (1986) Feeding biology of a Hawaiian sea star
corallivore, Culcita novaeguineae Muller & Troschel. J Exp Mar
Biol Ecol 96:75–96
Glynn PW, Mate JL, Baker AC, Calderon MO (2001) Coral bleaching
and mortality in Panama and Ecuador during the 1997–1998 El
Niño-Southern Oscillation Event: spatial/temporal patterns and
comparisons with the 1982–1983 event. Bull Mar Sci 69:79–109
Golbuu Y, Wolanski E, Idechong JW, Victor S, Isechal AL, Oldiais
NW, Richmond RH, van Woesik R (2012) Predicting coral recruitment in Palau’s complex reef archipelago. PLoS ONE 7:e50998.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0050998
Goldman B, Talbot FH (1976) Aspects of the ecology of coral reef
fishes. In: Jones OA, Endean R (eds) Biology and geology of coral
reefs. III. Biology 2. Academic, New York, pp 125–254
Götz S (2003) Biotic interaction and synecology in a Late Cretaceous
coral-rudist biostrome of southeastern Spain. Palaeogeogr
Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 193:125–138
Graham EM, Baird AH, Connolly SR (2008) Survival dynamics of
scleractinian coral larvae and implications for dispersal. Coral
Reefs 27:529–539
Grigg RW, Polovina JJ, Atkinson MJ (1984) Model of a coral reef
ecosystem. III. Resource limitation, community regulation, fisheries
yield and resource management. Coral Reefs 3:23–27
Hallock P (1981) Algal symbiosis: a mathematical analysis. Mar Biol
62:249–255
Hallock P (1987) Fluctuations in the trophic resource continuum; a
factor in global biodiversity cycles. Palaeoceanography 2:457–471
Hallock P (2001) Coral reefs, carbonate sediments, nutrients and global
change. In: Stanley GD Jr (ed) The history and sedimentology of
ancient reef systems. Kluwer Academic, New York, pp 388–427
Hamilton RJ, Choat JH (2012) Bumphead parrotfish – Bolbometopon
muricatum. In: de Mitcheson YS, Colin PL (eds) Reef fish spawning
aggregations: biology, research and management. Fish & Fisheries
Series 35. Springer, pp 490–496
Hamilton RJ, Adams S, Choat JH (2008) Sexual development and
reproductive demography of the green humphead parrot fish
(Bolbometopon muricatum) in the Solomon Islands. Coral Reefs
27:153–163
Hamner WM, Jones MS, Carleton JH, Hauri IR, Williams DMB (1988)
Zooplankton, planktivorous fish, and water currents on a windward
reef face: Great Barrier Reef, Australia. Bull Mar Sci 42:459–479
Handford P, Bell G, Reimchen T (1977) A gillnet fishery considered as
an experiment in artificial selection. J Fish Res Board Can
34:954–961
Harman RF, Katekaru AZ (1988) Hawaii Commercial Fishing Survey
1987. Div Aquatic Resources, Dept Land and Natural Resources,
State of Hawaii, 71 pp
Harrigan JF (1972) The planula larva of Pocillopora damicornis, lunar
periodicity of swimming and substratum selection behavior. PhD
University of Hawai’i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI
Harrison HB, Williamson DH, Evans RD, Almany GR, Thorrold SR,
Russ GR, Feldheim K, van Herwerden L, Planes S, Srinivasan M,
Berumen ML, Jones GP (2012) Larval export from marine reserves
and the recruitment benefit for fish and fisheries. Curr Biol
22:1023–1028
Hatcher BG (1997) Organic production and decomposition. In:
Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman & Hall,
New York, pp 140–174
Hatta M, Fukami H, Wang W, Omori M, Shimoike K, Hayashibara T,
Ina Y, Sugiyama T (1999) Reproductive and genetic evidence for a
reticulate evolutionary history of mass-spawning corals. Mol Biol
Evol 16:1607–1613

259

Hauser L, Adcock GJ, Smith PJ, Ramı́rez JHB, Carvalho GR (2002)
Loss of microsatellite diversity and low effective population size in
an overexploited population of New Zealand snapper (Pagrus
auratus). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:11742–11747
Hay WW, DeConto RM, Wold CN (1997) Climate: is the past the key
to the future? Geol Rundsch 86:471–491
Heckel PH (1974) Carbonate buildups in the geologic record: a review.
In: Laporte LF (ed), Reefs in time and space, SEPM Spec. Pub. 18.
Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Tulsa,
Oklahoma, pp 90–154
Helm C, Schülke I (2000) Contact reactions and fusion of late Jurassic
ramose coral Thamnasteria dendroica in a patch reef environment.
Coral Reefs 19:89–92
Hernández-Delgado EA, Suleimán-Ramos SE (2014) E.S.A. coral species listing: a roadblock to community-based engagement in coral
reef conservation and rehabilitation across the U.S. Caribbean?
Reef Encount 29:11–15
Hixon MA (1991) Predation as a process structuring coral reef fish
communities. In: Sale PF (ed) The ecology of fishes on coral reefs.
Academic, San Diego, pp 437–508
Hixon MA, Beets JP (1993) Predation, prey refuges, and the structure
of coral- reef fish assemblages. Ecol Monogr 63:77–101
Hixon MA, Carr MH (1997) Synergistic predation, density
dependence, and population regulation in marine fish. Science
277:946–949
Hixon MA, Johnson DW, Sogard SM (2013) BOFFFFs: on the importance of conserving old-growth age structure in fishery populations.
ICES J Mar Sci. doi:10.1093/icesjms/fst200
Hodgson G (1990) Sediment and the settlement of larvae of the reef
coral Pocillopora damicornis. Coral Reefs 9:41–43
Hoey AS, McCormick MI (2004) Selective predation for low body
condition at the larval-juvenile transition of a coral reef fish.
Oecologia 139:23–29
Holbrook SJ, Schmitt RJ (2002) Competition for shelter space causes
density-dependent predation mortality in damselfishes. Ecology
83:2855–2868
Holt RD (1984) Spatial heterogeneity, indirect interactions, and coexistence of prey species. Am Nat 124:377–406
Holt RD (1987) Prey communities in patchy environments. Oikos
50:276–290
Hönisch B, Ridgwell A, Schmidt DN, Thomas E, Gibbs SJ, Sluijs A,
Zeebe R, Kump L, Martindale RC, Greene SE, Kiessling W, Ries J,
Zachos JC, Royer DL, Barker S, Marchitto TM, Moyer R,
Pelejero C, Ziveri P, Foster GL, Williams B (2012) The geological
record of ocean acidification. Science 335:1058–1063
Howard KG (2008) Community structure, life history, and movement
patterns of parrotfishes: large protogynous hermaphrodite fishery
species. PhD dissertation, Univ Hawaii, 112 pp
Hughes TP, Connell JH (1999) Multiple stressors on coral reefs: a longterm perspective. Limnol Oceanogr 44:932–940
Hughes TP, Baird AH, Dinsdale EA, Moltschaniwskyj NA, Pratchett
MS, Tanner JE, Willis BL (2000) Supply-side ecology works both
ways: the link between benthic adults, fecundity, and larval recruits.
Ecology 81:2241–2249
Hughes TP, Rodrigues MJ, Bellwood DR, Ceccarelli D, HoeghGuldberg O, McCook L, Moltschaniwskyj N, Pratchett MS, Steneck
RS, Willis B (2007) Phase shifts, herbivory, and the resilience of
coral reefs to climate change. Curr Biol 17:360–365
Hunte W, Wittenberg M (1992) Effects of eutrophication and sedimentation on juvenile corals. Mar Biol 114:625–631
Hutchings JA, Reynolds JD (2004) Marine fish population collapses:
consequences for recovery and extinction risk. Bioscience
54:297–309
Jablonski D (2002) Survival without recovery after mass extinctions.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:8139–8144

260
Jackson JBC (1997) Reefs since Columbus. Proc 8th Int Coral Reef
Sym 1: 97–106
Jackson JBC, McKinney FK (1991) Ecological processes and progressive
macroevolution of marine clonal benthos. In: Ross RM, Allmon WD
(eds) Causes of evolution. Univ Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 173–209
Jennings S, Kaiser KJ, Reynolds JD (2001) Marine fisheries ecology.
Blackwell, Oxford, p 417
Jiménez CE, Cortés J, Le
on A, Ruiz E (2001) Coral bleaching and
mortality associated with the 1997–98 El Niño in an upwelling
environment in the eastern Pacific (Gulf of Papagayo, Costa Rica).
Bull Mar Sci 69:151–169
Johannes RE (1981) Words of the lagoon. Univ Cal Berkeley Press,
Berkeley, p 245
Johannes RE (1998) The case for data-less marine resource management: example from tropical nearshore fisheries. Trends Ecol Evol
13:243–246
Jokiel PL (1990) Transport of reef corals into the great Barrier Reef.
Nature 347:665–667
Jones GP (1997) Relationships between recruitment and
postrecruitment processes in lagoonal populations of two coral
reef fishes. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 213:231–246
Jones GP, Milicich MJ, Emslie MJ, Lunow C (1999) Self-recruitment
in a coral reef fish population. Nature 402:802–804
Jones GP, Planes S, Thorrold SR (2005) Coral reef fish larvae settle
close to home. Curr Biol 15:1314–1318
Jones GP, Almany GR, Russ GR, Sale PF, Steneck RS, van Oppen
MJH, Willis BL (2009) Larval retention and connectivity among
populations of corals and reef fishes: history, advances and
challenges. Coral Reefs 28:307–325
Keenan EE, Brainard RE, Basch LV (2006) Historical and present
status of the pearl oyster, Pinctada margaritifera, at Pearl and
Hermes Atoll, Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. Atoll Res Bull
543:333–344
Kennedy EV, Perry CT, Halloran PR, Iglesias-Prieto R, Schönberg
WM, Form AU, Carricart-Ganivet JP, Fine M, Eakin CM, Mumby
PJ (2013) Avoiding coral reef functional collapse requires local and
global action. Curr Biol 23:912–918
Kenyon JC (1997) Models of reticulate evolution in the coral genus
Acropora based on chromosome numbers: parallels with plants.
Evolution 51:756–767
Kiessling W (2009) Geologic and biologic controls on the evolution of
reefs. Ann Rev Ecol Evol Syst 40:173–192
Kiessling W, Baron-Szabo RC (2004) Extinction and recovery patterns
of scleractinian corals at the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary.
Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 214:195–223
Kinsey DW, Davies PJ (1979) Effects of elevated nitrogen and phosphorus on coral reef growth. Limnol Oceanogr 2:935–940
Kleypas JA, Buddemeier RW, Archer D, Gattuso J-P, Langdon C,
Opdyke BN (1999a) Geochemical consequences of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide on coral reefs. Science 284:118–120
Kleypas JA, McManus JW, Menez LAB (1999b) Environmental limits
to coral reef development: where do we draw the line? Am Zool
39:146–159
Kleypas JA, Buddemeier RW, Gattuso J-P (2001) The future of coral
reefs in an age of global change. Int J Earth Sci (Geol Rundsch)
90:426–437
Kleypas JA, Danabasoglu G, Lough JM (2008) Potential role of the
ocean thermostat in determining regional differences in coral reef
bleaching events. Geophysical Research Letters 35:L03613.
doi:10.1029/2007GL032257
Kline DI, Kuntz NM, Breitbart M, Knowlton N, Rohwer F (2006) Role
of elevated organic carbon levels and microbial activity in coral
mortality. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 314:119–125
Kojis BL, Quinn NJ (1984) Seasonal and depth variation in fecundity of
Acropora palifera at two reefs in Papua New Guinea. Coral Reefs
3:165–172

C. Birkeland
Kojis BL, Quinn NJ (1985) Puberty in Goniastrea favulus. Age or size
limited? Proc 5th Int Coral Reef Congr, Tahiti 4: 289–293
Koop K, Booth D, Broadbent A, Brodie J, Bucher D, Capone D, Coll J,
Dennison W, Erdmann M, Harrison P (2001) ENCORE: the effect
of nutrient enrichment on coral reefs. Synthesis of results and
conclusions. Mar Pollut Bull 42:91–120
Koslow JA, Hanley F, Wicklund R (1988) Effects of fishing on reef fish
communities at Pedro Bank and Port Royal Cays, Jamaica. Mar
Ecol Prog Ser 43:201–212
Kuffner IB, Paul VJ (2004) Effects of the benthic cyanobacterium
Lyngbya majuscula on larval recruitment of the reef corals
Acropora surculosa and Pocillopora damicornis. Coral Reefs
23:455–458
Kuffner IB, Walters LJ, Becerro MA, Paul VJ, Ritson-Williams R,
Beach KS (2006) Inhibition of coral recruitment by macroalgae
and cyanobacteria. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 323:107–117
Kuffner IB, Andersson AJ, Jokiel PL, Rodgers KS, Mackenzie FT
(2008) Decreased abundance of crustose coralline algae due to
ocean acidification. Nat Geosci 1:114–117
Larkin PA (1978) Fisheries management–an essay for ecologists. Ann
Rev Ecol Syst 9:57–73
Lathuilière B, Marchal D (2009) Extinction, survival and recovery of
corals from the Triassic to Middle Jurassic time. Terra Nova
21:57–66
Lehodey P, Leroy B (1999) Age and growth of yellowfin tuna (Thunnus
albacares) from the western and central Pacific Ocean as indicated
by daily growth increments and tagging data. Secretariat of the
Pacific Community, Noumea, 21 pp
Leinfelder RR (2001) Jurassic reef ecosystems. In: Stanley GD Jr
(ed) The history and sedimentology of ancient reef systems. Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publ, New York, pp 251–309
Leinfelder RR, Seemann J, Heiss GA, Struck U (2012) Could ‘ecosystem atavisms’ help reefs to adapt to the Anthropocene? Proc 12th
Int Coral Reef Sym, Cairns, Australia 2
Levitan DR, Fukami H, Jara J, Kline D, McGovern TM, McGhee KE,
Swanson CA, Knowlton N (2004) Mechanisms of reproductive
isolation among sympatric broadcast-spawning corals of the
Montastraea annularis species complex. Evolution 58:308–323
Levitan DR, Boudreau W, Jara J, Knowlton N (2014) Long-term
reduced spawning in Orbicella coral species due to temperature
stress. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 515:1–10
Lirman D (2000) Fragmentation in the branching coral Acropora
palmata (Lamarck): growth, survivorship, and reproduction of
colonies and fragments. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 251:41–57
Littler MM, Littler DS (1980) The evolution of thallus form and
survival strategies in benthic marine macroalgae: field and laboratory tests of a functional form model. Am Nat 116:25–41
Littler MM, Littler DS (1997) Disease-induced mass mortality
of crustose algae on coral reefs provides rationale for the conservation
of herbivorous fish stocks. Proc 8th Int Coral Reef Sym 1:719–724
Littler K, Robinson SA, Brown PR, Nederbragt AJ, Pancost RD (2011)
High sea-surface temperatures during the early Cretaceous Epoch.
Nat Geosci 4:169–172
Lokrantz J, Nyström M, Thyresson M, Johansson C (2008) The
non-linear relationship between body size and function in
parrotfishes. Coral Reefs 27:967–974
Longhurst A (2002) Murphy’s law revisited: longevity as a factor in
recruitment to fish populations. Fish Res 56:125–131
L
opez-Duarte PC, Carson HS, Cook GS, Fodrie FJ, Becker BJ,
DiBacco C, Levin LA (2012) What controls connectivity? An
empirical, multi-species approach. Integr Comp Biol 52:511–524
L
opez-Pérez RA (2005) The Cenozoic hermatypic corals in the eastern
Pacific: history of research. Earth Sci Rev 72:67–87
Loya Y, Sakai K, Yamazato K, Nakano Y, Sambali H, van Woesik R
(2001) Coral bleaching: the winners and the losers. Ecol Lett
4:122–131

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

Ma TYH (1959) Effect of water temperature on growth rate of reef
corals. Oceanographica Sinica Special Volume 1, pp 116 +320
plates
Marhaver KL, Vermeij MJA, Rohwer F, Sandin SA (2013) JanzenConnell effects in a broadcast-spawning Caribbean coral: distancedependent survival of larvae and settlers. Ecology 94:146–160
Marshall PA, Baird AH (2000) Bleaching of corals on the Great Barrier
Reef: differential susceptibilities among taxa. Coral Reefs
19:155–163
Mascarelli A (2014) Climate-change adaptation: designer reefs. Nature
508:444–446. doi:10.1038/508444a
Maynard JA, Anthony KRN, Marshall PA, Masiri I (2008) Major
bleaching events can lead to increased thermal tolerance in corals.
Mar Biol 155:173–182
McClanahan TR (2014) Recovery of functional groups and trophic
relationships in tropical fisheries closures. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
497:13–23
McClanahan TR, Ateweberhan M, Graham NAJ, Wilson SK, Sebastian
CR, Guillaume MMM, Bruggemann JH (2007) Western Indian
Ocean coral communities: bleaching responses and susceptibility
to extinction. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 337:1–13
McManus JW, Nañola CL, Reyes RB Jr, Kesner KN (1992) Resource
ecology of the Bolinao coral reef system. ICLARM Stud Rev
22:117
Meekan MG, Ackerman JL, Wellington GM (2001) Demography and
age structures of coral reef damselfishes in the tropical eastern
Pacific Ocean. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 212:223–232
Meyer AL, Dierking J (2011) Elevated size and body condition and
altered feeding ecology of the grouper Cephalopholis argus in
non-native habitats. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 439: 203–212
Michalek-Wagner K, Willis BL (2001) Impacts of bleaching on the soft
coral Lobophytum compactum. I. Fecundity, fertilization and offspring viability. Coral Reefs 19:231–239
Mora C, Frazier AG, Longman RJ, Dacks RS, Walton MM, Tong EJ,
Sanchez JJ, Kaiser LR, Stender YO, Anderson JM, Ambrosino CM,
Fernandez-Silva I, Giuseffi LM, Giambelluca TW (2013) The
projected timing of climate departure from recent variability.
Nature 502:183–187
Moran K et al (2006) The Cenozoic palaeoenvironment of the Arctic
Ocean. Nature 441:601–605
Morse DE, Hooker N, Morse ANC, Jensen RA (1988) Control of larval
metamorphosis and recruitment in sympatric agariciid corals. J Exp
Mar Biol Ecol 116:193–217
Muller-Parker G, D’Elia CF (1997) Interactions between corals and
their symbiotic algae. In: Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral
reefs. Chapman & Hall, New York, pp 96–113
Munro JL (ed) (1983) Caribbean coral reef fishery resources. ICLARM
Stud Rev 7, 276 pp
Murphy GI (1967) Vital statistics of the California sardine and the
population consequences. Ecology 48:731–735
Nadon MO, Baum JK, Williams ID, McPherson JM, Zgliczynski BJ,
Richards BL, Schroeder RE, Brainard RE (2012) Re-creating missing population baselines for Pacific reef sharks. Conserv Biol
26:493–503
Newman SJ, Williams DMB, Russ GR (1996) Age validation, growth
and mortality rates of the tropical snappers (Pisces: Lutjanidae)
Lutjanus adetii (Castelnau, 1873) and L. quinquelineatus (Bloch,
1790) from the central Great Barrier Reef, Australia. Mar Freshw
Res 47:575–584
Nixon SW (1982) Nutrient dynamics, primary production and fisheries
yields of lagoons. Oceanol Acta 5:357–371
Nugues M, Delvoye L, Bak R (2004) Coral defense against macroalgae:
differential effects of mesenterial filaments on the green alga
Halimeda opuntia. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 278:103–114
Ogden JC (1997) Ecosystem interactions in the tropical coastal seascape. In: Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman
& Hall, New York, pp 288–297

261

Oliver TA, Palumbi SR (2009) Distributions of stress-resistant coral
symbionts match environmental patterns at local but not regional
levels. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 378:93–103
Oliver TA, Palumbi SR (2011) Do fluctuating temperature
environments elevate coral thermal tolerance? Coral Reefs
30:429–440
Olsen EM, Heino M, Lilly GR, Morgan MJ, Brattey J, Ernande B,
Dieckmann U (2004) Maturation trends indicative of rapid evolution preceded the collapse of northern cod. Nature 428:932–935
Omori M, Fukami H, Kobinata H, Hatta M (2001) Significant drop of
fertilization of Acropora corals in 1999: an after-effect of heavy
coral bleaching? Limnol Oceanogr 46:704–706
Ong L, Holland KN (2010) Bioerosion of coral reefs by two Hawaiian
parrotfishes: species, size differences and fishery implications. Mar
Biol. doi:10.1007/s00227-010-1411-y
Page HM, Hubbard DM (1987) Temporal and spatial patterns of growth
in mussels Mytilus edulis on an offshore platform: relationships to
water temperature and food availability. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol
111:159–179
Palumbi SR, Barshis DJ, Traylor-Knowles N, Bay RA (2014)
Mechanisms of reef coral resistance to future climate change. Science 344:895–898
Pandolfi JM, Jackson JBC, Geister J (2001) Geologically sudden
extinction of two widespread Late Pleistocene Caribbean reef
corals. In: Jackson JBC, Lidgard S, McKinney FK (eds) Evolutionary patterns: growth, form, and tempo in the fossil record. Univ
Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 120–158
Pandolfi JM, Lovelock CE, Budd AF (2002) Character release following extinction in a Caribbean reef coral species complex. Evolution
56:479–501
Paulay G (1997) Diversity and distribution of reef organisms. In:
Birkeland C (ed) Life and death of coral reefs. Chapman & Hall,
New York, pp 298–353
Pearson PN, Palmer MR (2000) Atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations over the past 60 million years. Nature 406:695–699
Planes S, Jones GP, Thorrold SR (2009) Larval dispersal connects fish
populations in a network of marine protected areas. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 106:5693–5697
Podestá GP, Glynn PW (2001) The 1997–98 El Niño event in Panama
and Galápagos: an update of thermal stress indices relative to coral
bleaching. Bull Mar Sci 69:43–59
Poulin E, Palma AT, Leiva G, Narvaez D, Pacheco R, Navarrete SA,
Castilla JC (2002) Avoiding offshore transport of competent larvae
during upwelling events: the case of the gastropod Concholepas
concholepas in Central Chile. Limnol Oceanogr 47:1248–1255
Poulsen CJ, Barron EJ, Peterson WH, Wilson PA (1999) A reinterpretation of Cretaceous shallow marine temperatures through modeldata comparison. Paleoceanography 14:679–697
Poulsen CJ, Barron EJ, Arthur MA, Peterson WH (2001) Response of
the mid-Cretaceous global oceanic ocean circulation to tectonic and
CO2 forcings. Paleoceanography 16:576–592
Prescott R, Bourne DG, Negri A, Schmidt-Roach S (2014) Negative
cues drive settlement distribution of two corals from the Great
Barrier Reef: new perspectives from networks (in review)
Ramus J, Venable M (1987) Temporal ammonium patchiness and
growth rate in Codium and Ulva (Ulvophyceae). J Phycol
23:518–523
Randall JE (1963) An analysis of the fish populations of artificial and
natural reefs in the Virgin Islands. Carib J Sci 3:31–47
Randall JE (1965) Grazing effects on seagrasses by herbivorous reef
fishes in the West Indies. Ecology 46:255–260
Randall JE (2007) Reef and shore fishes of the Hawaiian Islands. Sea
Grant College Program, Univ Hawaii, 546 pp
Rawlinson KA, Stella JS (2012) Discovery of the corallivorous
polyclad flatworm, Amakusaplana acroporae, on the Great Barrier
Reef, Australia – the first report from the wild. PLoS ONE. doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0042240

262
Ricker WE (1981) Changes in the average size and average age of
Pacific salmon. Can J Fish Aquat Sci 38:1636–1656
Riegl BM, Purkis SJ, Al-Cibahy AS, Abdel-Moati MA, HoeghGuldberg O (2011) Present limits to heat-adaptability in corals
and population-level responses to climate extremes. PLoS ONE.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0024802
Ritson-Williams R, Arnold SN, Fogarty ND, Steneck RS, Vermeij
MJA, Paul VJ (2009) New perspectives on ecological mechanisms
affecting coral recruitment on reefs. Smithson Contrib Mar Sci
38:437–457
Rizzari JR, Frisch AJ, Connolly SR (2014) How robust are estimates of
coral reef shark depletion? Biol Conserv 176:39–47
Rose CS, Risk MJ (1985) Increase in Ciona deletrix infestation of
Montastrea cavernosa heads on an organically polluted portion of
the Grand Cayman fringing reef. Mar Ecol 6:345–363
Rosen BR (2000) Algal symbiosis, and the collapse and recovery of
reef communities: Lazarus corals across the K–T boundary. In:
Culver SJ, Rawson PF (eds) Biotic response to global change: the
last 145 million years. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp
164–180
Roughgarden J, Smith F (1996) Why fisheries collapse and what to do
about it. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93:5078–5083
Russ GR (1984) A review of coral reef fisheries. UNESCO Rep Mar Sci
27:74–92
Ruttenberg BI, Hamilton SL, Walsh SM, Donovan MK, Friedlander A,
DeMartini E, Sala E, Sandin SA (2011) Predator-induced demographic shifts in coral reef fish assemblages. PLoS ONE 6(6):
e21062. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0021062
Ryther JH (1969) Photosynthesis and fish production in the sea. Science
166:72–76
Sadovy Y (1993) The Nassau grouper, endangered or just unlucky?
Reef Encount 13:10–12
Sammarco PW, Andrews JC (1989) The Helix experiment; differential
localized dispersal and recruitment patterns in Great Barrier Reef
corals. Limnol Oceanogr 34:896–912
Sandin SA, Smith JE, DeMartini EE, Dinsdale EA, Donner SD,
Friedlander AM, Konotchick T, Malay M, Maragos JE, Obura D,
Pantos O, Paulay G, Richie M, Rohwer F, Schroeder RE,
Walsh S, Jackson JBC, Knowlton N, Sala E (2008) Baselines and
degradation of coral reefs in the northern Line Islands. PLoS ONE
3(2):11, e1548
Schaffer WM (1974) Optimal reproductive effort in fluctuating
environments. Am Nat 108:783–790
Schouten S, Hopmans EC, Forster A, van Breugel Y, Kuypers MMM,
Damsté JSS (2003) Extremely high sea-surface temperatures at low
latitudes during the middle Cretaceous as revealed by archaeal
membrane lipids. Geology 32:1069–1072
Sepkoski JJ (2002) A compendium of fossil marine animal genera. In:
Jablonski D, Foote M (eds), Bull Am Paleon 363: 1–563
Shanks AL, Shearman RK (2009) Paradigm lost? Cross-shelf
distributions of intertidal invertebrate larvae are unaffected by
upwelling or downwelling. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 385:189–204
Sharp KH, Ritchie KB, Schupp PJ, Ritson-Williams R, Paul VJ (2010)
Bacterial acquisition in juveniles of several broadcast spawning
coral species. PLoS ONE 5:e10898
Shomura RS (1987) Hawaii’s marine fishery resources: yesterday
(1900) and today (1986). Southwest Fisheries Center Administrative Report H-87-21. 15 pp
Smith CL (1972) A spawning aggregation of Nassau grouper,
Epinephelus striatus (Bloch). Trans Am Fish Soc 2:257–261
Smith MK (1993) An ecological perspective on inshore fisheries on the
Main Hawaiian Islands. Mar Fish Rev 55:34–49
Smith JE, Shaw M, Edwards RA, Obura D, Pantos O, Sala E, Sandin
SA, Smriga S, Hatay M, Rohwer FL (2006) Indirect effects of algae
on coral: algae-mediated, microbe-induced coral mortality. Ecol
Lett 9:835–845

C. Birkeland
Solomon S, Plattner G-K, Knuttic R, Friedlingstein P (2009) Irreversible climate change due to carbon dioxide emissions. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 106:1704–1709
Stanley SM, Hardie LA (1998) Secular oscillations in the carbonate
mineralogy of reef-building and sediment-producing organisms
driven by tectonically forced shifts in seawater chemistry.
Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 144:3–19
Stella JS, Pratchett MS, Hutchings PA, Jones GP (2011) Coralassociated invertebrates: diversity, ecological importance and vulnerability to disturbance. Oceanogr Mar Biol Ann Rev 49:43–104
Steneck RS (2006) Staying connected in a turbulent world. Science
311:480–481
Stoeker DK (1999) Mixotrophy among dinoflagellates. J Eukaryot
Microbiol 46:397–401
Strathmann RR, Hughes TP, Kuris AM, Lindeman KC, Morgan SG,
Pandolfi JM, Warner RR (2002) Evolution of local recruitment
and its consequences for marine populations. Bull Mar Sci
70:377–396
Swearer SE, Caselle JE, Lea DW, Warner RR (1999) Larval retention
and recruitment in an island population of a coral-reef fish. Nature
402:799–802
Swearer SE, Shima JS, Hellberg ME, Thorrold SR, Jones GP,
Robertson DR, Morgan SG, Selkoe KQ, Ruiz GM, Warner RR
(2002) Evidence of self-recruitment in demersal marine
populations. Bull Mar Sci 70:S251–S271
Szmant AM (2002) Nutrient enrichment on coral reefs: is it a major
cause of coral reef decline? Estuar Coasts 25:743–766
Szmant AM, Gassman NJ (1990) The effects of prolonged “bleaching”
on the tissue biomass and reproduction of the reef coral Montastrea
annularis. Coral Reefs 8:217–224
Thornhill DJ, Rotjan RD, Todd BD, Chilcoat GC, Iglesias-Prieto R
et al (2011) A connection between colony biomass and death in
Caribbean reef-building corals. PLoS ONE 6:e29535. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0029535
Tomascik T (1991) Settlement patterns of Caribbean scleractinian
corals on artificial substrata along a eutrophication gradient,
Barbados, West Indies. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 77:261–269
Tomascik T, Sander F (1987) Effects of eutrophication on reef-building
corals. III. Reproduction of the reef-building coral Porites porites.
Mar Biol 94:77–94
Tomascik T, van Woesik R, Mah AJ (1996) Rapid coral colonization of
a recent lava flow following a volcanic eruption, Banda Islands,
Indonesia. Coral Reefs 15:169–175
Underwood JN, Smith LD, van Oppen MJH, Gilmour JP (2009)
Ecologically relevant dispersal of corals on isolated reefs:
implications for managing resilience. Ecol Appl 19:18–29
Uthicke S, Schaffelke B, Byrne M (2009) A boom-bust phylum?
Ecological and evolutionary consequences of density variations in
echinoderms. Ecol Monogr 79:3–24
Van Oppen MJH, McDonald BJ, Willis B, Miller DJ (2001) The
evolutionary history of the coral genus Acropora (Scleractinia,
Cnidaria) based on a mitochondrial and a nuclear marker: reticulation, incomplete lineage sorting, or morphological convergence?
Mol Biol Evol 18:1315–1329
Van Oppen MJH, Oliver JK, Putnam HM, Gates RD (2015) Building
coral reef resilience through assisted evolution. Proc Nat Acad Sci
USA. doi:10.1073/pnas.1422301112
Van Veghel MLJ, Bak RPM (1994) Reproductive characteristics of the
polymorphic Caribbean reef building coral Montastrea annularis.
III. Reproduction in damaged and regenerating colonies. Mar Ecol
Prog Ser 109:229–233
Van Woesik R, Franklin EC, O’Leary J, McClanahan TR, Klaus JS,
Budd AF (2012) Hosts of the Plio-Pleistocene past reflect modernday coral vulnerability. Proc Roy Soc B 279:2448–2456
Vermeij GJ (1987) Evolution and escalation. Princeton Univ Press,
Princeton

12

Biology Trumps Management: Feedbacks and Constraints of Life-History Traits

Vermeij MJA, Smith JE, Smith CM, Thurber RV, Sandin SA (2009)
Survival and settlement success of coral planulae: independent and
synergistic effects of macroalgae and microbes. Oecologia
159:325–336
Veron JEN (1995) Corals in space and time. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, p 321
Veron JEN (2000) Corals of the world, 3 vols. Australian Institute of
Marine Science, Townsville, Australia
Vianna GMS, Meekan MG, Pannel D, Marsh S, Meeuwig JJ (2010)
Wanted dead or alive? The relative value of reef sharks as a fishery
and an ecotourism asset in Palau. Australian Institute of Marine
Science and University of Western Australia, Perth, p 34
Villanueva RD, Edwards AJ (2010) Butterflyfishes feed on externally
brooded larvae of the blue coral, Heliopora coerulea. Coral Reefs
29:105
Wallace CC, Rosen BR (2006) Diverse staghorn corals (Acropora) in
high-latitude Eocene assemblages: implications for the evolution of
modern diversity patterns of reef corals. Proc Roy Soc B Bio Sci
273:975–982
Walsh SM, Hamilton SL, Ruttenberg BI, Donovan MK, Sandin SA
(2012) Fishing top predators indirectly affects condition and reproduction in a reef-fish community. J Fish Biol 80:519–537
Ward S, Harrison P (1997) The effects of elevated nutrient levels on
settlement of coral larvae during the ENCORE experiment, Great
Barrier Reef, Australia. Proc 8th Int Coral Reef Sym, Panama 1:
891–896
Ward S, Harrison P (2000) Changes in gametogenesis and fecundity of
acroporid corals that were exposed to elevated nitrogen and phosphorus during the ENCORE experiment. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol
246:179–221
Ward S, Harrison P, Hoegh-Guldberg O (2002) Coral bleaching
reduces reproduction of scleractinian corals and increases susceptibility to future stress. Proc 9th Int Coral Reef Sym, Bali 2:
1123–1128
Warner RR, Cowen RK (2002) Local retention of production in marine
populations: evidence, mechanisms, and consequences. Bull Mar
Sci 70:245–249
Wass RC (1982) The shoreline fishery of American Samoa – past and
present. In: Munro JL (ed.), Ecological aspects of coastal zone
management. Proc Seminar on Marine and Coastal Processes in
the Pacific, Motopore Island Research Center, UNESCO, pp 51–83

263

Weber P (1993) Reviving coral reefs. In: Brown LR (ed) State of the
world. WH Norton, New York, pp 42–60
Webster NS, Uthicke S, Botté ES, Flores F, Negri AP (2013) Ocean
acidification reduces induction of coral settlement by crustose coralline algae. Glob Chang Biol 19:303–315
Weersing K, Toonen RJ (2009) Population genetics, larval dispersal,
and connectivity in marine systems. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 393:1–12
Wells JW (1956) Scleractinia. In: Moore RC (ed) Treatise on invertebrate paleontology, Part F, Coelenterata, Geological Society of
America and University of Kansas Press, Lawrence, KS, pp
328–444
Widdows J, Fieth P, Worrall CM (1979) Relationships between seston,
available food and feeding activity in the common mussel Mytilus
edulis. Mar Biol 50:195–207
Williams DMB, Hatcher AI (1983) Structure of fish communities on
outer slopes of inshore, mid-shelf and outer shelf reefs of the Great
Barrier Reef. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 10:239–250
Wilson PA, Norris RD, Cooper MJ (2002) Testing the Cretaceous
greenhouse hypothesis using glassy foraminiferal calcite from the
core of the Turonian tropics on Demerara Rise. Geology
30:607–610
Wing SR, Wing ES (2001) Prehistoric fisheries in the Caribbean. Coral
Reefs 20:1–8
Wisshak M, Schönberg CHL, Form A, Freiwald A (2012) Ocean
acidification accelerates reef bioerosion. PLoS ONE 7:e45124
Wittenberg M, Hunte W (1992) Effects of eutrophication and sediment
on juvenile corals I. Abundance, mortality and community structure. Mar Biol 112:131–138
Wood R (1999) Reef evolution. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, p 414
Wooldridge SA (2009) A new conceptual model for the warm-water
breakdown of the coral–algae endosymbiosis. Mar Freshw Res
60:483–496
Zachos JC, Röhl U, Schellenberg SA, Sluijs A, Hodell DA, Kelly DC,
Thomas E, Nicolo M, Raffi I, Lourens LJ, McCarren H, Kroon D
(2005) Rapid acidification of the ocean during the PaleoceneEocene Thermal Maximum. Science 308:1611–1615
Zapata FA, Vargas-Ángel B (2003) Corals and coral reefs of the Pacific
coast of Colombia. In: Cortés J (ed) Latin American coral reefs.
Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 419–447
Zeebe RE (2001) Seawater pH and isotopic paleotemperatures of Cretaceous oceans. Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 170:49–57

Index

A
Abiotic, 28, 148–151, 157, 159, 160, 164–166, 168, 170, 171,
197, 207, 218
Abrolhos Bank, 167
Acanthaster, 11, 43, 82, 85–87, 118, 122, 128, 162, 180, 191, 206, 207,
221, 232, 238, 247
Acanthurids, 185, 249
Acanthurus, 187, 249
Acclimation, 135–138
potential, 137, 138
Acclimatization, 134–139, 141–143, 234, 244
Accommodation space, 28, 34, 46–48
Accretion, 6, 19, 47, 48, 50, 57–59, 69, 152, 158, 184, 187, 202, 203,
224, 245, 246
Accretion patterns, 59
Acidification, 83, 91, 112, 139, 142, 204, 208, 224
Acquisition of zooxanthellae, 102–104
Acropora, 11, 38, 39, 43, 51, 60, 62, 85–87, 125, 127, 128, 136,
137, 139–141, 143, 156–158, 203, 204, 206, 219, 221,
235–241, 243, 244
Acute disturbances, 11, 92, 218, 219, 221, 222, 224, 225
Adaptation, 104–108, 128, 134–136, 138–143, 217, 234, 235, 244
Adaptive potential, 143
Aeromonas, 159
Agaricia, 57, 60, 166
Age-class strength, 180
Alacranes Reef, 159
Alcaligenes, 159
Algae
endolithic, 4, 5, 71
epilithic, 4, 82
Algal turf, 4, 53, 82, 89
Allee effect, 167
Allele frequencies, 140
Allopatric speciation, 38, 125
Alpheus, 79, 118, 160
Alteromonas, 159
Amakusaplana, 238
Amazon, 51, 183, 185
Ambergris Cay, 159
American Samoa, 5, 11, 139, 140, 142, 152, 169, 186, 187, 233, 239,
244, 247
Ammonium, 104, 105, 180, 185, 234, 240
Amoebocytes, 76
Anemonia, 137, 138
Anoxic, 137, 138
Antecedent topography, 54–55
Antibiotic, 138, 149, 167, 171, 221
Antimicrobial, 153, 168
Apex predators, 3, 247, 248
Aplysina, 153, 167

Aquarium-fish trade, 8
Arabian Gulf, 135, 139, 142, 155, 220
Arabian/Persian Gulf, 244
Aragonite, 19, 21, 25, 26, 28, 33–39, 55, 83, 106, 108, 158, 223, 233,
234, 240, 246
calcite oceans, 21
calcite seas, 25
saturation state, 83, 106, 223, 234, 236
seas, 35, 240
Archaea, 121
Arms race, 246
Arothron, 68, 76, 81
Asexual reproduction, 86, 102, 127
Aspergillus, 154
Assimilation, 104, 105
Assisted migration, 142, 226
Astralium, 118
Astreopora, 237, 243
Astropyga, 161
Aswan Dam, 179, 191
Atoll, 6, 8–10, 39, 46, 51, 69, 73, 182, 184, 186, 190, 196, 245, 256
Autotrophy, 240
B
Bacillus, 153
Bacteria, 3, 18, 19, 24, 32, 71–73, 104, 119, 121, 129, 138, 148, 150,
153–157, 159–162, 164, 165, 168, 180
Bahamas, 52, 75, 153, 171, 200, 205, 254
Barbados, 62, 73, 75, 79, 83, 85, 161, 162
Barcoding, 118–121
Barnacles, 18–20, 71, 74, 78, 81, 164, 185, 186, 239
Barrier reef, 46, 47, 51
Basalt, 11, 22, 26, 37, 235, 241, 246
Bay of Bengal, 183
Beggiatoa, 152
Belize, 58, 60, 79, 81, 119, 153, 154, 159, 160, 166, 200, 204, 205
Bermuda, 11, 73, 76, 154, 161, 247, 253
Bet-hedging, 233, 251
Big fishes, 246–256
Bindin, 33, 91, 125, 241
Biodiversity, 6, 10, 91, 128, 142, 151, 165, 166, 168, 171, 191, 226
Bioeroder, 19, 20, 53, 58, 68–81, 83, 85–87, 92, 167, 238, 246
Bioerosion, 20, 36, 38, 45, 54, 56–59, 67–92, 139, 161, 166, 187, 199,
205, 224, 245, 246
Biofilms, 235
Biogeochemical cycles, 128
Biogeographic, 183, 234
Biogeography, 6
Bioherm, 18, 19, 35, 55
Bioinformatics, 117

# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015
C. Birkeland (ed.), Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene, DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-7249-5

265

266
Biomineralization, 27, 33
Biosphere, 6–7, 180
Biotic, 18, 24, 27, 36, 45, 62, 86, 148–151, 157, 162, 164–166,
168–171, 184, 197, 207, 217, 218, 222
Biscayne bay, 168
Black band disease (BBD), 72, 154, 155, 166, 169
Bleaching, 43, 44, 50, 51, 60, 62, 70, 82–84, 87, 89–92, 101, 103, 104,
106, 107, 110, 111, 113, 135, 136, 138–141, 150, 153–157, 168,
170, 205, 207, 218, 220–224, 226, 234, 238, 240, 244, 247
calcification, 103
disease, 62
resistance, 135, 136, 138, 139
Bocas del Toro, 167
Body size, 197, 232, 248, 249, 251
Bolbometopon, 198, 205, 247, 249, 251
Bonaire, 8, 9, 72, 73, 75, 76, 80, 81, 156, 254
Broadcast-spawner, 237
Brooklynella, 164
Budget, 47, 57, 69, 83, 89, 90, 92
Butterflyfishes, 198, 203, 222, 233, 238
C
Calcification, 21, 26, 27, 33, 34, 36, 37, 39, 50, 53, 55, 56, 58, 59, 70,
83, 84, 89–92, 100, 105–106, 108–110, 112, 113, 128, 135, 137,
139, 158, 168, 184, 223, 239, 245, 246
Calcinus, 120
Calcite, 19, 21, 24, 26, 33, 35, 36, 55
seas, 241, 245, 246
Calcium carbonate budget, 83, 89–90, 92
Cambrian, 26, 27, 33, 36, 68, 71
Caranx, 8, 255
Carbon cycle, 25, 26, 35
Carbon dioxide cycle, 25
Carbon fixation, 102, 104, 105, 107
Carbonate
budget, 57, 59, 68, 69, 83, 90, 92
mineral, 21, 26, 83, 223
production, 6, 18, 24, 34, 35, 38, 47, 48, 51, 56–59, 81, 83, 86, 184
sediment, 18, 19, 28, 34, 36, 73
Carboniferous, 24, 26, 34
Caretta, 164
Caribbean, 5–8, 11, 38, 47, 48, 51–53, 56, 58, 60–62, 71, 72, 77–79, 81,
82, 84, 86, 89–90, 102, 118, 125, 137, 140, 151–155, 158,
160–162, 164, 166–171, 184–185, 188, 190, 196, 200, 201, 204,
205, 207, 219–222, 224, 225, 238, 239, 242, 243, 246, 247
Caribbean yellow band disease (CYBD), 158, 169
Catch-per-unit-effort (CPUE), 7, 247, 252
Cenozoic, 37–38, 71
Cephalopholis, 249–251
Chaetodon, 149, 158, 198, 204, 238
Chasmolith, 70
Cheilinus, 254
Chelonia, 164, 165
Chemotaxis, 103
Chiton, 19, 71, 75, 79
Chlorophyta, 72
Chronic, 11, 13, 137, 157, 166, 168, 218, 219, 221–223, 225, 226, 234,
244, 245
Chronic disturbances, 11, 218, 221, 222, 225, 226, 234
Chronic stress, 222, 234–236
Clade, 102, 103, 106, 108, 119, 140, 141, 143, 157, 241
Climate, 7, 24, 28, 31, 32, 37, 39, 45, 47, 51, 59, 60, 83, 86, 90, 111,
113, 128, 133–143, 167, 170, 218, 232, 236, 237, 244
change, 7, 24, 45, 59, 83, 86, 90–91, 111, 113, 128, 133–143, 167,
170, 225, 232, 236, 237

Index
Clionaid bioerosion, 76
Clostridium, 161
Coccolithophorid, 18, 24, 26–28, 35, 190
Codium, 185, 240
Coelobite, 68
COI-based barcoding, 118
Colpophyllia, 154
Compensation depth, 185
Competition, 2, 36, 54, 55, 70, 71, 88, 108, 127, 166, 169, 185, 189,
196, 197, 206, 207, 233, 239, 241, 244, 248, 249, 255
Complexity, 10, 55, 81, 86, 87, 89, 91, 169, 170, 190, 191, 197, 208,
209, 223, 224, 235, 237, 239, 245, 246, 250
Connectivity, 122, 218, 224, 226, 234–237
Conservation, 62, 92, 109, 118, 128, 142, 143, 154, 171, 186, 197,
207–209, 247, 256
medicine, 171
Consumer biomass, 4
Continental effects, 186
Cook Islands, 8, 151, 254
Coral Disease and Health Consortium (CDHC), 154, 171
Coral fish disease, 163
Coral Reef Information System, 154
Coral Triangle, 125, 220
Coralline cyanophyte disease (CCD), 152
Coralline fungal disease (CFD), 152, 168
Coralline lethal disease (CLD), 152
Coralline lethal orange disease (CLOD), 151, 152
Coralline target phenomena (CTP), 152
Coralline white band syndrome (CWBS), 152
Coralliophila, 222, 238
Corallivore, 82, 87, 103, 196–199, 203–208, 218, 222, 223, 238, 248
Coriolis effect, 180–182, 184
Cost, 8, 10, 56, 62, 109–112, 129, 141, 232, 234, 240, 244, 253, 254
Cost-benefit, 110–111
Cretaceous, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, 35–37, 237, 240–243, 245–246
Cretaceous/Paleogene mass extinction, 240
Crustacea, 73, 75, 78
Crustaceans, 74, 78, 160–161, 238
Crustose coralline algae, 73, 152, 187, 188, 202, 233, 241
Cryogenian, 24, 32
Cryptic species, 118
Curaçao, 12, 57, 60, 80, 153, 167, 200
Curios trade, 9
Cyanobacteria, 2, 3, 22, 24, 26, 32, 33, 35, 71–73, 82, 104, 153, 155,
157, 180, 203
Cycle, 25, 39, 44, 47, 48, 60, 102, 108, 109, 150, 163, 165, 166,
224, 225
Cyclones, 12, 184, 219, 220
D
Daldorfia, 120
Daly, 46, 47
Damselfish neurofibromatosis (DNF), 163
Damselfish virus-like agent (DVLA), 163
Damselfishes, 162, 185, 198, 199, 201–205, 207, 249
Dark spot syndrome (DSS), 158
Darwin Point, 51
Darwin, C., 45–47, 50, 53, 68, 184
Data, 45, 47, 51, 54, 57, 60, 62, 86, 87, 90, 117, 118, 121–123, 125,
127–129, 135, 139, 140, 143, 150, 158, 159, 162, 170, 171, 202,
203, 219, 224, 233, 242, 243, 245, 247, 248, 251, 252
Dead zones, 180
Degradation, 10, 53, 60, 62, 81, 87, 113, 127, 148, 151, 167, 183, 197,
207, 209, 222, 224, 225
Degree heating weeks (DHW), 220

Index
Development, 8, 12, 24, 30–32, 35, 37, 43, 44, 46, 47, 51, 53, 54, 60, 68,
70, 79, 85, 90, 91, 103, 111, 112, 118, 140, 147–149, 152, 156,
158, 162, 164, 165, 167, 180, 183, 190, 207, 222, 234, 237, 245,
247, 250
Devonian, 33, 36, 48, 49
Diadema, 11, 43, 75, 80, 85, 86, 89, 123, 151, 161, 166, 167, 191, 207,
219, 221, 226
Diagenesis, 44
Dictyosphaeria, 87
Diet, 3, 4, 7, 57, 79, 125, 128, 189
Dinoflagellate, 99–102, 128, 157, 226
toxicity, 184
Diploastrea, 243, 245
Diploria, 77, 154
Dispersal, 86, 109, 121–123, 128, 134, 141–143, 197, 220, 225, 235
Disturbances, 7, 11, 12, 70, 81, 82, 86, 89, 92, 147, 151, 167, 217–222,
224–226, 234, 244, 248
Disease, 9–12, 43, 44, 60, 62, 81, 82, 89, 112, 121, 123, 128, 148–151,
153–158, 160–171, 191, 206–208, 218, 220–223, 226, 232,
238, 240
Dispersal, 86, 121–123, 128, 134, 141–143, 191, 197, 220, 225, 235
Diversity, 3, 5, 6, 9–11, 19, 32–34, 38, 44, 45, 50, 53, 55, 57, 59, 60, 68,
70, 87, 89, 100–102, 109, 110, 112, 113, 118–122, 125, 128,
129, 138–143, 151, 164, 167, 181, 183, 184, 190, 191, 196, 197,
199, 201, 202, 207–209, 217, 218, 224, 233, 238, 241, 242, 244,
246, 248, 252, 253
gradient, 181
DNA barcoding, 118–120
Dolostone, 22, 25, 33
Drupella, 82, 222, 238
Dust from Sahara, 170
E
Eastern tropical Pacific (ETP), 83, 90, 91
Echinoid, 11, 20, 57, 76, 79–80, 83, 86, 87, 91, 161, 162
Echinometra, 75, 80, 89, 125, 162
Echinothrix, 75, 161
Economy, 1, 9, 10, 62, 250, 253, 254, 256
Ecosystem
health, 171
services, 5, 7, 167, 171, 226, 246
El Niño, 11, 59, 67, 86, 87, 180, 220
El Niño – Southern Oscillation (ENSO), 70, 82, 83, 86–87, 89–91, 180,
184, 194, 248, 250
Emerging infectious diseases (EIDs), 165
Endolith, 82, 84
Endolithic algae, 4, 78, 79, 84, 90, 92
Endosymbionts, 99, 100, 111, 220
Energy reserves, 149, 248
Enewetak, 6, 46, 75, 107
Eocene, 26, 29, 30, 37, 38, 240–242, 245
Epiactaea, 120
Epilithic, 70, 71, 84
algae, 4, 82
Epinephelus, 162, 247
Epizootics, 150, 162, 170
Eretmochelys, 164
Etiologic, 148, 150–152, 163
Eucheuma, 9
Eucidaris, 11, 75, 80, 85, 86, 89, 91, 191
Eutrophication, 3, 70, 81, 87, 89, 90, 112, 167, 222, 234
Exallias, 238
Excavating, 71, 74, 80, 81, 220
Experiment, 135, 187, 201, 202
External bioeroder, 68, 78, 82

267
Extinction, 8, 27, 32, 35–39, 89, 128, 134, 138, 184, 207, 238, 240–245
Extrachromosomal DNAs (EDNA), 163
Extractive-based economy, 253
F
Faustian corals, 243
Favia, 127, 141, 207
Fecundity, 7, 12, 13, 160, 218, 221, 225, 232–237, 240, 247, 249–252
Fertilization, 125, 127, 161, 185, 187, 202, 218, 221, 223, 225, 232,
234, 245
Fertilizer, 9, 92, 112, 180
Fibropapilloma-associated turtle herpesvirus (FPTHV), 164
Fibropapillomatosis, 151, 164, 170
Fiji, 8, 9, 151
Filamentous algae, 156, 158, 185, 187
Filefishes, 81, 98
Fisheries, 2, 6–8, 10, 87, 89, 90, 92, 118, 123, 128, 153, 160, 169, 179,
182, 190, 191, 198, 224, 226, 247, 248, 250, 252–254, 256
Fixed nitrogen, 180
Florida, 8, 19, 33, 50, 83, 89, 90, 139, 140, 142, 151, 153, 155, 156, 158,
160, 161, 163, 164, 166–168, 171, 200, 201, 203, 205, 254
Bay, 19, 50, 151, 160, 166
Keys, 10, 33, 50, 83, 139, 140, 142, 153, 155, 156, 160, 161, 163,
166, 167, 171, 200, 205
Flower Garden Bank, 186
Fluorescence, 106, 113, 129, 170
Food web, 161, 166, 167, 171, 184–187, 190, 191, 223, 252, 253
Foraging, 79, 189, 199, 200
Foraminiferan, 2, 70, 74, 164
Fringing reef, 10, 46, 70, 73, 75, 76, 79, 85, 88
Fungi, 19, 25, 71–73, 121, 138, 148, 150, 154, 155, 159, 161, 165
Fungia, 100, 158
G
Galapagos Islands, 191
Galathea, 120
Gambier Islands, 9
Gamete recognition, 125
Gametogenesis, 234
Gastropoda, 75, 79
Gene expression, 127, 129, 136–138, 142, 143
Gene
expression, 127, 129, 136–138, 142, 143
flow, 38, 125, 126, 140
Generalists, 102, 121, 189, 220
Genetic differentiating, 53, 107, 118, 121, 122, 126, 140, 143
Genetic
engineering, 128
isolation, 140
structuring, 140
Genomic, 127–129, 133–143
Geodia, 153
Geologic guilds, 28
Geologic history, 24, 243
Giant clams, 8, 159, 191
Global Coral Disease Database, 154
Globalization, 171, 253, 254
Gold rush, 7, 8, 247
Goniastrea, 154, 238
Goods and service values, 7–11
Grand Cayman, 161
Grazing, 4, 6, 51, 58, 76, 79, 81, 83, 86, 90, 188, 189, 200–206, 218,
221, 224, 248

268

Index

Great Barrier Reef (GBR), 4, 6, 12, 19, 43, 47, 50, 51, 71–74, 76, 78, 81,
89, 121, 122, 136, 140, 141, 152, 154, 155, 159, 160, 167, 200,
202, 203, 205–207, 209, 220, 221, 225, 232, 235, 244
Great Oxygenation Event, 32
Green fluorescent protein (GFP), 106
Grenada, 162
Grenadines, 162
Gross production, 3, 191
Gross productivity, 2, 189, 191, 252
Growth anomalies, 158
Guam, 6, 8–11, 51, 184, 186, 187, 191, 202, 203, 233, 247, 250,
254, 255
Gulf
of Aqaba, 141, 142
of Panama, 164
Stream, 30
Gut contents, 121, 122

Intermediate size classes, 5, 251, 252
Internal bioeroder, 68, 72, 82, 86
Introduced species, 169, 187
Inverted trophic biomass pyramid, 2, 3, 246, 248
Inverted trophic pyramid, 3, 6, 231, 232, 247
Iriomote Island, 11, 87
Iron, 32, 170
Isolation, 30, 38, 39, 140, 156, 170, 190, 197, 221, 237
Isthmus of Panama, 44, 125, 182, 188
Iteroparous, 231

H
Habitat complexity, 85, 246
Haemulon, 249
Haiti, 7
Halimeda, 19
Haloes, 248
Halos, 207
Harengula, 164
Hawaii, 4, 8, 9, 24, 54, 107, 112, 161, 162, 186, 187, 191, 234, 250, 251
Health, 10, 43, 53, 100, 113, 127, 136, 148–154, 162, 165, 171, 198
Heliopora, 233, 245
Herbivore, 6, 11, 89, 166, 186, 187, 196–199, 201, 203, 205–208
Herbivorous fish, 200
Heritability, 140, 141
Hermit crab, 79
Hermodice, 238
Heron Island, 76, 160, 219
Heterotrophy, 102, 104, 240
Heteroxenia, 103
High-throughput sequencing, 117–119, 122, 129
Hippospongia, 153
Holobiont, 3, 100, 107, 109, 138, 148, 169, 239
Holocene, 33, 38–39, 48–50, 53, 54, 56, 60
Homeorhesis, 148
Homeostasis, 148, 149
Homophyllia, 124, 243
Horizontal transmission, 141
Host, 4, 6, 28, 78, 100–109, 122, 125, 129, 136–141, 148–151, 153,
157–160, 164–171, 203, 220, 222
Hurricane, 51–53, 127, 164, 166, 204, 218–220
Hurricane Allen, 164, 166, 204, 219
Hybridization, 125, 164, 237
Hypoplectrus, 126

K
Kaneohe Bay, 4, 8, 112, 186
Key West, 151
Keystone species, 201–203
Kimbe Bay, 153
Kingman Reef, 6
Kirimati, 4
Kiritimati, 247
Koch’s Postulates, 50, 156, 170

I
Ianthella, 153
Ichthyophonus, 162
Identification, 68, 118–122, 125, 128, 129
Immune system, 149, 150
Indo-Pacific, 12, 13, 38, 47, 82, 107, 111, 118, 152, 154–156, 158, 160,
162, 166, 167, 169, 176, 198, 205, 207, 221, 224
Indo-West Pacific, 118, 191
Indonesia, 8, 9, 11, 28, 51, 89, 141, 182, 185, 186, 191, 240, 252
Infectious, 148–151, 154, 159, 161–163, 165, 168, 170
Infectious erythrocytic necrosis (IPN), 162
Interconnections coastal habitats, 184
Intermediate predation, 201, 202

J
Jamaica, 12, 161, 166, 204, 218, 219, 247
Jarvis Island, 4
Jewelry, 9
Jurassic, 24, 28, 29, 35, 36, 240, 241, 245, 246

L
Labyrinthula, 151
Larvae, 3, 107, 122, 123, 125–127, 140–142, 150, 152, 159, 166, 167,
169, 185, 188, 206, 222, 224, 233–238, 245, 251, 256
Larval pelagic duration, 234
Larval recruitment, 54, 221, 237, 248
Larval stage, 118, 121, 192
Laticauda, 164
Lazarus corals, 243
Light, 19, 22, 34, 35, 37, 38, 44, 52–55, 58, 59, 70, 72, 101, 102, 104,
106–107, 109–113, 121, 135, 137, 142, 148, 150, 155, 157, 159,
165, 184, 185, 190, 206, 217, 233, 235, 239
Limestone record, 39
Limpet, 71, 79, 80
Lithification, 34
Lithophaga, 53, 73, 74, 80, 84, 85
Lizard Island, 73, 74, 76, 78, 159, 160, 218
Lobophora, 118
Looe Key, 155
Lutjanus, 162
Lymphocystis, 162
M
Macroalgae, 4, 6, 19, 43, 59, 62, 82, 108, 112, 166, 167, 185, 187, 196,
197, 200–202, 204–208, 225, 235
Macroalgal cover, 4, 186, 200, 219
Macroborer, 71, 82
Madracis, 237
Magnesium, 55, 241
Management, 7, 44, 45, 87, 90, 92, 122, 123, 128, 140, 188, 191–192,
197, 207–209, 222, 224, 226, 231–256
Marine Protection Act of 1994, 8, 255
Marine tenure, 255, 256
Mass extinction, 27, 34–37, 39, 238, 240–245
Mass mortalities, 87, 111, 151, 154, 161–164, 170, 184, 225
Maximum sustainable yield (MSY), 252

Index
Mediterranean, 136, 179, 247
Meso-scale Controls
salinity, 51
temperature, 5, 0–51
wave energy, 5, 1–53
Mesozoic, 24, 26, 28, 29, 35, 71, 237, 241, 244–246
Metabolic processes, 149, 168, 239
Mexico, 34, 37, 137, 139, 160, 162, 186
Microbial, 18, 27, 28, 32–35, 100, 102, 119, 121, 128, 136–138, 148,
152–156, 158, 160, 167–170, 223, 226, 233, 235
Microbolite, 18, 19, 32, 34, 36
Microborer, 67, 71, 72
Micronesia Challenge, 256
Microsatellite, 117, 122, 123, 127
Millepora, 52, 136, 137, 140, 143, 221, 235, 238, 244
Miocene, 31, 38, 242
Mississippi River, 183
Mitochondrial genome, 118
Mixotrophic, 27, 240
Mollusca, 27, 73, 75, 79–80
Mona Channel, 185
Mona Island, 158
Montastraea, 53, 118, 123, 127, 154, 156, 158, 204, 221, 245
Montastraea complex, 53
Montipora, 38, 39, 155, 157, 203, 204, 234
Moorea, 74, 75, 137, 203
Mortality, 11, 12, 50, 54, 82–84, 86, 87, 89–92, 111, 136, 142, 153, 156,
158, 160, 161, 164–169, 171, 205–208, 218–226, 232, 235, 242,
243, 256
Mucus, 104, 129, 149, 162, 168, 221, 235
Mulloides, 250
Mutation, 127, 135, 138, 139, 143
Mycosporine-like, 106
Myripristis, 122, 249
N
Nassau grouper, 247
Natural selection, 135, 138, 232–238, 244
Nectamia, 122
Neogene, 13, 26, 38, 240
Neoplasm, 163, 164
Neoproterozoic, 24, 32
Net production, 2, 5, 6, 107, 108, 187, 188, 190, 240, 248
Net yield, 2, 188
Netherlands Antilles, 80, 156, 158
Nevis, 162, 171
New Britain, 153
New Caledonia, 8, 118, 207
Nitrogen, 3, 28, 37, 104, 107, 109, 180, 183, 203, 239, 240
Nitrogen fixation, 104, 203
Nuclear genome, 118, 123, 129
Nutrient input, 3, 181–188, 190, 233, 239, 248, 252, 253
Nutrients, 2, 3, 27, 36, 38, 45, 52, 53, 60, 62, 82, 91, 100, 104, 105,
107–112, 121, 155, 165, 167, 168, 171, 179–191, 197, 207, 221,
239, 248
O
Ocean acidification, 35, 70, 83, 86, 91, 127, 135, 137, 139, 141–143,
223, 225, 234, 238, 246
Ocean thermostat, 245
Oculina, 136, 240, 243
Ocyurus, 162
Oligocene, 30, 32, 38, 241, 242
Oligotrophic, 58, 73, 74, 76, 81, 181, 182, 185, 186, 188, 190
Opportunistic pathogens, 150, 168

269
Orbicella, 44, 53, 57, 118, 127, 154–158, 204, 205, 221, 226, 236
Ordovician, 24, 33, 36
Orinoco, 51, 185
Ornamental corals, 9
Ostreobium, 4, 72, 84
Overfishing, 43, 83, 89, 92, 121, 123, 148, 167, 171, 196, 207, 208, 218,
223, 236, 237, 246–248, 250, 252, 253
P
Palau, 5, 8, 9, 11, 80, 85, 139, 186, 191, 234, 238, 253–256
Paleocene, 37, 38, 240–242, 245
Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum, 242, 245
Paleogene, 24, 32, 37, 38, 237, 240, 241, 243, 245, 246
Palmyra, 6
Panama, 1, 5, 30, 44, 50, 69, 75, 76, 78, 79, 81, 83, 86, 90, 91, 111, 125,
157, 158, 161, 162, 164, 167, 182, 188, 189, 201, 204–206
Canal, 161
Panamanian Seaway, 30
Pangaea, 47
Papua New Guinea, 139, 151, 153, 201
Parasite, 148–151, 158–160, 162–165, 167–170
Parrotfishes, 3, 4, 71, 76, 81–83, 196, 198–201, 204, 205, 207, 208,
248–250, 252
Pathogen, 89, 92, 148–151, 153, 157–159, 161, 162, 165, 170, 171
Pavona, 204–206
Pelagic fishes, 9, 233, 248, 250, 253, 254
Pelamis, 164
Pelorus Island, 155
Perkinsus, 159, 160
Permian, 29, 34, 36
Permian-Triassic Boundary (PTB), mass extinction, 34, 35
Persian Gulf, 244
Peyssonelia, 152
Peyssonelia yellow-band syndrome (PYBS), 152
pH, 44, 79, 83, 84, 90, 91, 106, 112, 113, 121, 134, 135, 137–139, 142,
170, 187, 223, 232, 233, 237, 241, 245, 246
Phaceloid, 240, 241, 243
Pharmaceuticals, 9, 10, 222
Phase shift, 166, 167, 196, 197, 222, 237
Phenotypic plasticity, 135, 137
Philippines, 9, 10, 156, 159, 167, 185, 186, 191, 247, 254, 255
Phormidium, 155
Phosphate, 26, 53, 104, 106, 108, 167, 183
Phosphorus, 3, 28, 104, 105, 107, 109, 183, 239
Photoacclimate, 107, 137, 138
Photoadaptation, 107, 137
Photoautotrophy, 100, 102
Photobacterium spp., 162
Photosynthesis, 19, 22–28, 32–37, 39, 57, 58, 102, 106, 107, 112, 113,
137, 165, 180, 182, 239
Photosynthesis respiration ratio (P/R), 2, 3, 252
Phylogenetics, 123, 124, 240
Phylogeography, 125
Phylotypes, 140, 141
Phytoplankton, 2, 3, 24, 37, 83, 107, 108, 112, 167, 180, 182, 185, 186,
190, 239, 253
Pinctada, 9, 159, 160, 232
Piscivores, 3, 200, 209, 232, 246, 248
Planktotrophic larvae, 188
Planula, 103, 126, 127, 233–235, 237
Platax, 198
Plate tectonics, 6, 24, 25, 28, 29, 47
Platygyra, 134, 221
Plectropomus, 123, 249
Pleistocene, 24, 31, 38, 39, 47, 54–56, 60, 62, 242, 243
Plesiomonas, 159

270
Plexaura, 10
Pocillopora, 60, 127, 138, 140, 141, 143, 159, 203, 205, 206, 233–236,
239, 240, 243
Podocotyloides, 149, 158
Pollutant, 82, 87–89, 92, 148, 160
Pollution, 11, 32, 44, 87–90, 92, 112, 159, 165, 167, 169, 170, 208, 221,
236, 237, 244, 246
Polychaete, 74, 77–78, 92, 125, 152, 164, 238
Pomacentrus, 163
Porites, 53, 69, 70, 79, 84, 86–88, 127, 137, 139, 140, 143, 149, 158,
159, 166, 203–205, 221, 226, 233, 236
Positive feedback, 4, 7, 8, 11, 13, 82, 197, 234–236
Precambrian, 68, 71
Preconditioning, 138
Predation, 2, 5, 11, 27, 70, 71, 81, 83, 85–87, 121, 150, 163, 165, 166,
169, 171, 188–190, 200–204, 206–208, 219, 220, 222, 233, 238,
240, 248, 249
Predation risk, 207
Primary production, 2, 5, 27, 106, 190, 248
Prochloron, 2, 3
Producer biomass, 4
Production
daily, 106, 200
net, 2, 5, 6, 107, 108, 190, 248
primary, 2, 5, 27, 106, 190, 248
secondary, 166, 185
Proteins, 5, 7, 8, 80, 106, 107, 117, 121, 127–130, 140, 149, 180, 239
Proterozoic, 24, 26, 27, 32
Protogynous, 248
Protons, 106
Pseudodiploria, 154
Pseudomonas, 153, 156, 159
Pseudoplankton, 2
Pseudopopulation, 184
Pseudopterogorgia, 126
Pterois, 170
Puerto Rico, 10, 48, 49, 54, 75, 78, 161, 164, 165, 171, 185, 202, 245
Puffers, 81, 198, 206, 207
Pyramid, 4, 6, 248
Q
Queensland, 12, 160, 164, 183
Quintana Roo, 137
R
Rabbitfishes, 198–200
Rapid adaptation, 138, 139
Rates, 4, 6, 10, 18, 19, 22–28, 34–36, 38, 39, 47–51, 53, 57–59, 69–72,
74, 76–84, 86, 88, 90, 91, 100, 102, 105–112, 118, 129, 133,
137, 140, 141, 148, 151, 154, 155, 157, 158, 163, 166, 167,
182–186, 190, 191, 200, 203, 205, 207, 219, 223, 224, 226, 232,
235, 239–241, 244–246, 250–253
Rates bioerosion, 246
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 106, 111
Recovery, 11, 39, 56, 61, 62, 70, 82, 86, 87, 89, 104, 111, 135, 147, 149,
151, 161, 198, 204–207, 217–226, 232, 234, 236, 240, 247, 256
Recruitment, 5, 12, 53–55, 58, 70, 74, 82, 84, 86, 87, 122, 166, 185,
186, 191, 197, 205, 218, 222, 224–226, 232–237, 244, 245,
248–252, 256
Recycling of nutrients, 182, 190
Red Sea, 74, 76, 81, 120, 141, 154, 155, 157, 162, 167, 203, 207
Reef budget, 89
Reef degradation, 81, 87, 113, 127, 167, 183, 222, 224
Reef development, 31, 32, 35, 43–60, 68, 91
Refuge, 142, 185, 189, 200, 202, 203, 205, 207, 248, 249, 251

Index
Rescue, 138, 142
Reserves, 12, 13, 33, 34, 48, 58, 59, 62, 63, 109, 149, 159, 200, 205,
209, 222, 226, 248
Resilience, 7, 11, 12, 196, 197, 199, 205, 208, 209, 218, 219, 224, 226,
232, 233, 237, 256
Reticulate evolution, 38, 236, 237
Retiophyllia, 240
Rhodophyta, 72
Rhytisma, 158
Rickettsiales, 157, 170
River discharge, 179, 188, 190
Rudist bivalves, 36, 241, 246
Rugose coral, 34
Runoff, 18, 36, 82, 86, 87, 92, 111, 112, 168, 181–183, 190, 218, 220,
222, 235
S
Sabellastarte, 8
Salinity, 21, 51, 92, 110–113, 148, 157, 159, 190, 220
San Andres Island, 160
Sargocentron, 122
Saron, 120
Scale, 4, 9–12, 23–25, 28, 32, 34, 39, 43–63, 72, 83, 87, 89, 90,
92, 101, 110, 121, 123, 135, 138, 139, 142, 143, 164, 168,
170–184, 187, 191, 200, 217, 218, 220, 221, 224–226, 235,
237, 244, 247
Scarus, 6, 75, 76, 81, 162, 200, 204
Scolymia, 124, 243
Sea-level rise, 25, 34, 39, 44, 46–50, 244
Seagrass, 10, 19, 20, 36, 39, 150, 151, 154, 164–166, 207, 247, 248
Secondary production, 166, 185
Sediment/sedimentation, 6, 18, 19, 21, 24, 25, 28, 32–36, 38, 39, 45,
51–59, 62, 69–74, 77, 79–92, 102, 103, 109, 111, 112, 129, 135,
148, 150, 157, 158, 161, 166–168, 182–184, 190, 222, 225,
233–236, 241, 244, 246
Selection, 5, 70, 125, 126, 135, 138–140, 143, 201, 226, 232–235,
238, 244
Sequencing, 102, 109, 117–119, 122, 128–130, 135, 157
Sequencing technologies, 117, 129, 135
Seriatopora, 143
Serratia, 156
Service, 2, 5, 7, 9, 10, 133, 167, 171, 226, 244, 245, 253, 254
Service economy, 252–253
Service-based economy, 253, 254
Settlement, 10, 54, 82, 120, 152, 166, 183, 202, 204, 218, 223, 225, 234,
235, 245
Sex change, 248
Shark Haven Act of, 254, 2009
Siderastrea, 57, 158, 205
Siganus, 162
Sign, 86, 87, 140, 148, 149, 153, 154, 156–158, 161, 164, 232
symptom, 148
Simplicity, 239
Singapore, 83, 141
Sipuncula, 73
Skeleton, 2, 4, 9, 17–19, 21, 26, 33, 35, 45, 53, 56, 57, 68–72, 74,
76–85, 100, 106, 107, 112, 127, 149, 155–158, 160, 166, 198,
233, 238, 239, 241
Slot limits, 5, 251
Solomon Islands, 151, 251
Somatic mutation, 127
Sparisoma, 4, 75, 76, 162, 204, 205
Speciation, 38, 118, 125, 126
Species complexes, 118, 236, 237
Spiny lobster, 152, 160, 161
Sponges, clionaid, 73, 74, 80, 81, 83, 84, 92

Index
Spongia, 173
St. Croix, 52, 54, 75, 155, 156, 161, 162
St. Kitts, 162, 171
St. Vincent, 162
Stability, 21, 43, 44, 47, 60, 62, 100, 102, 105, 107, 110–113, 141, 191,
248, 252
Stability symbiosis, 100, 108–110
Standing genetic variation, 138–141, 143
Stegastes, 11, 187, 202, 204, 205, 207, 238, 249
Stephanocoenia, 158
Storm, 7, 9, 44, 45, 50–54, 58, 59, 81, 82, 87, 91, 92, 111, 165, 207,
218–220
Streptococcus, 162
Stress tolerance, 140
Stromatolite, 18, 19, 22, 32–34
Strombus, 159
Stylophora, 118, 119, 127, 141, 143
Subsidence, 46, 47, 51, 184
Substratum excavation, 198, 248
Succession, 6, 26, 33, 34, 187, 189, 200–202
Surgeonfishes, 81, 198–201, 207
Suspension feeder, 2, 71, 80, 167, 185, 188
Symbiodinium, 2, 37, 38, 84, 99–102, 105, 119, 121, 127, 128, 135–141,
143
Symbiosis, 24, 27, 33, 34, 38, 99–104, 106, 108–113, 121, 128, 141,
220, 239
Sympatric species, 118, 126
Symptom, 148
Syndrome, 148, 152, 153, 156–158, 160, 167
T
Tabuaeran, 4, 247
Tabulate coral, 33
Taiwan, 8, 138
Taphonomy, 44
Tectonic, 24–26, 29, 34, 39, 47, 51
Temperature, 13, 21, 22, 34, 38, 45, 50, 51, 81, 82, 84, 87, 90, 92, 106,
107, 109–113, 121, 127, 134–143, 148, 153, 157, 159, 161, 165,
166, 168, 169, 184, 190, 198, 220, 225, 244, 245
Terrestrial runoff, 36, 112, 181, 182, 190, 222
Territories, 4, 47, 82, 163, 185, 187, 190, 198–203, 205–209
Tethyan Sea, 34
Thalassia, 151, 166
Thamnasteria, 241
Thermal limits, 50, 244
Thermal tolerance, 111, 136–143
Threshold, 26, 44, 45, 51, 84, 90, 134, 136, 139–142, 168, 169, 184,
221, 226, 232, 244
Thresholds, 44, 134, 139, 142, 169, 221, 226, 244
Tissue thickness, 108
Tobago, 162
Tolerance, 53, 92, 100, 107–113, 133, 134, 136–143, 157, 166, 217,
218, 226, 234, 236, 238, 240, 244, 245
limits, 133, 134, 136, 139, 140, 142, 143
Topographic complexity, 55, 81, 85–87, 89, 91, 190, 191, 235, 245,
246, 250
Topography, 19, 54–55, 92, 134
Torres Strait, 154, 164
Tourism, 7, 9, 10, 253–255
Trade winds, 38, 180–182
Tradeoffs, 233–234, 238, 239
Transmission
horizontal, 141
vertical, 141
Transplant, 10, 53, 92, 136, 137, 142, 203, 233, 245

271
Transport, 18, 19, 45, 59, 106, 108, 253
Trematode, 149, 158, 160, 164
Triassic, 24, 26, 34, 35, 240–242
Tridacna, 8, 159
Trididemnum, 10
Triggerfishes, 81, 83, 198, 203, 207
Trochus, 8
Trophic, 2–7, 112, 167, 180, 181, 184, 190, 200, 222, 224, 225, 232,
240, 246–248, 252
Trophic biomass pyramid, 2, 3, 246, 248
Trophic cascade, 167, 200
Trophic level, 2, 3, 5, 167, 180, 190, 232, 246–248, 252, 253
Trophic pyramid, 3–6, 232, 247
Tuamotus, 6, 8, 9, 83, 190, 191
Tumor, 10, 148, 158, 162–164
Turbo, 8
Turbulence, 80, 200, 203
Turnover, 2–4, 6, 117, 189, 239, 242, 248, 253
Typhoon, 10, 184, 238
U
U.S. Virgin Islands, 47, 54, 59, 75, 155, 160, 167, 221, 254
Ultraviolet, 35, 37, 107, 112, 157
Ulva, 185, 240
Uptake, 26, 27, 102, 104, 105, 108, 168, 185, 240, 246
Upwelling, 2, 3, 91, 108, 138, 180–182, 184, 185, 188, 190, 239, 248,
250, 252, 253
Urchins, 18, 19, 43, 71, 75, 76, 80–83, 89–91, 123, 125, 142, 152, 161,
162, 170, 171, 191, 196, 197, 207, 218, 221, 224
V
Vector, 149, 168, 169, 203
Velvet disease, 163
Venus, 22
Vermetid, 79
Vertical transmission, 141
Vibrio, 156–159, 162
Viral erythrocytic necrosis (VEN), 162
Volcanism, 24, 28, 37, 241, 245
W
Wall of mouths, 3, 249
Wave action, 10, 99, 241, 244
Wave energy, 45, 50–53, 56
Weathering, 22, 24, 26, 28, 55
White band disease (WBD), 11, 43, 44, 60, 82, 89, 152, 156, 157, 166,
169, 238
White patch disease (WPD), 156
White spot syndrome virus (WSSV), 160
White syndrome (WS ), 156, 157, 166, 169
X
Xestospongia, 153
Z
Zebrasoma, 251
Zonation, 51–53, 59, 60, 85, 200, 203–206
Zoonotic diseases, 148, 149, 151
Zooplankton, 2–4, 100, 103, 108, 180, 185
Zooxanthellae, 2–4, 19, 35–37, 50, 53, 82, 100–113, 157, 158, 167,
185, 191, 205, 220, 239, 243

