Naval War College Review
Volume 54
Number 2 Spring Article 11

2001

Thinking about Innovation
Williamson Murray

Follow this and additional works at: https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review

Recommended Citation
Murray, Williamson (2001) "Thinking about Innovation," Naval War College Review: Vol. 54 : No. 2 , Article 11.
Available at: https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol54/iss2/11

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journals at U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in
Naval War College Review by an authorized editor of U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons. For more information, please contact
repository.inquiries@usnwc.edu.



Murray: Thinking about Innovation

Dr. Murray received his Ph.D. (after service in the U.S.
Air Force) in military-diplomatic history at Yale Uni-
versity. He has taught at Yale, at the Air, Army, and
Naval War Colleges, the U.S. Military Academy, Ma-
rine Corps University, the London School of Economics,
the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum, and Ohio
State University, of which he is a professor emeritus. He
is currently a consultant at the Institute for Defense
Analyses in Arlington, Virginia. His numerous books
include Air War, 1914–1945 (1999) and a number of
works in collaboration with Allan Millett, including,
most recently, A War to Be Won: Fighting World War
II (1999). An earlier version of this paper was delivered
at the Naval War College’s Conference on Military In-
novation, held 9–10 March 2000.

© 2000 by Williamson Murray
Naval War College Review, Spring 2001, Vol. LIV, No. 2

Published by U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons, 2001 1



Naval War College Review, Vol. 54 [2001], No. 2, Art. 11

THINKING ABOUT INNOVATION

Williamson Murray

Briefings by service representatives at recent conferences on military innova-
tion suggest a great deal about what is wrong with the current efforts in the

U.S. Department of Defense to foster innovation. One clearly evoked a mass
Stakhanovite-like* operation at that service’s doctrine center, a program in
which the entire staff, from the commander to the lowliest enlisted person, are
working twelve hours a day, six days a week, to realize the service chief ’s vision of
innovation.1 That is unfortunate; it is inconceivable that any valuable thinking,
much less progress toward substantial innovation, could be taking place under
such conditions.

It is all too easy, in fact, to form the impression that none of the services are
deeply serious about transformation, that little real thinking is occurring within
the labyrinthine corridors of the Pentagon or the various agencies that make up
the Defense Department’s nervous system.2 There is a great deal of talk in the
Washington, D.C., area about transformation, innovation, and “revolutions in
military affairs,” but there is unfortunately little focus on the attributes of mili-
tary (and other) organizations that have actually fostered significant, successful
innovation over the past century.

Instead, even the most sympathetic onlooker is likely to sense that the Penta-
gon lives in a sea of slogans, briefings using elaborate electronic graphics, and a

* The (state-sponsored) Stakhanovite labor movement in the Soviet Union in the 1930s was charac-
terized by centralized organization and very large individual work assignments.

https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol54/iss2/11 2



1 2 0 N A V A L W A R C O L L E G EMRuErVrIaEyW: Thinking about Innovation

self-satisfied belief that new platforms will solve the tactical and operational
problems of the future. Unfortunately, slick presentations do not equate to seri-
ous military thought. Nor does the procurement of sophisticated—and there-
fore exceedingly expensive—weapons systems necessarily lead to a “revolution
in military affairs.” In fact, technology has rarely been more than an enabler of
revolutions in military affairs in the past, and there is no reason to believe that
things will be different in the future.3

From the perspective of a military historian, there is no particular cause for
surprise in that state of affairs—or, at least for the coming decade, for worry.
What is troubling is the set of attitudes and cultures that characterizes U.S. mili-
tary services at the beginning of what appears to be an extended period of peace.
These are attitudes and cultures of a sort that may make real innovation, when it
counts, impossible.

Ironically, the United States has been all too successful in its efforts to elimi-
nate the threats that arose in the twentieth century to its national security inter-
ests. Entering World War I near the end of the conflict, it helped to bring victory
on the Western Front in 1918 and thereby to prevent Kaiser Wilhelm’s Reich
from establishing a general hegemony over Europe. Two decades later America’s
military and industrial might wrecked both Nazi Germany (with the help of the
Soviet Union) and imperial Japan in a successful two-front war.4 Then, over the
course of a cold war of nearly sixty years (for the Cold War really began in the
late 1930s), the United States outlasted its ideologically motivated communist
opponents; their economic systems finally collapsed. The difficulty is that the
current framework of international politics is unlikely to last until the end of the
twenty-first century, and the threats to American interests are likely to grow
rather than diminish.5

THE HISTORICAL PARAMETERS OF REVOLUTIONS IN
MILITARY AFFAIRS
One of the factors that emerged in the last interwar period as a significant
enabler of revolutions in military affairs was the fact that military organiza-
tions—which then had real, discernible threats against which to develop new ca-
pabilities and doctrine—invariably innovated more coherently and effectively
than other entities. A case in point is the development of combined-arms tactics
by the Germans. The German army spent much of the interwar period confront-
ing threats in both the east and west represented by Polish, Czech, and French
military forces.6 Mobility and a careful refinement of the lessons of the last war
eventually allowed the Germans to handle the immediate threats on their fron-
tiers. However, the development of combined-arms warfare in a Central Euro-
pean setting was not sufficient for the worldwide war that was unleashed; the

Published by U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons, 2001 3



Naval War College Review, Vol. 54 [2001], No. 2, Art. 11 M U R R A Y 1 2 1

Germans possessed neither the logistical or intelligence resources nor the strate-
gic grasp necessary to wage war from the North Cape to the Mediterranean and
from Stalingrad to the Caribbean.

Similarly, the U.S. Navy and the U.S. Marine Corps confronted in the 1920s
and 1930s formidable problems in developing capabilities to fight a war over

the distances involved in the Pa-
It is all too easy, in fact, to form the impres- cific Ocean.7 For the Navy, the
sion that none of the services are deeply seri- eventual result was the develop-
ous about transformation, that little real ment of carrier aviation in a way
thinking is occurring within the Pentagon. that would significantly extend

the reach of the fleet.8 In the case
of the Marines, the need to capture logistical bases to support the projection of
naval and air power across the ocean led to the development of amphibious tac-
tics and capabilities. The Navy, which required island bases to support its own
advance across the Pacific, recognized the need to assist the Marines.

The problem that the U.S. services confront today is that they cannot assess
when, where, or against whom a future war might occur, or even how long it
might last.9 There is simply no discernible threat, even on the distant horizon,
against which the United States can now measure its forces or its capabilities.
The implications are profound, because they make real innovation especially
difficult. In the interwar period, those military organizations, like the Royal Air
Force and the U.S. Army Air Corps, that developed “generic” capabilities—that
is, not focused upon specific projected missions—created doctrinal and opera-
tional concepts that were fundamentally flawed. The evidence suggests that am-
biguity resulted in dangerous assumptions—for example, about the ability of
strategic bomber formations to defend themselves.

But it is not only the uncertainties of the future strategic environment that
raise problems for the American military. One of the major advantages that the
services enjoyed in the 1920s and 1930s was the fact that that period of peace
lasted no longer. Thus, the senior leaders who went to war in 1939 were all expe-
rienced combat officers who had studied definable tactical, and in some cases
operational, problems on the basis of real-world combat experience. Today’s
American military confronts a peace that could last well into the century. The
last significant war that the U.S. military fought was the Vietnam conflict; al-
ready, few even in the flag and general-officer ranks served in that traumatic
war.10 A long peace, one that lasts forty or fifty years, could well create military
cultures that no longer understand the fundamental nature of war, in which
planners assume that there will be little friction or that opponents will be unable
to interfere with the conduct of operations.11

https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol54/iss2/11 4



1 2 2 N A V A L W A R C O L L E G EMRuErVrIaEyW: Thinking about Innovation

Certainly, the Royal Navy’s history in the period from 1815 through 1914 sug-
gests some of the professional pitfalls of a prolonged period of peace.12 That mil-
itary organization, primed by the decades of naval war against the fleets of the
French revolutionaries and Napoleon, had come to rely on the willingness and
ability of subordinate commanders—exemplified by Admiral Horatio Nelson’s
“band of brothers”—to discern and respond independently to the dictates of a
situation. But in the decades after 1815 the Royal Navy, facing few demands
more pressing than polishing brass and making a good impression, gradually
changed into a service whose senior officers at Jutland refused to fire on German
ships at virtually point-blank range because they had received no orders from
their superiors—and neglected to inform those superiors that they had the en-
emy in sight.

The basic problem is that military organizations can rarely replicate in times
of peace the actual conditions of war. It becomes increasingly easy, as the com-
plexities, ambiguities, and frictions of combat recede into the past, for militaries
to develop concepts, doctrines, and practices that meet the standards of
peacetime efficiency rather than those of wartime effectiveness. There is no
other profession in the world whose peacetime efforts represent only a pale
shadow of the harsh realities in which its men and women must carry out their
true functions—not least that their opponents are trying to kill them. That is
why the profession of arms is the most demanding calling not only physically
but intellectually. It is also why professional military education has been so pro-
foundly important to armed services in preparing for and waging war. Here lies
perhaps the greatest weakness in the current culture of the American military.

With perhaps a single exception, the colleges of professional military educa-
tion, charged with educating the officer corps for the complexities and ambigu-
ities of the future, are not especially distinguished. In 2000, a very senior officer
told an assemblage at a war college that he hoped its students were getting to
know their families and playing plenty of softball and golf, as he had himself
when he attended that same institution. At least some of the better students were
outraged. It is well to remember, as a contrast, that in the interwar period indi-
viduals who were to rise to the highest levels in the coming war had been on the
faculties of the war colleges; examples include Raymond Spruance (who served
two tours on the faculty of the Naval War College at Newport and returned after
the war to become its president), Richmond Kelly Turner, J. Lawton Collins, W.
H. Simpson, and Alexander Patch.

Exacerbating the problem of successful innovation over the past century has
been the harsh reality that military organizations have rarely been willing to
learn from the past. It is a myth that military organizations tend to do badly in
each new war because they have studied too closely the last one; nothing could

Published by U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons, 2001 5



Naval War College Review, Vol. 54 [2001], No. 2, Art. 11 M U R R A Y 1 2 3

be farther from the truth. The fact is that military organizations, for the most
part, study what makes them feel comfortable about themselves, not the uncon-
genial lessons of past conflicts. The result is that more often than not, militaries
have to relearn in combat—and usually at a heavy cost—lessons that were
readily apparent at the end of the last conflict.

To take an example from the British: by summer of 1918 the Royal Navy had
evolved a complex set of technologies and tactics that allowed its antisubmarine

forces to respond effectively to the

What is troubling is the set of attitudes and threat of the U-boats. Convoys,

cultures—attitudes of a sort that may make air support (including night-flying

real innovation, when it counts, impossible. aircraft equipped with search-
lights), trained escort groups, and

technological support had all become available. When the next war began in
September 1939, however, the Royal Navy had virtually none of these capabili-
ties. The result was the nightmarish Battle of the Atlantic, wherein the British
had to struggle desperately to keep up with a U-boat force that was inflicting ter-
rible losses on the merchant shipping that was the lifeline of their island nation.13

We have already noted the flawed concepts and doctrine developed between
the wars by the Royal Air Force and the U.S. Army Air Corps. Interestingly, both
had rejected the lessons of the last war in their thinking. Yet in retrospect, World
War I had clearly underlined two basic facts about air war: first, air superiority is
essential to the successful employment of aircraft for any other mission; second,
it is very difficult for aircraft to hit targets accurately, even under the conditions
of daylight and good weather.14 In the case of the Royal Air Force, the rejection of
recent experience was explicit; for the Army Air Corps, it was implicit.15 Certain-
ly, the rapidity of technological change confronted airmen with troublesome
ambiguities. But the far more impressive level of innovation that the Luftwaffe
achieved in preparing for World War II—innovation that rested on a careful
analysis of the past—suggests that many of the problems that confronted Amer-
ican and British air forces were self-inflicted, arising from contempt for the les-
sons of the past (even the immediate past) in a rush to get on with the future.16

The unwillingness to learn from the past carried on into the next war. The
RAF spent much of the first two years of the war killing German cows and blow-
ing up trees, because of its lack of blind-bombing aids. Not until late summer
1941 did the Butt Report make clear that barely one-third of Bomber Com-
mand’s aircraft were capable of hitting within five miles of their targets (that is,
an area of seventy-five square miles).17 For their part, U.S. airmen dismissed the
warnings implicit in the Battle of Britain about the vulnerabilities of bomber
formations; it took not one but two Schweinfurt raids and the loss of hundreds

https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol54/iss2/11 6



1 2 4 N A V A L W A R C O L L E G EMRuErVrIaEyW: Thinking about Innovation

of bombers before Eighth Air Force’s leadership gave long-range escort fighters
top priority.

There were, however, organizations that did learn from the past. Unfortu-
nately, the foremost of these was the Reichsheer, the successor to the German
army of the First World War. The Reichsheer’s first chief, General Hans von
Seeckt, noted soon after assuming command, “It is absolutely necessary to put
the experiences of the war in a broad light and collect this experience while the
impressions won on the battlefield are still fresh and a major proportion of the
experienced officers are still in leading positions.”18 As one of his first steps
Seeckt ordered a sweeping examination of the lessons of the last war, establish-
ing fifty-seven committees to carry out that task. Seeckt gave these committees
explicit terms of reference; they were to produce

short concise studies on the newly gained experiences of the war and consider the
following points: a) What new situations arose in the war that had not been consid-
ered before the war? b) How effective were our prewar views in dealing with the
above situations? c) What new guidelines have been developed from the use of new
weaponry in the war? d) Which new problems put forward by the war have not yet
found a solution?19

The result was that the Germans developed a thorough understanding of the
combined arms–related implications of the war. That historical understanding
infused both their 1923 Field Service Regulations and the 1932 basic doctrinal
manual Die Truppenführung, the finest exposition of the nature of war at the op-
erational level ever written.

It is well worth underscoring the contrast here between the British and Ger-
man armies: the British failed to establish a committee to study the lessons of
World War I until 1932. At that time, the chief of the Imperial General Staff gave it
a toughly worded task: the committee was to “study the lessons of the late war, as
shown by the various official accounts, and to report whether these lessons are
being correctly and adequately applied in our manuals and in our training general-
ly.”20 Unfortunately, the committee produced a report that was highly critical of the
army’s performance in the war, and a new chief of the Imperial General Staff,
General Sir Archibald Montgomery-Massingberd, quashed it; he ordered that a far
more favorable study be issued to the officer corps. Thus, the British army never
gained any insight into what had gone wrong in the last war. Three long years of
defeat would ensue before Bernard Law Montgomery assumed command of
Eighth Army in Egypt and began to grapple with the systemic prewar problems
that still were affecting his command’s performance on the field of battle.21

There is another crucial element in the innovation equation—the culture of
military organizations. By and large, historians devote little attention to the

Published by U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons, 2001 7



Naval War College Review, Vol. 54 [2001], No. 2, Art. 11 M U R R A Y 1 2 5

subject; yet it may be the most important enabler of military innovation. The
services that innovated with considerable success in the interwar period pos-
sessed internal cultures that encouraged debate, study, and honest experimenta-
tion in their preparations for war. Professional military education was clearly a

part of the process; so was serious
Professional military education has been study and writing outside of the
profoundly important to armed services in schoolhouse. Erwin Rommel, the
preparing for and waging war. Here lies per- preeminent “muddy-boots” soldier
haps the greatest weakness in the current in the German army, not only
culture of the American military. read books but wrote them.22 Fur-

ther, military cultures that inno-
vated well cultivated substantive exchanges about the significant military issues
of the day. The German army particularly encouraged its officers to engage in se-
rious debate, and in print. In contrast, its future opponent across the Rhine was
elevating doctrine to the stature of dogma. In the mid-1930s General Maurice
Gamelin, the French army’s commander in chief, established the high command
as the sole arbiter for doctrinal matters; all lectures, articles, and books by serv-
ing officers had to receive its prior approval. As the French general André
Beaufre later noted in his memoirs, “Everyone got the message, and a profound
silence reigned until the awakening of May 1940.”23

Still, history as measure of the parameters of innovation can be quite mis-
leading; the impression historians form can depend on the cases they select and
the contemporary sources they consult. The devastating victory of German
forces in the campaign against France in 1940 would seem as clear a “revolution
in military affairs” as any in the twentieth century. Yet virtually none of the Ger-
man generals responsible felt there was anything revolutionary in that victory.
In fact, one of the most perceptive General Staff officers, General Erich
Marcks—soon to be selected by the army’s chief of staff, Franz Halder, to draw
up the initial plan for the invasion of the Soviet Union—noted in his diary in late
June 1940 as the major explanation of the success in France the ideological moti-
vation of German soldiers.24 On the other side of the hill, however, his counter-
parts in the British and French armies clearly believed that something
revolutionary had occurred.

Why the difference in perception? To German officers the changes that had
taken place between 1920 and 1940 appeared to be evolutionary; many of these
individuals had been part of the process, step by step. British and French officers,
on the other hand, their own armies having evolved at a slower pace or in en-
tirely different directions, saw in 1940 what seemed a victory of revolutionary
magnitude.

https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol54/iss2/11 8



1 2 6 N A V A L W A R C O L L E G EMRuErVrIaEyW: Thinking about Innovation

The only truly sudden, discontinuous change in the interwar period on what
would be the Allied side appears to have been the creation of Fighter Command,
under the leadership of Air Marshal Sir Hugh Dowding from 1937 through
1940.25 Still, in technological matters Dowding drew on decisions he had
made earlier in the thirties, when he had directed the RAF’s research and devel-
opment efforts. In that position he had set the specification for the sin-
gle-engine, high-performance fighter designs that became the Spitfire and the
Hurricane, and he had backed experiments in radio direction finding that would
produce radar. Furthermore, the British had created in World War I, by summer
1918, an effective air defense system to oppose German strategic bombers; the
concept of a system of air defense remained embedded in RAF thinking in the
late 1930s and provided a mental framework for creating a counter to the new
threats.

PROSPECTS FOR INNOVATION IN THE NEXT CENTURY
What does all this history have to do with the current state of innovation in the
U.S. military? In effect, it is a benchmark against which one can measure the
trends and the attitudes of its officer corps and senior leadership as to their likely
receptiveness to innovation and the major conceptual changes to come in the
next decades. In some respects such a report card on the present state of the U.S.
military would be quite positive, particularly in regard to current threats. Its
marks would not be so good on long-range prospects for innovations on the or-
der of those of the 1920s and thirties.

In the day-to-day business of training and preparing military forces to face
current and immediately foreseen threats, the American armed services re-
main far ahead of any conceivable opponent. Such facilities and programs as
“Red Flag,” “Top Gun,” the National Training Center, and fleet battle experi-
ments all provide realistic, tough challenges for assessing the readiness of units
and the suitability of new concepts. While these facilities cannot replicate the
conditions of combat, they do provide a framework for preparing for combat
in a way that is superior by an order of magnitude to anything available in
previous decades. This state of affairs is encouraging, because the historical re-
cord suggests that at the heart of innovation lie discrete, specific problems.
Only by beginning with such issues have military organizations been able to
realize their larger visions and exploit the capabilities inherent in technologi-
cal change.26

Yet there are also worrisome trends. The military services, with the exception
of the Marine Corps, reflect the attitudes of the American people in being pro-
foundly ahistorical.27 The “revolution in military affairs” has been to some ex-
tent advocated by people who are disturbingly ignorant of history.28 The

Published by U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons, 2001 9



Naval War College Review, Vol. 54 [2001], No. 2, Art. 11 M U R R A Y 1 2 7

emphasis within the services has been, more often than not, on technology and
platforms, as embodying in themselves the necessary direction of innovation. But
even more distressing has been the reemergence of the mechanistic, engineering,
systems-analysis approach to thinking about future war that so characterized
Robert Strange McNamara’s Pentagon in the 1960s. The catastrophic result of that
secretary of defense’s approach was the waging of the Vietnam War by an Ameri-
can military that consistently refused to recognize the human factor in warfare.29

However, most of the lower-ranking and mid-level officers who fought (and
survived) in Vietnam returned with the uncertainties and ambiguities of war
burned into their souls.30 Accordingly, much of the development of the U.S. mil-

itary between 1975 and 1990, as it
One of the major advantages that the ser- adapted to an increasing pace of
vices enjoyed in the 1920s and 1930s was the technological change, reflected
fact that the peace lasted no longer. the lessons learned at such cost in

Southeast Asia. It is not that those
seared by the experience of Vietnam rejected technological change; the new
weapons systems and technological capabilities introduced in the years of their
ascendancy reflect their understanding that technology would provide impor-
tant leverage against the Soviets. But they also understood that technology was
only an enabler: what really mattered in combat, they were convinced, were the
doctrine and conceptualizations within which technology was to be employed.
One result was a series of doctrinal publications that were the best ever pro-
duced by the American military. The 1986 edition of the Army’s Field Manual
100-5, as well as the Marine Corps’s Fleet Marine Force Manual 1, Warfighting,
represented a deep understanding of the fundamental nature of war.

Today, that understanding appears in danger of dissipating, notwithstanding
the even more Clausewitzian statement issued by the Marines under General
Charles C. Krulak. In 1992 the Army published a considerably watered-down
version of FM 100-5, and its concurrent efforts to draft a post–Cold War view of
the operational level of war floundered in the late 1990s. The 1998 revision of
Air Force Manual 1-1 was extraordinarily weak, a jumble of assertions, pictures,
and dogma—a manual more concerned with style than substance, a pale shadow
of the far more substantive manual published in the early 1990s.

In the larger sense, it is the cultures of the services that constitute the greatest
cause for alarm. The American armed services remain alone among “First
World”militaries in not making intellectual, along with operational and tactical,
accomplishments prerequisites for senior command.31 As one senior officer has
suggested, American officers with substantial academic attainment have to prove
that they are “muddy-boots” soldiers or “blue-water” seamen, etc., but the latter
do not have to prove they have brains.

https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol54/iss2/11 10



1 2 8 N A V A L W A R C O L L E G EMRuErVrIaEyW: Thinking about Innovation

Part of the problem is that the service personnel systems are so constrained by
laws drawn up in the late 1940s, as well as by more recent service practices and
congressional mandates, that it is virtually impossible for young officers to find
time and opportunity to attain the broad spectrum of historical knowledge, lan-
guage training, and cultural awareness that the twenty-first century is going to
demand. The officer corps of the U.S. armed services are therefore likely become
ever more narrowly technological and less capable of adapting and innovating
in the face of diverse threats and emerging challenges.32 For successful innova-
tion in the coming decades, as in the past, it will be the ability to conceptualize
that matters.

N O T E S

1. This view of innovation contrasted sharply Historian’s Thoughts,” Strategic Review, Win-
with that of two senior Army officers (who ter 1999.
had been leaders in the renaissance of the late 6. See Williamson Murray, “Armored Warfare,”
1970s) who suggested in a conference at the in Murray and Millett, eds., Military Innova-
Army War College in March 2000 that a cru- tion in the Interwar Period, chap. 1.
cial element in innovation was to form small,
carefully picked groups to work on substan- 7. Ibid., chaps. 2 and 10.

tive doctrinal and conceptual issues. 8. See in particular Thomas C. Hone, Norman

2. For all the talk about how important trans- Friedman, and Mark D. Mandeles, American

formation and innovation are to the future and British Aircraft Carrier Development

capabilities of the U.S. military, the chief in- (Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute Press, 2000).

tellectual positions in that process, those of 9. For how well the American military is ad-
the presidents and commandants of the war dressing the emerging threats, see Williamson
and staff colleges, seem often to be filled as Murray, “Preparing to Lose the Next War?”
afterthoughts—in the case of the National Strategic Review, Spring 1998.
War College, on the basis of which service’s

10. For the impact this is already having on the
turn it is, in the “joint world,” to hold that

American military, see Williamson Murray,
three-star position

“Clausewitz Out, Computer In, Military Cul-
3. For a discussion of the role of technology in ture and Technological Hubris,” National In-

the processes of innovation and the creation terest, Summer 1997.
of “revolutions in military affairs,” see Barry

11. As early as spring 1996 this author heard a se-
Watts and Williamson Murray, “Military In-

nior Army general suggest to a war college
novation in Peacetime,” in Military Innova-

class that “the digitization of the Army spells
tion in the Interwar Period, ed. Williamson

the end of Clausewitz.”
Murray and Allan R. Millett (New York:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1996). 12. For the deleterious effects of long interwar

periods, see Andrew Gordon and John
4. For the role of the United States in World

Woodward, The Rules of the Game: Jutland
War II, see Williamson Murray and Allan R.

and British Naval Command (London: James
Millett, A War to Be Won: Fighting the Second

Murray, 1996).
World War (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press
of Harvard Univ. Press, 2000). 13. See Murray and Millett, A War to Be Won,

chap. 10.
5. See in particular Williamson Murray, “The

Emerging Strategic Environment: An 14. See Williamson Murray, The War in the Air,
1914–1945 (London: Cassell, 1999), chap. 1.

Published by U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons, 2001 11



Naval War College Review, Vol. 54 [2001], No. 2, Art. 11 M U R R A Y 1 2 9

15. In 1924 the RAF’s air staff produced a memo- The French we met in battle were no longer
randum arguing that forces attacking an en- those of [the years] 14/18. The relationship
emy nation “can either bomb military was like that between the revolutionary
objectives in populated areas from the begin- armies of 1796 and those of the [First] Coali-
ning of the war, with the objective of obtain- tion—only this time we are the revolutionaries
ing a decision by moral effect which such and Sans-Culottes.” Quoted in MacGregor
attacks will produce, and by the dislocation of Knox, Common Destiny, Dictatorship, Foreign
the country, or, alternatively, they can be Policy, and War in Fascist Italy and Nazi Ger-
used in the first instance to attack enemy many (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ.
aerodromes with the view to gaining some Press, 2000), p. 186.
measure of air superiority, and when this has 25. See Alan Beyerchen, “From Radio to Radar:
been gained, can be changed over to the di- Interwar Military Adaptation to Technologic
rect attack on the nation. The latter alterna- Change in Germany, the United Kingdom,
tive is the method which the lessons of and the United States,” in Murray and
military history seem to recommend, but the Millett, eds., Military Innovation in the Inter-
Air Staff are convinced that the former is the war Period, chap. 7. For Dowding’s prewar
correct one.” Public Records Office, AIR view of the threat, see Sir Hugh Dowding,
20/40, Air Staff Memorandum 11A, March “Employment of Fighter Command in Home
1924. Defence,” intro. and annotations by John

16. For Luftwaffe preparations see Williamson Monsarrat and Robert S. Staley II, Naval War
Murray, Luftwaffe (Baltimore: Nautical and College Review, Spring 1992, pp. 35–50.
Aviation, 1985), chap. 1. 26. I am indebted to Colonel Rick Sinnreich,

17. For the Butt Report see Sir Charles Webster USA (Ret.), for this point.
and Noble Frankland, The Strategic Air Offen- 27. See MacGregor Knox and Williamson
sive against Germany, vol. 4, Appendices (Lon- Murray, The Dynamics of Military Revolution,
don: H.M. Stationery Off., 1962), app. 13, 1300–2050 (forthcoming from Cambridge
p. 205. Univ. Press, 2001).

18. Quoted in James S. Corum, The Roots of 28. See William A. Owens and Edward Offley,
Blitzkrieg: Hans von Seeckt and German Mili- Lifting the Fog of War (New York: Farrar,
tary Reform (Lawrence: Univ. Press of Kansas, Straus, Giroux, 2000), pp. 73–9, 102–15, for
1992), p. 37. astonishing misstatements of historical

19. Ibid. fact—including the first names of generals.

20. Quoted in Harold R. Winton, To Change an 29. The best critique of the American conduct of
Army: General Sir John Burnett-Stuart and the war remains Andrew Krepinevich, The
British Armored Doctrine, 1927–1938 (Law- Army and Vietnam (Baltimore: Johns
rence: Univ. Press of Kansas, 1988), p. 127. Hopkins Univ. Press, 1986).

21. The appalling defeat in the Gazalla battles in 30. See Murray, “Clausewitz Out, Computer In.”
May–June 1942 against Rommel underlined 31. On professional military education see Leon-
these defects clearly. ard Holder [Lt. Gen., USA (Ret.)] and Wil-

22. For the best biography of Rommel, as the liamson Murray, “Prospects for Military
thinking soldier as well as the man of action, Education,” Joint Forces Quarterly, Spring
see Sir David Fraser, Knight’s Cross: A Life of 1998.
Field Marshal Erwin Rommel (New York: 32. This trend increasingly affected the General
HarperCollins, 1993). Staff in the late nineteenth and early twenti-

23. André Beaufre, 1940: The Fall of France (Lon- eth centuries and caused the Germans signifi-
don: Cassell, 1967), pp. 36–7, 45. cant difficulties in the first years of World

24. Marcks commented, “The change in men War I.

weighs more heavily than that in technology.

https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/nwc-review/vol54/iss2/11 12



Murray: Thinking about Innovation

Looking toward Luce Hall from the Mahan Rotunda

Published by U.S. Naval War College Digital Commons, 2001 13