What is Past is Prologue: A History of 
Archival Ideas Since 1898, and the Future 
Paradigm Shift 

TERRY COOK 
& s u ~ B  Cet essaie analyse l'histoire de la pensCe archivistique depuis la publication du 
Manuel hollandais il y a un sikcle. I1 suggkre qu'un nouveau paradigme Cmerge au sein 
de la profession sur la base de ce pass6 inspirant. Les idCes des principaux penseurs des 
traditions archivistiques d'Europe, d'AmCrique du Nord, ou d'Australie sont considCrCes 
dans le contexte de leur Cpoque respective que leurs contributions aient CtC de premier 
plan ou symboliques. L'accent est mis sur ces thCoriciens qui ont su reconnaitre et 
articuler les changements radicaux affectant la nature des archives, les crkateurs d'archi- 
ves, les systhmes de gestion des documents, l'utilisation des archives, ainsi que les 
mutations de sociCtC ?siu rvenir dans les domaines culturel, juridique, technologique, 
social, et philosophique qui ont eu une influence sur la thCorie et la pratique archivistiques. 
Tout cela s'imbrique aujourd'hui dans les diffkrents types de discours qui sous-tendent la 
pratique professionnelle. Des lors, on voit cinq themes Cmerger de 1'Cvolution de 
l'archivistique au cours des cent dernikres annCes. Les tendances actuelles suggkrent 
qu'il faut revoir les bases conceptuelles des principes archivistiques traditionnels pour 
mettre davantage l'accent sur le processus plutBt que sur le produit en vue de mieux 
protCger la mimoire des nations et des personnes. 

ABSTRACT This essay analyzes the history of archival thought since the publication of 
the Dutch Manual a century ago and suggests that from this inspiring past a new 
conceptual paradigm is emerging for the profession. Ideas of leading or symbolic 
thinkers within the European, North American, and Australian archival traditions are 
considered within the context of their times. The focus is on those theorists able to 
recognize and articulate radical changes in the nature of records, record-creating organi- 
zations, record-keeping systems, record uses, and in the wider cultural, legal, technologi- 
cal, social, and philosophical trends in society, as well as the impact of these changes on 
archival theory and practice. That articulation forms our collective discourse, the 
metatext or narrative that animates our professional practice, and from it five broad 
themes are seen to emerge from the evolution of archives over the last one hundred years. 
For the future, the trends of the century suggest the need to reconceptualize traditional 
archival principles from a product-focused to a process-oriented activity, to preserve in 
the best manner the collective memory of nations and peoples. 

Prologue: Memory, Archives, and Archival History 

The history of  archival thought in this century reflects the interaction of 



18 Archivaria 43 

archival theory and practice as archivists everywhere have sought to preserve 
the memory of the world.' Former National Archivist of Canada and ICA 
President Jean-Pierre Wallot has set the inspiring goal for archivists of "build- 
ing a living memory for the history of our present." The resulting "houses of 
memory," in his words, will contain "the keys to the collective memory" of 
nations and peoples, and to the protection of rights and privileges. Thereby the 
world's citizens can open the doors to personal and societal well-being that 
comes from experiencing continuity with the past, from a sense of roots, of 
belonging, of id en tit^.^ Archivists recall that Memory, in Greek mythology, is 
the Mother of all the Muses. Through her, society may be nursed to healthy and 
creative maturity. 

Yet such societal or collective memory has not been formed haphazardly 
throughout history, nor are the results without controversy. Historians in a 
postmodernist milieu are now studying very carefully the processes over time 
that have determined what was worth remembering and, as important, what 
was forgotten, deliberately or accidentally. Such collective "remembering9'- 
and "forgetting"--occurs through galleries, museums, libraries, historic sites, 
historic monuments, public commemorations, and archives-perhaps most es- 
pecially through archives. 

French historian Jacques Le Goff refers to the politics of archival memory: 
since ancient times, those in power decided who was allowed to speak and who 
was forced into silence, both in public life and in archival records. Indeed, 
archives had their institutional origins in the ancient world as agents for 
legitimizing such power and for marginalizing those without power. This initial 
emphasis has continued. Medieval archives, scholars now find, were col- 
lected-and later often weeded and reconstructed-not only to keep evidence 
of legal and business transactions, but also explicitly to serve historical and 
sacralhymbolic purposes, but only for those figures and events judged worthy 
of celebrating, or memorializing, within the context of their time. Taking the 
opposite perspective of those marginalized by the archival enterprise, Ameri- 
can historian Gerda Lerner has convincingly traced from the Middle Ages to 
this century the systemic exclusion of women from society's memory tools and 
institutions, including archives. World War I archives are now revealed to have 
been subjected to significant tampering and alteration in order to make Field 
Marshal Sir Douglas Haig appear less culpable for the slaughter on the Western 
Front over which he had command and much responsibility. And from yet 
another perspective, archivists in developing countries are now seriously ques- 
tioning whether classic archival concepts that emerged from the written culture 
of European bureaucracies are appropriate for preserving the memories of oral 
cultures. All acts of societal remembering, in short, are culturally bound and 
have momentous implications. As Czech novelist Milan Kundera asserts, "the 
struggle against power is the struggle of memory against f~rgetting."B~ut 
whose memory? And who determines the outcome of the struggle? 



What is Past is Prologue 19 

These questions seem to me the central issues of archival history. How, for 
example, have archivists reflected these changing societal realities and power 
struggles as they built their "houses of memory"? How have archival assump- 
tions, concepts, and strategies reflected the dominant structures and societal 
ethos of their own time? Upon what basis, reflecting what shifting values, have 
archivists decided who should be admitted into their houses of memory, and 
who excluded? To answer these questions, we need an intellectual history of 
our profession. We need to understand better our own politics of memory, the 
very ideas and assumptions that have shaped us, if we want our "memory 
houses" to reflect more accurately all components of the complex societies they 
allegedly serve. Archival history has other uses too. Canadian archival educa- 
tor Barbara Craig has stated the matter eloquently: "Just as personal identity is 
anchored in a strong historical sense[,] so is our professional identity-both 
come from the ability to experience ... continuity. Surely if you have nothing to 
look backward to, and with pride, you have nothing to look forward to with 
hope."4 Without continuity with the past, future directions lack legitimacy. 
Without understanding our predecessors' intellectual struggles, we lose the 
benefit of their experiences and are condemned to repeat their errors. As 
Shakespeare discerned, "what is past is prologue." Before archivists as a 
profession can write their prologue for the next century, they need to under- 
stand better their own past. 

Exploring the Archival Discourse: Possibilities and Limitations 

Many books could (and should) be written by archivists about their profes- 
sional history, across the centuries and millennia, across cultures, languages, 
gender, and nationalities, across differing media and differing types of record 
creators, across the bridge of theory and practice, that is, across the chasm of 
the guiding principles and ideas on one side and their actual implementation in 
archival institutions on the other. This single (if rather long) essay is limited to 
but one century in the rich history of archival ideas, and is further limited to the 
Western European tradition through a Canadian filter. I think, however, that the 
analytical methodology employed here might be useful in other historical 
contexts concerning the archival past. 

In my view, analyzing the history of archival ideas requires listening to the 
archival discourse of the time or place involved. Archival historical analysis 
requires revisiting the principal professional discussions that leading archivists 
had about their work and with each other. It requires hearing again, and 
understanding within the context of their time,.and our own, their assumptions, 
ideas, and concepts. 

Archival "theory" and archival "theorist" in this approach do not relate, 
respectively, to some immutable set of fixed principles and their constant 
defenders across varying realms of practice. That kind of historical perspective 



20 Archivaria 43 

is rather too Positivist and outdated for a late twentieth-century observer to 
adopt. Rather, archival thinking over the century should be viewed as con- 
stantly evolving, ever mutating as it adapts to radical changes in the nature of 
records, record-creating organizations, record-keeping systems, record uses, 
and the wider cultural, legal, technological, social, and philosophical trends in 
society. Archival ideas formed in one time and place reflect many of these 
external factors, which ideas are often reconstructed, even rediscovered in 
another time and place, or reshaped across generations in the same place. The 
best archival theorists are those who have been able to recognize and articulate 
these radical changes in society and then deal conceptually with their impact on 
archival theory and practice. That articulation forms our collective discourse, 
the metatext or narrative animating our professional practice, and thus properly 
is the focus of an intellectual history of archives. 

In examining the archival discourse of this century since the publication of 
the famous Dutch Manual of 1898, I am limiting my analysis to some key 
European, North American, and Australian thinkers whose works have found 
expression in English-language sources. Moreover, my focus will be primarily 
on the twin pillars of the archival profession, appraisal and arrangement/ 
description, as these have been affected by changes in cultures, media, and 
technology, even while recognizing that lively debates have occurred in the 
profession around preservation issues, public programming, or the archives as 
a place of custody, among others. And given the main audience of this journal, 
I have placed some emphasis on Canadian traditions, where relevant, within 
this larger Western European narrative. There are of course many archival 
traditions outside these geographical and linguistic limitations. Yet in some 
ways that is irrelevant, for my thesis is that the analysis in this paper, despite my 
limited foci, will reveal historical trends that have some universality even 
within the broad pluralism that characterizes the international archival profes- 
sion. While I give voice to particular speakers in one language, I am suggesting 
that the issues they have addressed will be found to transcend their own 
national and linguistic circumstances and thus be relevant to all archivists. 

The Dutch Manual of 1898: Archival Principles Defined 

Exactly one hundred years ago, the Dutch trio of Samuel Muller, Johan Feith, 
and Robert Fruin published their famous Manual for the Arrangement and 
Description of Archives. Of course Muller, Feith, and Fruin's work did not 
spring to life in a vacuum during the 1890s. Archives in various forms had 
existed for centuries, but modem archival principles per se, despite some 
obscure precedents, were only articulated in detail in nineteenth-century France 
and germ an^.^ Yet, ironically, the important treatises which brought these 
principles to world attention in the early twentieth century were not written by 
German or French authors, but rather by Dutch, English, and Italian  archivist^.^ 



What is Past is Prologue 2 1 

Of these, the Dutch Manual has had a major influence, because it was the first, 
and because it reached many archivists through French, German, English, 
Italian, Portuguese, Chinese, and other translations. 

Muller, Feith, and Fruin produced their manual for the Dutch Association of 
Archivists, in cooperation with the State Archives of the Netherlands and the 
Ministry of the Interior. Each of the one hundred rules advanced in the Manual 
was formally debated by the Society during the 1890s. Typical of a work 
written by committee, the accompanying text bears many marks of careful 
qualification and elaborate examples, even if the rules themselves are force- 
fully stated. The Manual also reflects Muller's exposure to French archival 
theory from his attendance in 1873 at the ~ c o l dees chartes in Paris and the 
introduction from Germany of the concept of provenance into several Dutch 
archives. 

The Dutch authors' chief contribution was to articulate the most important 
principles (or "rules") concerning both the nature and the treatment of archives. 
The trio stated in their very first rule, which to them was "the foundation upon 
which everything must rest," that archives are "the whole of the written 
documents, drawings and printed matter, officially received or produced by an 
administrative body or one of its officials. ..." Rules 8 and 16 enunciated the 
twin pillars of classic archival theory: archives so defined "must be kept 
carefully separate" and not mixed with the archives of other creators, or placed 
into artificial arrangements based on chronology, geography, or subject; and 
the arrangement of such archives "must be based on the original organization 
of the archival collection, which in the main corresponds to the organization of 
the administrative body that produced it." There, simply stated, are the con- 
cepts of provenance and original order. The latter rule of respecting and, if 
necessary, re-establishing the original filing and classification system used by 
the creator, was considered by the Dutch authors to be "the most important of 
all, ... from which all other rules follow." They believed that by so respecting 
the arrangement of original record-keeping systems, the all-important archival 
activity of elucidating the administrative context in which the records are 
originally created could be much fa~ilitated.~ 

We now recognize certain limitations of the pioneering Dutch Manual. As 
noted, it is first and foremost about arrangement and description, as is reflected 
in the very title of the book; it has little to say about appraisal and selection as 
we now understand these terms. It is about government, public, or corporate 
records and their orderly transfer to archival repositories to preserve their 
original order and classification; it dismisses private and personal archives to 
the purview of libraries and librarians. Most important, the Manual is based on 
experience the authors had either with limited numbers of medieval documents 
susceptible to careful diplomatic analysis or with records found in well- 
organized departmental registries within stable administrations. Such experi- 
ence led directly to their assumption, as noted above, that the "original organi- 



22 Archivaria 43 

zation of the archive" in the creating institution would correspond "in its main 
outline with the organization of the administration which produced i tn8 

This close relationship no longer holds true in modern organizations where 
numerous record-keeping systems in several media in many sub-offices no 
longer closely correspond to the internal structural organization or to the 
multiple functions of the creating administration. Moreover, the computer and 
telecommunications revolutions of the last decade have radically accelerated 
this decentralization and diffusion, to a point where operational functions now 
cross all manner of structural or organizational lines. Herein lies the reason for 
the recent dissonance between the archival perceptions animating appraisal and 
electronic records strategies and those underpinning arrangement and descrip- 
tion. A detailed understanding of rapidly changing administrative structures, 
functions, and work activities is central to modem archival appraisal and for 
controlling electronic records, as it is to contemporary business process 
reengineering and computer system design. Yet such understandings can no 
longer be derived solely from the study of records following the classic Dutch 
methodologies devised for arrangement and description. 

The Dutch authors described accurately what they saw in the registries and 
administrative structures of their time, and from that experience they articu- 
lated our core professional principles. Yet as administrative structures have 
significantly changed over this century, these principles have sometimes been 
too rigidly defended or too literally interpreted. This is not the fault of the 
Dutch authors, but rather a tribute to the convincing nature of their work. 
Indeed, while the authors were rather too modest in describing their work as 
"tedious and meticulous," they were generous, and realistic, in not wanting it to 
sit "like a heavy yoke on the shoulders of our colleagues. We shall not mind," 
they stated, "if there are deviations from ... [the rules] in certain details or even 
in essentials." Over the past century, there certainly have been deviations from, 
as well as confirmations of, the principles articulated by Muller, Feith, and 
F r ~ i n T. ~he importance of the Dutch Manual rests on its codification of 
European archival theory and its enunciation of a methodology for treating 
archives. Transatlantic archival pioneer Ernst Posner observed that the Manual 
gave "final sanction" to theoretical principles that had gradually been evolving 
throughout the previous century, while the first international archival congress 
in Brussels in 1910 formally endorsed the Dutch principles.1•‹ As late as 1956, 
American archival theorist Theodore R. Schellenberg called the Dutch Manual 
"a Bible for modern  archivist^,"^ and both he and English theorist Sir Hilary 
Jenkinson based their landmark books on this very solid Dutch foundation. 
Whether directly or through Jenkinson and Schellenberg, the work of Muller, 
Feith, and Fruin has widely influenced our collective theory and practice. 

Sir Hilary Jenkinson: The Sanctity of Evidence Proclaimed 

Twenty-four years after the Dutch book, Hilary Jenkinson produced the second 



What is Past is Prologue 23 

major treatise on archival theory and practice. Jenkinson's defence therein of 
archives as impartial evidence and his vision of the archivist as guardian of 
evidence have justly become clarion calls to the profession. In a passage that 
appears in no less than four of his addresses,12 Jenkinson exclaimed: 

The Archivist's career is one of service. He exists in order to make other people's work 
possible .... His Creed, the Sanctity of Evidence; his Task, the Conservation of every 
scrap of Evidence attaching to the Documents committed to his charge; his aim to 
provide, without prejudice or afterthought, for all who wish to know the Means of 
Knowledge.... The good Archivist is perhaps the most selfless devotee of Truth the 
modem world produces. 

If records were the natural byproducts of administration, the untainted evi- 
dence of acts and transactions, then no post-creation interference could be 
allowed, Jenkinson asserted, or their character as impartial evidence would be 
undermined. If archives were the organic emanation of documents from a 
record creator, then severing any record from that organic whole seemed to 
violate fundamental archival principles as established by the Dutch. If records 
were to maintain their innocence in an archival setting, then any appraisal by 
the archivist was utterly inappropriate. Such exercise of "personal judgement7' 
by the archivist, as Jenkinson knew appraisal must necessarily involve, would 
tarnish the impartiality of archives as evidence, as of course would any 
consideration of saving archives to meet their actual or anticipated uses by 
researchers. The archivist's role was to keep, not select archives. Consistent 
with such an approach, archivists were known in Britain as "keepers." While 
the huge volumes of records generated by the First World War gave Jenkinson 
a perspective which the Dutch archivists did not have, he never felt comfort- 
able, despite some faint-hearted concessions later in his career, with archivists 
doing any sort of appraisal or selection. 

Jenkinson's solution to this dilemma was to consign to the records creator 
the unwelcome task of reducing vast accumulations of modem records, thus 
"making the Administrator the sole agent for the selection and destruction of 
his own documents...." Archivists would then take charge of the remnant, in 
exactly the same way they cared in Jenkinson's day for medieval and early 
modem records, where because of small accumulations no destruction was 
necessary in an archival setting. While Jenkinson himself raised the concerns 
that these administrators may not destroy enough, or may destroy too much, or 
may even create records that consciously have one eye on history as much as 
provide unbiased evidence of transactions, he advanced no satisfactory solu- 
tion to these dilemmas. 

In fairness, it should be noted that Jenkinson did encourage a limited 
"archive-making" role for archivists, consisting of articulating standards whereby 
administrators could create and maintain high-quality archives in the future 
that would bear the characteristics of authentic, impartial evidence that he 



24 Archivaria 43 

thought were invested in past archives. This was hardly a satisfactory solution 
to appraisal, although it was a useful step. He admitted the insoluble dilemma, 
given his overall approach, that this "archive-making" intervention would have 
to distinguish more "important" agencies (and programmes and activities) 
from others, and yet these very judgements of importance and value-which 
are the foundation of modem archival appraisal-immediately undermine his 
impartial archivist, and therefore Jenkinson, always consistent at least, con- 
ceded that "upon this point we have no suggestions to offer"! He does not seem 
to have appreciated that even his limited intervention of setting standards for 
"archive-making" would also undermine the innocence of records as natural or 
pure accumulations that their administrators created, organized, and used in the 
normal course of business as they (and not standard-setting archivists) saw 
fit.13 

American archivist Gerald Ham recently, starkly, but correctly commented 
on the central Jenkinsonian dilemma about appraisal: "Allowing the creator to 
designate what should be the archival record solves the problems of complex- 
ity, impermanence, and volume of contemporary records by ignoring them."14 
Jenkinson's approach to appraisal and, indeed, to the very definition of ar- 
chives would (no doubt to his horror) give sanction to record creators such as 
U.S. Presidents Richard Nixon or George Bush to destroy or remove from 
public scrutiny any records containing unfavourable evidence of their actions 
while in office, thus undermining both democratic accountability and historical 
knowledge. At its most extreme, Jenkinson's approach would allow the archi- 
val legacy to be perverted by administrative whim or state ideology, as in the 
former Soviet Union, where provenance was undermined by the establishment 
of one state fonds and archival records attained value solely by the degree to 
which they reflected the "official" view of history.15 

In the area of arrangement and description, Jenkinson introduced the concept 
of the "archive group" as a difference in interpretation, if not principle, from 
the European concept of thef onds d'archives. Jenkinson's view was somewhat 
more all-encompassing, with his archive group containing the entirety of 
records "from the work of an Administration which was an organic whole, 
complete in itself, capable of dealing independently, without any added or 
external authority, with every side of any business which could normally be 
presented to it." Consistent with his "very catholic definition" of archives as the 
entire records universe of an administration or agency, he admitted that the 
archive group for very large agencies might contain 'tfonds within fonds," a 
subtlety which more recent codifiers of descriptive standards sometimes over- 
look. It is important to listen carefully to Jenkinson's turn of phrase. He refers 
to an Administration which was an organic whole, thus illustrating again his 
focus, just like the Dutch trio, on medieval and early modem records, with their 
closed series, their stable and long-dead creators, and their status as inherited 
records from the past. That transfers of records from open-ended series from 



What is Past is Prologue 25 

fluid administrative structures might create anomalies to challenge the archive 
group concept did not occur to Jenkinson.I6 

Jenkinson had joined the Public Record Office in London in 1906, where his 
work focused almost exclusively on medieval and early nation-state records. 
This experience helps to explain his insistence on the legal character of archival 
records, their evidential nature, and their stability and inherited completeness. 
His archival assumptions also reflect his personal identification with the corpo- 
rate culture of the prewar British Civil Service, which underpins his faith in the 
government "Administrator" being an honourable, educated, and civilized 
person capable of exercising disinterested judgements in terms of record 
preservation. Our world of lying presidents and corrupt commissars would 
have been entirely foreign, and doubtless repugnant, to him. As for his notions 
that "Truth" was revealed through archival documents or that the archivist was 
an unbiased "keeper" of records and a "selfless devotee of Truth," Jenkinson 
was simply mirroring the empirical Positivism common to the historiography 
with which he was deeply familiar and schooled. 

In summary, Jenkinson's views on appraisal are no longer valid for modern 
records or for modem society's expectations of what archives should do, nor is 
his perspective on the stable nature of administrations or the fixed order of 
record arrangement useful for modem descriptive problems. But his spirited 
defence of the evidential character of records certainly remains inspirational to 
archivists everywhere. As will be seen, his ideas are enjoying a revival today, 
especially in Australia and Canada, but also among many electronic records 
theorists everywhere, in the face of ephemeral records, virtual documents, 
decontextualized information, and increasing incidents of unscrupulous and 
haphazard record destruction.I7The trick for neo-Jenkinsonian enthusiasts is to 
follow the spirit, not the letter, of his magisterial assertions. 

Two broad themes emerge in the history of European archival ideas up to 
1930: archival principles had been derived primarily from solving problems in 
the arrangement and description of older records; and those principles very 
much reflected the authors' time, place, and the type of records they encoun- 
tered. A further illustration of these two themes may be found in the work of 
noted Italian archival theorist, Eugenio Casanova, whose principal work ap- 
peared in 1928. Like Jenkinson and the Dutch trio, Casanova mirrored the 
intellectual currents of the nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries when he, in 
the recent words of Italian archival commentator Oddo Bucci, "gave the 
discipline its empirical slant, constructed it as a descriptive science, and applied 
to it the imperative of positivist historiography, which aimed at the accumula- 
tion of facts rather than at the elaboration of concepts...." But such Positivist 
historiography and "factm-basedempiricism have by the late twentieth century 
long been discredited. Bucci notes that new societal changes fundamentally 
"undermine habits and norms of conduct, involving a break with principles that 
have long governed the processes whereby archival records are created, trans- 



26 Archivaria 43 

mitted, conserved and exploited. It is clear," he continues, "that radical innova- 
tions in archival practice are becoming increasingly incompatible with the 
continuance of a doctrine seeking to remain enclosed within the bulwarks of its 
traditional principles." What Bucci says of Casanova, and which is equally true 
of Jenkinson and the Dutch trio, is that archival principles are not fixed for all 
time, but, like views of history itself, or literature, or philosophy, reflect the 
spirit of their times and then are interpreted anew by succeeding generations.18 

Facing Modern Records: T.R. Schellenberg and the American Voice 

The next principal initiative in articulating the archival discourse came from 
the United States. Not having the luxury to formulate archival principles based 
on the meticulous analysis of limited numbers of old documents, nor able to 
rely solely on the "descriptive science" of Casanova, Jenkinson, and the Dutch 
authors, American archivists began their collective professional activity facing 
a mounting crisis of contemporary records, only a tiny fraction of which could 
be preserved as archives. When the National Archives in Washington was 
created in 1934, it inherited an awesome backlog of about one million metres of 
federal records, with a growth rate of more than sixty thousand metres annu- 
ally. By 1943, under the expansion of the state to cope with the Great Depres- 
sion and World War 11, that growth rate had reached six hundred thousand 
metres annually. l9 This had two principal results: the first was the emergence of 
the North American records management profession to help agencies cope with 
this paper avalanche; and the second was a fundamental reorientation of the 
archival profession in North America, and wherever its influential ideas were 
read and translated. 

Margaret Cross Norton, a pioneering American archival writer and State 
Archivist of Illinois, asserted in 1944 that, in light of these incredible volumes 
of modem records, "it is obviously no longer possible for any agency to 
preserve all records which result from its activities. The emphasis of archives 
work," she noted in conscious contrast to Jenkinson, "has shifted from preser- 
vation of records to selection of records for preservation." Philip C. Brooks, a 
key thinker at the U.S. National Archives, was explicit in his criticism of 
Jenkinson's view that archivists could safely remain "aloof from responsibility 
for how public agencies managed their records," which would simply mean 
that "too many records would be badly handled and even lost before archivists 
took custody of them."20 From these concerns came the American "life cycle" 
concept, where records were first organized and actively used by their creators, 
then stored for an additional period of infrequent use in off-site record centres, 
and then, when their operational use ended entirely, "selected" as archivally 
valuable and transferred to an archives, or declared non-archival and destroyed. 
Like Norton, Brooks argued for a close relationship throughout this whole "life 
cycle" between archivists doing such selection of records for long-term preser- 



What is Past is Prologue 

vation and records managers organizing and caring for active records in 
departments: the appraisal function, he argued, "can best be performed with a 
complete understanding of the records of an agency in their relationships to 
each other as they are created rather than after they have lain forgotten and 
deteriorating for twenty years." Specifying how that selection work was actu- 
ally to be done was left for Theodore R. Schellenberg to summarize from his 
colleagues' work and then articulate in his landmark books and reports. In 
developing these selection or appraisal criteria, Schellenberg became "the 
father of appraisal theory in the United  state^."^^ 

Schellenberg asserted that records had primary and secondary values. Pri- 
mary value reflected the importance of records to their original creator; second- 
ary value their use to subsequent researchers. Primary value related to the 
degree to which records served their creators on-going operational needs-not 
unlike Jenkinson allowing the determination of long-term value to rest with the 
"Administrator." Secondary values, which Schellenberg sub-divided into evi- 
dential and informational values, were quite different, for they reflected the 
importance of records for secondary research by subsequent users, not primary 
use by their original creator. On this point, Schellenberg explicitly denied that 
his "evidential value" was linked to Jenkinson's sense of archives as "evi- 
dence." For Schellenberg, evidential values reflected the importance of records 
for researchers, not for administrators, in documenting the functions, pro- 
grammes, policies, and procedures of the creator. These values were to be 
determined, after appropriate research and analysis, by Schellenberg's archi- 
vist, not by Jenkinson's administrator. Informational value, the other half of 
secondary value, concerned the content of records relating to "persons, corpo- 
rate bodies, things, problems, conditions, and the like" incidental to "the action 
of the Government itself." Deciding which informational content was impor- 
tant, and which was not-deciding, that is, who gets invited into the archival 
"houses of memory" and who does not-was again to be determined by the 
archivist, drawing on his or her training as an historian and consulting with 
"subject-matter specialists," in order to reflect as many research interests as 
possible.22 This search for informational value was most important to 
Schellenberg, given its "usefulness ... for the larger documentation of Ameri- 
can life."23 Certainly consistent with his focus on secondary research, 
Schellenberg to his credit attempted much more than the Dutch trio or Jenkinson 
to build bridges between archivists and librarians, and between archivists 
caring for institutional records and those responsible for private  manuscript^.^^ 

Another major change in archival thinking was introduced by Schellenberg 
and his American colleagues. The Dutch and Jenkinson believed that all 
material created and received by an administration was "archives." For 
Schellenberg, "archives" were only that much smaller portion that had been 
chosen by the archivist for preservation from the larger, original whole, which 
he termed "records." Records were the concern of records managers and 



Archivaria 43 

creating institutions; archives were the concern of archivists and archival 
institutions. Despite good cooperation between the two professions, and the 
"continuum"-like cooperation envisioned by Philip Brooks, the Schellenbergian 
distinction between "records" and "archives" has tended to emphasize the 
differences between records managers and archivists, and between records and 
archives, rather than their similarities and interconnections. That legacy creates 
strategic problems for archivists in a computerized world, because electronic 
records especially require "up front" intervention by archivists if records are to 
be preserved as archival evidence.25 

In arrangement and description, Schellenberg invented the record group 
concept as a tool to cope with the huge volumes of records generated by "a 
highly complex government" where, in his words, "no governmental unit 
completely meets Jenkinson's requirements [for the archive group] ... of 
completeness and independence ...." Schellenberg rightly noted that in modem 
administrations "all units are interrelated and few are completely independent 
in their dealing with the business that is their main concern." Because of this 
complexity of administration and large volumes of records, the American 
record group "considered quantity, as well as provenance," as a criterion for its 
creation. Such an approach necessarily proceeded "somewhat arbitrarily," as 
such practical factors would differ across time and place in terms of assessing 
"the desirability of making the unit of convenient size and character for the 
work of arrangement and description and for the publication of inventorie~."~~ 
Where the record group concept has been adopted, so too have been many of 
these arbitrary and practical compromises, to the point where some critics have 
asserted that the concept obscures more than protects pr~venance.'~ 

Schellenberg was pointed in his criticism of Jenkinson: "I'm tired of having 
an old fossil cited to me as an authority in archival matters."28 Rather than allow 
Jenkinson's "Administrator" to decide what should be in archives, Schellenberg 
insisted that archivists should make this crucial decision themselves and work 
with records managers and subject specialists to influence the future shape of 
the archival record. Rather than shy away from records destruction, Schellenberg 
spearheaded the process that eventually destroyed millions of metres of records. 
Rather than insist on the alleged purity of either the Europeanf onds d'archives 
or Jenkinson's archive group, Schellenberg popularized the record group as an 
exercise in compromise seemingly suitable for the arrangement and description 
of records from complex government agencies. 

In all this, Schellenberg reflected the contemporary American political 
culture of "New Deal statism, with its emphasis on the benefits of a manage- 
ment technocracy and of efficiency," where the archivist became "a contribut- 
ing partner to the corporate management team...."29 Reflecting as well contem- 
porary social engineering initiatives in the new fields of sociology, social work, 
and urban planning, and the major interventionist activities of government 



What is Past is Prologue 29 

reformers in Depression reconstruction projects, archivists could themselves 
likewise become efficient "engineers" intervening in and managing the world 
of contemporary records. Since Schellenberg's generation also coincided in its 
upbringing with the widespread professionalization of academic history in the 
universities, it is also not surprising to find in his work the close identification 
of archivists with historians, and archival "informational value" with historical 
themes and interpretations. 

Much praise is due to Schellenberg. Unlike Jenkinson, he anticipated the 
future rather than defended the past, and he joined management techniques to 
historical scholarship in archives. Despite working with federal government 
records and within a huge national bureaucracy, he also saw the need for 
archivists to be linked with broader cultural issues and allied information 
professions. Yet some of the compromises he encouraged, especially when 
amplified by his successors, now trouble some archivists. 

One such issue is the concept of use-defined archives. Most American 
archivists after Schellenberg have until very recently emphasized-more than 
he did-that discerning real or anticipated use by scholars, and particularly by 
academic historians, should be the central methodology for determining which 
records have archival value. "Recent trends in historiography are of prime 
importance to us" was the appraisal advice offered by Meyer H. Fishbein, a 
leading appraisal thinker of the National Archives and Records Service in the 
1960s and 1970~.~MOaynard Brichford, in the manual on appraisal approved 
by the Society of American Archivists in 1977, asserted that "successful 
appraisal is directly related to the archivist's primary role as a representative of 
the research community. The appraiser should approach records ... [by] evalu- 
ating demand as reflected by past, present, and prospective research use.... In 
reaching a decision ... they consider long-term needs for documentary sources 
and the potential demands of scholars."31 Yet such use-based approaches to 
defining the very nature of archives, Gerald Ham later objected, resulted in "a 
selection process [that was] so random, so fragmented, so uncoordinated, and 
even so often accidental ... [and one that] too often reflected narrow research 
interests rather than the broad spectrum of human experience. If we cannot 
transcend these obstacles," Ham warned, "then the archivist will remain at best 
nothing more than a weathervane moved by the changing winds of 
historiography."32Worse yet, a use-based approach to archives removes records 
from their organic context within the activities of their creator and imposes 
criteria on both appraisal and description that are external to the record and its 
provenance.33By so shifting the appraisal focus of archivists and the definition 
of archival value away from record-creating processes and record creators, 
advocates of use-defined appraisal ultimately reduce archival theory to "much 
ado about shelving," that is, to a few practical rules meant to supplement what 
is for them the key knowledge base for archivists: the historical subject content 
of records, recent historiography, and users' expectations and wishes.34 



Societal Analysis and Functional Appraisal: 
Towards a Broader View of Archives 

If archivists are not to appraise, acquire, and describe as archival records 
primarily those that historians and other users want (as Schellenberg and his 
successors advocated); if archivists are not comfortable assuming that the 
records creator will be able to decide fairly what records to keep, beyond a very 
narrow range needed to meet the agency's legal obligations and short-term 
accountabilities (as Jenkinson recommended), what are archivists to do? An- 
swers and alternative approaches have come from Germany, the United States, 
and Canada. Believing that archives should reflect more globally the society 
that creates them, these differing "societal approaches" explore new concep- 
tions of archival theory and methodology. This perspective represents a funda- 
mental change in the archival discourse from one based on the state to one 
reflecting the broader society that the state serves.35Now, it may be said that 
archives are of the people, for the people, often even by the people.36 

Perhaps the first major voice raised in favour of a new societal paradigm for 
archives was by Germany's Hans Booms, although Schellenberg's secondary 
values indirectly (and through historians' filters) also attempted to break the 
statist paradigm. Booms remains the most important thinker on the philosophi- 
cal underpinnings of archival appraisal. Reacting against the worst excesses of 
the traditional archival statist approach, whereby the state's ideological values 
are imposed on the very definition of the archival record, Booms asserted that 
society must be allowed to define its own core values, and that these values 
should then be representatively mirrored through archival records. "If there is 
indeed anything or anyone qualified to lend legitimacy to archival appraisal," 
Booms wrote, "it is society itself, and the public opinions it expresses- 
assuming, of course, that these are allowed to develop freely. The public and 
public opinion," Booms observed, "...sanctions public actions, essentially 
generates the socio-political process, and legitimizes political authority. There- 
fore, should not public opinion also legitimize archival appraisal? Could it also 
not provide the fundamental orientation for the process of archival appraisal?"7 
His essential insight was that society, not Schellenberg's specialized users and 
not Jenkinson's state administrators, must generate the values that define 
"importance" and therefore archival significance and archival retention. This 
led to the corollary that "archivists need to orient themselves to the values of the 
records' contemporaries, for whose sake the records were created." In 1991 
Booms asserted that society's values were best identified not directly by 
research into societal dynamics and public opinion, as he had earlier advocated, 
but indirectly through research into the functions of those key records creators 
designated by society to realize its needs and wishes. He asserted that "archi- 
vists require a useful analysis of records-creating functions to help them 
connect the documentary needs ... with the records themselves." In this way, 



What is Past is Prologue 3 1 

there is an "immediate transition" from his admittedly amorphous attempt 
earlier to define societal values through public opinion research to a very 
concrete focus on the provenance of records as expressed through the function- 
ality of their creators, which, in Booms' words, "is why [and how] provenance 
must remain the immutable foundation of the appraisal process."38 

Booms' approach of mirroring societal values through the functions of the 
record creator is also the direction of the new macroappraisal acquisition 
strategy implemented in 1991 at the National Archives of Canada and articu- 
lated in my own theoretical writings since the late 1980s. This new 
conceptualization is finding increasing favour in some international circles. In 
this Canadian approach, the older archival focus on the subject content of 
records, and on having that content directly reflect public opinion or users' 
needs or historical trends, has been replaced by a new focus on the larger or 
"macro" context of the records, as revealed through their creators' functions, 
programmes, activities, and transactions, that is, through the context and 
process of the records' own creation. I drew inspiration for my own theoretical 
work and for the National Archives practical models from Booms' societal 
ideals, and those of his colleague, Siegfried Buttner. I did so, however, at a 
philosophical level (i.e., archival "value" should be defined by social con- 
structs and societal functions, rather than by either Jenkinson's creators or 
Schellenberg's users). I did not do so at the strategic level (i.e., an appraisal 
methodology, like Booms' first model, whereby archivists would research 
directly into societal trends and public opinion issues to try directly to "docu- 
ment society"). Rather, the National Archives has adopted a functional-struc- 
tural macroappraisal methodology that focuses research instead on records 
creators rather than directly on society, on the assumption that those creators, 
and those citizens and organizations with whom they interact, indirectly repre- 
sent the collective functioning of society. This is similar to Booms' 1991 
concept of an "immediate transition" from amorphous societal functions to the 
concrete provenance-based institutional manifestations of those functions. I 
thus consciously placed my writings and the National Archives appraisal 
methodology in a context-based, provenance-centred framework rather than in 
a content-based, historical-documentalist one.39 

This Canadian reinterpretation of provenance makes that principle more 
conceptual than physical, as is appropriate for the age of the electronic record. 
The "new" provenance is also more functional than structural, as is fitting for 
an era where organizational stability is everywhere disappearing. But it is 
provenance nonetheless, whereby the contextual circumstances of record crea- 
tion are again made the centre of the archivist's universe of activities, rather 
than some external criteria such as use, public opinion, or historiographical 
trends. The Canadian approach is not driven by the Dutch or Jenkinsonianliteral 
provenance principles based on arrangement and description, which asserted 
an exact congruity between creator function, creator structure, and record- 



32 Archivaria 43 

keeping system. Nevertheless, the Canadian approach does recognize and re- 
spect the intent behind those older principles, which was to link recorded infor- 
mation with the organic context of institutional (or personal) activity. That or- 
ganic context of activity can no longer be determined, initially at least, by trying 
to appraise billions of records in paper form, let alone their more elusive elec- 
tronic or visual counterparts. Rather, the focus must first be on the organic 
context itself of record-keeping, and thus on analyzing and appraising the im- 
portance of government functions, programmes, activities, and transactions- 
and citizen interactions with them-that cause records to be created. Then the 
appraisal conclusions so derived are tested before they are finalized by a selec- 
tive hermeneutic "reading" of the actual record "textsw-but only after the 
macroappraisal of functions and business processes has been completed.40 

The state archives in the Netherlands has adopted at the very same time as the 
Canadians a similar method of appraising government functions rather than 
appraising individual records. In its well-known PIVOT project, the Dutch 
decided that, "instead of looking to traditional principles of archives and 
records management, which in fact tend chiefly to select and retain information 
generated by the administrative processes, the proposed strategy bases the 
evaluation of information on its role in government activities and tasks. Fol- 
lowing such an approach, agencies would first analyze the processes critical to 
their missions and the tasks required to carry them out; selection and evaluation 
of information used in these activities should reflect the appraised value of the 
tasks .... In general, information needed to reconstruct the critical functions of 
government is what should be retained...."41 For the Dutch as for the Canadi- 
ans, appraisal is not focused, in the first instance, on the records or on 
individual documents, but on the government functions or tasks or activities 
that generate records. The Canadian project is much broader in scope, however, 
for it also involves the interaction of the citizen with the state and the impact of 
state actions on the citizens as revealed through case file series, whereas the 
Dutch project focuses primarily on policy and internal tasks and is not as 
concerned with case-level implementation and related records. While the 
Dutch PIVOT project is radical in its functional methodology, it remains more 
statist than societal in its focus. 

Another new theoretical approach certainly employing "societal" rather than 
"statist" thinking has been elaborated by Helen Sarnuels in the United States, 
with her concept of the "documentation strategy." Recognizing that the scale of 
modem record-keeping can only be understood by some level of analysis 
above that of the record and its creating institution, Samuels conceived the 
documentation strategy as a multi-institutional, cooperative analysis that com- 
bines many archives' appraisal activities in order to document the main themes, 
issues, activities, or functions of society. The documentation strategy integrates 
in its analysis official government and other institutional records with personal 
manuscripts and visual media, as well as published information and even oral 



What is Past is Prologue 3 3 

history. Its focus is not in the first instance provenancial, however, but on 
themes such as educating college students or developing the computer indus- 
try.42 Not surprisingly, therefore, the documentation strategy approach has 
been criticized because it carries, unless applied on a very narrow and local 
basis, the threat of overlapping themes/functions and thus the possibility of 
duplication of archivists' research work and of records acquisition. Moreover, 
the themes or subjects chosen will always be in dispute, and thus the approach 
reflects some of the "weathervane" faults of the American Schellenbergian 
tradition.43For these reasons, the documentation strategy is most appropriate 
for the world of personal manuscripts and non-corporate records rather than for 
government or institutional records, or as a supplement to the latter to be used 
in collection strategies to target related creators of private fonds for acquisition. 

Samuels recognized this Schellenbergian fallacy in her earlier work, and has 
since developed the concept of the "institutional functional analysis" in her 
important book Varsity Letters: Documenting Modem Colleges and Universi- 
ties, which, despite its title, has applicability for any institutional archives. Here 
she argues that archivists first need, not unlike what Hans Booms recom- 
mended in 1991, and as practised by the National Archives of Canada and the 
Dutch PIVOT project, to research and understand the functions and activities of 
their own institutions, and she outlines a precise methodology for such func- 
tional analysis leading to a strategic plan to appraise each institution's records. 
In retrospect, Samuels agrees that she really developed her two broad concepts 
in reverse order of logic: once the "institutional functional analysis" has 
allowed the archivist to appraise the records of his or her parent or sponsoring 
institution, then the archivist can intelligently engage in a wider, interinstitutional 
"documentation strategy" to locate related personal records that might comple- 
ment or supplement the institutional archives. With both concepts, the key 
issue for Samuels is that, on a much broader scale than archivists traditionally 
have done, "analysis and planning must precede ~ollecting."B~y~bridging the 
world of corporate records archivists with that of personal manuscript archi- 
vists, by focusing on the entire interrelated information universe (records in all 
media as well as publications and other cultural artifacts) of all relevant creators 
rather than just a portion of them, by advocating a research-based, functional 
approach to institutional appraisal rather than the old search for "values" in the 
content of records, Samuels provides an important direction for coping with the 
voluminous records of complex modem organizations and contemporary soci- 
eties, and thus for revitalizing archival theory. 

Samuels' approach of searching for connections between formal institu- 
tional archives and private manuscript archives was anticipated in Canada by 
the "total archives" concept which, from the early 1970s, articulated a long- 
evolving Canadian tradition.45 That tradition is certainly shared by other 
countries, but rarely with the balance between public and private archives at the 
national level that Canada displays, and indeed in virtually all non-business 



34 Archivaria 43 

archival institutions across the country. The Canadian "total archives" ap- 
proach involves the integration of the official role of archives as guardians of 
their sponsors' continuing corporate requirements for recorded evidence of 
their transactions and the cultural role of archives as preservers of societal 
memory and historical identity, in both cases encompassing all media. Like 
Booms, Cook, and Samuels, the Canadian approach therefore reflects a wider 
vision of archives, one sanctioned in and reflective of society at large rather 
than one shaped primarily by powerful interest groups of either users or 
creators, or the state. In the rather inspired words of Canadian archivist Ian 
Wilson, the Canadian "total archives" tradition focuses more on the records of 
governance rather than on those of government. "Governance" includes cogni- 
zance of the interaction of citizens with the state, the impact of the state on 
society, and the functions or activities of society itself, as much as it does the 
governing structures and their inward-facing bureaucrats. The archival task is 
to preserve recorded evidence of governance, not just of governments govern- 
ing. The "total archives" perspective may be threatened with marginalization, 
the late Shirley Spragge stated in an emotional parting call to her colleagues, 
only if Canadian archivists overlook or abdicate their own  tradition^.^^ 

No one better represents the new "societal" rather than "statist" paradigm 
than Canada's Hugh Taylor. Himself a key architect of the "total archives" 
concept at the National Archives of Canada, Taylor came to Canada from 
England in 1965 and was influenced early on by the communications and 
media theories of Canadians Harold Innis and Marshall McLuhan. Taylor soon 
began blending together an acute awareness of the transforming character of 
new audio-visual and electronic recording media and the immense power of 
world-wide communication technologies, with deep ecological, holistic, and 
spiritual perspectives. With this potent mixture, he pulled many Canadian and 
international archivists out of their "historical shunt" of looking after old 
records and placed them firmly in the Information Age of electronic records, 
global communications networks, and local community heritage concerns and 
bio-regional initiatives. Through it all, he exuded a revitalized sense of the 
contextuality (or provenance) of records by exploring the rich interconnections 
between society and the documentary record, between the act and the docu- 
ment. In a long series of speculative, probing essays, Taylor challenged archi- 
vists to see the archival connections in the evolution from the ancient to the 
medieval to the industrial to the information society, and from the oral to the 
written to the visual and to the electronic record. Moreover, Taylor discerned, 
in our new world of interactive electronic transactions and communications, "a 
return to conceptual orality," that is to say, a return to the medieval framework 
where words or documents gained meaning only as they were "closely related 
to their context and to actions arising from that context." In that oral tradition, 
meaning "lay not in the records themselves, but [in] the transactions and 
customs to which they bore witness as 'evidences."' Given the centrality of 



What is Past is Prologue 35 

these "evidential" or contextualized actions both to the very definition and even 
existence of the record in the Information Age and to any subsequent understand- 
ing of it, Taylor encouraged archivists to adopt "a new form of 'social historio- 
graphy' to make clear how and why records were created ...." Archivists need to 
do this, in Taylor's view, because, faced with incredible information overloads 
and technological transformations, they need to concentrate less on "dealing 
with individual documents and series" and more on "the recognition of forms 
and patterns of knowledge which may be the only way by which we will 
transcend the morass of information and data into which we will otherwise 

Not surprisingly, Taylor's thoughtful speculations also explicitly 
challenged archivists not to remain isolated in their professional cloisters or 
behind disciplinary walls. 

By combining in his own person the European and North American tradi- 
tions, by enhancing rather than undermining the archival traditions of his 
adopted country, by ranging imaginatively from medieval orality to the "global 
village," by welcoming rather than shunning the new electronic and visual 
record, by searching for patterns and connections in place of fragmentation and 
compartmentalization, and by linking archives to their social, philosophical, 
and technological contexts, Taylor demonstrated that archivists could still 
serve society well as its new "chip monks," rather than simply as allies (or 
minions) of the powers of the state. 

Provenance Refreshed: Canada and Australia 

Hugh Taylor's work led North American, and especially Canadian, archivists 
to what Canadian archival educator Tom Nesmith has called "a rediscovery of 
p ro~enance ."I~n ~many ways, of course, provenance had not been lost. But 
until the later 1970s, North Americans limited their use of the concept of 
provenance to a narrow range of arrangement and description activities. Even 
here they allowed compromises such as the Schellenbergian record group to 
weaken the contextualizing power of provenance. While provenance was never 
openly rejected, therefore, and theoretical lip-service was paid to the concept, 
all too often in practice it was either ignored or actually undermined. Following 
Schellenberg's widespread influence, knowledge of the historical subject con- 
tent of the records replaced provenance as the animating force in most North 
American archival appraisal, description, and public service until the late 
1970s. Accordingly, the ideal education of the archivist was perceived to 
consist of graduate degrees in history supplemented by on-the-job training. 

Nesmith argues that this older approach has changed radically in Canada 
over the past two decades, from both Canadian and European influences. 
Archivists trained as historians began to apply their historical skills and re- 
search methodologies not as before to the subject content of records, but to 
researching and understanding, in Nesrnith's words, "the evidential context 



36 Archivaria 43 

which gave them birth." In this Nesmith was himself a leader, calling for a 
"history of the record" as the basis of Hugh Taylor's "new form7' of socio- 
historiographical scholarship, and establishing on a regular basis in Archivaria 
a "Studies in Documents" section as a way to develop a "modern diploma ti^."^^ 
Supporting this same thrust to refresh provenance, I then argued that, by 
focusing on "provenance, respect des fonds, context, evolution, interrelation- 
ships, order" of records, that is, on the traditional heart of our professional and 
theoretical discourse, archivists could move from an "information" to a "knowl- 
edge" paradigm, and thus to renewed relevance in the era of electronic records 
and networked comrn~nicationsR.~a~th er than abandoning archival principles 
for those of information management or computer science, as some cornrnenta- 
tors were then suggesting, or remaining locked in the Schellenbergian content- 
centred cocoon, Canadian archivists began discovering (or "rediscovering7') 
the intellectual excitement of contextualized information that was their own 
profession's legacy. A whole range of archival studies soon flourished across 
Canada to "explore provenance information about the creators of documenta- 
tion, the administration of documents, and the forms, functions, and physical 
characteristics of various archival documents" in all media.51 

Perhaps not surprisingly, this encouraging Canadian atmosphere led Ameri- 
cans David Bearman and Richard Lytle to publish their oft-cited 1985 article 
"The Power of the Principle of Provenance," in Archivaria rather than in the 
United States. In this landmark statement, they argued that provenance-based 
retrieval of information, centred on a study of form and function of records, and 
the context of creation, and re-presented to researchers in authority records, 
was superior to subject- and content-based methods of retrieval, and thus 
provided the key to the archivist having a valuable role in the age of electronic 
records. Provenance was not some past legacy, but rather a promise of future 
relevance based on the archivist's "unique perspective ... [of] how organiza- 
tions create, use, and discard inf~rmation."~~ 

To this indigenous Canadian stream of rediscovering the intellectual or 
theoretical core of the profession through the historical and contextual analysis 
of records and their creators was joined an awakened interest in European 
archival theory per se. The key figure here is Luciana Duranti, who came to 
Canada from Italy in 1987 and articulated through a series of six articles the 
centuries-old discipline of diplomatics and posited its continued relevance for 
understanding modem records.53Duranti's exposition contained a rigour of 
analysis beyond that which had evolved through the above-noted Canadian 
neo-provenance or "history of the record" approach, and helped to spark, with 
her other work and that of her students, a neo-Jenkinsonian revival of focusing 
archivists' attention on the record, especially on its properties as evidence of 
the acts and transactions of its creator.54While diplomatics has much of value 
to say to modem archivists (as does the central thrust of the indigenous "history 
of the record" approach) about the necessity to conduct careful research into 



What is Past is Prologue 37 

the form, structure, and authorship of documents, especially in electronic 
environments, it is evident that diplomatics must still be coupled with a broader 
understanding, as Booms, Samuels, Taylor, Nesmith, and Cook suggest, of the 
animating functions, structures, and interrelationships of the creators that 
contextualize those isolated, individual  document^.^^ As these two traditions 
merge in the Canadian archival discourse, it should not become a question of a 
top-down functional analysis of creators being better or worse than a bottom-up 
diplomatic analysis of individual documents, but rather a recognition that both 
approaches have important insights to offer to a contextualized understanding 
of the record, and thus both should be used as interrelated tools by the 
a r ~ h i v i s tT.h~e~t op-down approach permits a better understanding of function, 
process, and activity; the bottom-up approach allows sharper insight into 
evidential transactions. One cautionary note must be added, however. Despite 
the benefits of enriched understanding offered by the neo-Jenkinsonian ap- 
proach, its implicit emphasis-like that of Jenkinson himself-on the archives of 
administrations and institutions must not be allowed to turn the Canadian 
archival profession away from its "total archives" comprehensiveness in the 
public and private sectors, nor to diminish the overall cultural dimensions of all 
archives.57 

This rediscovery of provenance, this richer understanding of creator 
contextuality that can turn information into knowledge, has had three major 
results in Canada that have drawn widespread international attention and 
praise, as well as a host of more local benefits. The first impact is the new 
macroappraisal acquisition strategy articulated at the National Archives of 
Canada, which is now being adopted in some other countries and jurisdictions. 
As mentioned before, this strategy features a functions-oriented, multi-media, 
and provenance-centred approach that does not assess records for their antici- 
pated research uses, but rather seeks to reflect in the archival record the 
functions, programmes, and activities of records creators and those in society 
with whom they interact or whose values they indirectly reflect.58The second 
impact of the rediscovery of provenance is a major Canada-wide national 
initiative to develop a system of descriptive standards that replaces Schellenberg's 
record group with the provenance-centred concept of the archival fonds; 
structures description in a general-to-specific, multi-level, multi-media rela- 
tionship for all record entities within a single fonds; and asserts the need to 
protect provenance further through authority files to illuminate multiple-crea- 
tor relationships-as well as codifying precise rules for describing archives 
within such a reordered contextualized universe.59 The third impact has been 
the establishment of several world-class, full-time, graduate-level archival 
education programmes. The articulation of professional educational require- 
ments for archivists certainly reflects the rediscovery of provenance and re- 
vival of archival theory in Canada, and, in turn, by the work of these pro- 
grammes' professors and students, actively contributes to it.60 



38 Archivaria 43 

If Canadians were thus acquiring a much stronger and more conscious 
appreciation of the relevance of provenance to address modem archival prob- 
lems, European archivists have also made the same affirmation. In at least four 
recent volumes of essays representing authors from many countries, European 
archivists have wrestled with the continued relevance of provenance to the 
challenges facing archives today. That archivists from the birthplace of archi- 
val theory have felt the need to undertake repeatedly this re-examination may 
help Europeans to forgive North Americans their temporary archival apostasy 
and to understand the enthusiasm of their recent rediscoveries! Europeans 
through these studies have in large part reaffirmed the relevance of the princi- 
ple of provenance, but see the need to interpret it liberally rather than literally, 
conceptually rather than physically, if the principle is to continue to vitalize the 
profession as it faces the new environment of the automated office and elec- 
tronic  record^.^' 

The most forceful reinterpretation of provenance since the mid-century has 
come from Australia, in the work of Peter Scott and his  colleague^.^^ While 
most archival theorists after Jenkinson and Schellenberg have concentrated on 
the thorny problems of appraisal or electronic records, Peter Scott focused on 
description. The traditional archival model for description, as articulated by the 
Dutch trio, and only slightly adapted or somewhat modified by, respectively, 
Jenkinson and Schellenberg, assumed a mono-hierarchical and thus mono- 
provenancial administrative and records environment, and these theorists de- 
signed their descriptive concepts and tools accordingly. Scott's fundamental 
insight was that the traditional archival assumption of a one-to-one relationship 
between the record and its creating administration was no longer valid. He also 
demonstrated clearly that administrations themselves were no longer mono- 
hierarchical in structure or function, but ever-changing, complex dynamisms, 
as were their record-keeping systems. He therefore developed the Australian 
series system approach as a means for describing multiple interrelationships 
between numerous creators and numerous series of records, wherever they may 
be on the continuum of records administration: in the office(s) of creation, in 
the office of current control, or in the archives. Scott's own focus was on 
interrelating records and their immediate creator(s). Australian archivists are 
now testing enriching this contextuality by adding other multiple relationships 
based on formal functions and the larger ambient provenance contexts beyond 
those of the immediate creator.63All these interrelationships are not fixed one- 
to-one linkages, as in most archival descriptive approaches (despite some 
cross-referencing), but rather exist as many-to-one, one-to-many, and many- 
to-many relationships: between many series and one creator, between many 
creators and one series, between many creators and many series, between 
creators and other creators, between series and other series, and between series 
and creators to functions, and the reverse. In effect, Scott shifted the entire 



What is Past is Prologue 39 

archival description enterprise from a static cataloguing mode to a dynamic 
system of multiple interrelationships. 

Unfortunately, the misconception exists that the Australian series system is 
simply a very minimalist version of Jenkinson's archive group or Schellenberg's 
record group or the European fonds d'archives.@ This misconception masks 
Scott's truly revolutionary changes to archival description and indeed archival 
theory generally. Scott's essential contribution was to break through (rather 
than simply modify) not just the descriptive strait-jacket of the Schellenbergian 
record group, but the whole mindset of the "physicality" of archives upon 
which most archival thinking since the Dutch Manual had implicitly been 
based. In this way, as is finally being acknowledged, Peter Scott is the founder 
of the "postcustodial" revolution in world archival thinking.65 Although he 
worked in a paper world, his insights are now especially relevant for archivists 
facing electronic records, where-just as in Scott's system-the physicality of 
the record has little importance compared to its multi-relational contexts of 
creation and contemporary use. 

In recent years, Australian archivists have developed a second useful contri- 
bution to the archival discourse and another significant revitalization of prov- 
enance thinking about the context and character of archives. Reacting to 
several major public scandals, in which important records were lost or inten- 
tionally destroyed, Australian archival educators Sue McKemmish and Frank 
Upward have written with much sophistication about the concept of "account- 
ability" throughout the records continuum-a notion that certainly has been long 
prevalent in Europe, especially France, and accepted by many archivists, but 
rarely articulated with the sustained power of the A~s t r a l i ansC.~o~ns ciously 
based on Jenkinson's central dictums and on Canadian articulations of a neo- 
provenance creed, and especially on the insights of visiting American theorist 
David Bearman, McKemmish and Upward assert that the Schellenbergian 
distinction between "records" and "archives" as the purview of, respectively, 
records managers and archivists distracts from their common, unifying purpose 
as "archival documents" at any point in their life, which they see as a common 
continuum rather than separate, distinct cycles. McKernmish and Upward 
observe correctly that information technology professionals too often are 
concerned only with the efficient access and use of information, and lose sight 
of the essential qualities of "integrity, completeness, accuracy and reliability" 
that information must also have if it is to serve as evidence of actions for 
anyone: creators, sponsors, citizens, or later archival researchers. Such eviden- 
tiary qualities of archival documents form, in short, a basis for the institution's 
internal accountability and for a wider public accountability essential for any 
democracy where leaders and institutions are required to account to the people 
for their actions. Unless institutions can thus be held accountable, which 
includes being accountable for ensuring that these qualities of "recordness" are 



40 Archivaria 43 

present in their record-keeping systems, then any efficient access gained to 
information will be meaningless, for current and archival users alike.67 

Australian colleague Glenda Acland has crystallized the issue by telling 
archivists to manage records rather than relics.68Needless to say, the Australian 
Jenkinsonians do not follow their master's stance as passive keepers and 
custodians of records, but rather see archivists as active interveners, even 
auditors, in the archival document c o n t i n ~ u mT. ~he~  Australian articulation 
anew of the evidentiary character of archival documents within an accountabil- 
ity framework is very important, because it combines archival concepts con- 
cerning evidence and recordness with creating institutions' own self-interest in 
protecting themselves legally and ethically. It thus sanctions a potentially 
powerful strategy to get archival issues addressed by record creators at the front 
end of the records continuum, which is essential if an archival record is to 
survive in the electronic era. Yet with its heavy focus on institutional and 
official records in its formulation and examples, the accountability approach 
also carries with it, as some Australian advocates are now beginning to recog- 
nize?O a danger of rendering into two camps the administrative and cultural 
roles of archivists, and thus of devaluing archives' role as a bastion of national 
culture and societal memory in favour of narrower, strictly legal accountabilities. 
The same threat is implicit in the emphases of Canada's neo-Jenkinsonians and, 
as will be seen, in the formulations of some electronic records theorists. 

"Reinventing Archives": Electronic Records and Archival Theory 

The revitalization or rediscovery of provenance has also been motivated by the 
many challenges posed to archivists by electronic records. Discussion about 
such records is increasingly dominating the professional discourse, and is 
leading to exciting new conceptual insights, as well as to new strategies and 
practices.71Despite significant contributions by Canadians and Australians, the 
leadership in the electronic records discourse belongs to the United States, 
especially to David Bearn-~an."~ 

The early impact of electronic records, or machine-readable records as they 
were called, was not quite so promising, however. In panic over the then 
relatively new technology, some commentators in the 1970s and early 1980s 
advocated that archivists should stop being archivists, and instead become 
computer specialists or information managers in order to cope with this chal- 
lenging new medium. In what I have called the "first generation" of electronic 
records archives, there was also a strong emphasis on information content over 
provenancial context, on library cataloguing over archival description, on one- 
time, one-shot statistical datafiles over continuing and continually altering 
relational databases and office systems, and on treating electronic datafiles as 
discrete and isolated items rather than as part of the comprehensive, multi- 
media information universe of the record creator.73 Such approaches by the 



What is Past is Prologue 4 1 

pioneering, first-generation of electronic records archivists are perfectly under- 
standable: the only working models available to them had been created by data 
librarians dealing with social science datafiles bearing the above characteris- 
tics. This changed by the mid-1980s when new information technology featur- 
ing relational databases became the norm in business, universities, and govern- 
ment. The archivally valuable computerized data in such large social and 
economic programmes' relational systems are often added, revised, or deleted 
almost every second. Outside the world of such databases, wherein information 
is at least structured logically, there is the automated office, where text, data, 
graphics, images, and voice are converted into electronic formats, and even 
combined into "compound" or "smart" multimedia documents. All these new 
and complex computerized formats, until controlled, standardized, and linked 
to business processes, threaten decision-making accountability and the long- 
term corporate memory of record creators, especially when joined with a 
telecommunications revolution affecting the transmission and interconnectivity 
of this electronic information. Even more, these new formats threaten the very 
possibility that archives can continue as vibrant institutions able to maintain 
such records in their full context or functionality over decades and centuries. If 
an electronic document has only a transient existence as a "virtual" composite 
or fleeting "view" on the computer screen of randomly stored information 
created by the different commands of different users in different organizational 
structures for different purposes, how does any one accountable institution 
preserve reliable evidence of specific transactions? What is the functional 
context of such transient and disjointed data? Whither provenance? Electronic 
records, much like the earlier thinking of Peter Scott, bring archivists to the era 
of virtual archives and virtual records, where the physical record and its 
arrangement, so central to much traditional archival discourse in this century, is 
now of rather secondary importance compared to the functional context in 
which the record is created, described by its creator, and used by its contempo- 
raries. Such revolutionary changes suggested by the electronic record have led 
archival theorists, such as Sue McKemmish of Australia, to ask, "Are records 
ever 

Answers to these fundamental challenges are beginning to come. Archivists 
are now perceiving that a world of relational databases, of complex software 
linkages, of electronic office systems, of hypermedia documents, of multi- 
layered geographical information systems, is, when all the high-technology 
rhetoric is put aside, still a world of information relationships, of interconnec- 
tions, of context, of evidence, of provenance. Re-creating such relationships for 
complex electronic records should be no different for the archivist, at a 
conceptual and theoretical level, than unravelling the interconnections of the 
many series of records that were typical of the nineteenth-century office, and 
linking them to their animating functions and creators. Of course, at the level of 
strategy and tactics, there is a world of difference. Margaret Hedstrom and 



42 Archivaria 43 

David Bearman accordingly recommend "reinventing archives" entirely by 
moving the focus away from actual custody of records in archives and more 
towards remote control of records left on interconnected computers all over the 
government or business. Archivists would then be less concerned with tradi- 
tional curatorship of physical objects than with the centralized management of 
organizational behaviour in order to protect a sense of "recordness" or evidence 
in the organization(s)' computerized information systems.75But the essence of 
the archivist's task of comprehending and elucidating contextual linkages 
remains the same. 

David Bearman, the most visionary of thinkers dealing with electronic 
records, echoes these themes throughout his many writings. He asserts, for 
example, that "the important point of these challenges to the traditional docu- 
ment is that the boundaries of the document have given way to a creative 
authoring event in which user and system participate. Only the context in which 
these virtual documents are created can give us an understanding of their 
content." Bearman argues, reassuringly for archivists, that this new mindset 
"corresponds closely to a professional perspective of the archivist, which has 
long focused on provenance and the context of records creation rather than on 
the physical record or its contents." He concludes that, in terms of the many 
problems posed by electronic records, "the analysis to date has enriched the 
concept of provenance and reinforced its direct link to missions, functions and 
ultimately the activities and transactions of an organization rather than to 
organizational units...."76 For some archivists, this latter phrase may prove 
more troubling. Such conceptual linkages of records to functions and business 
processes rather than to single administrative units undermine many of the 
traditional perspectives of archival theory and methodology, as defined above 
in the work of the Dutch trio, Jenkinson, Casanova, even Schellenberg. Elec- 
tronic records present this stark challenge to archivists: core archival principles 
will only be preserved by discarding many of their traditional interpretations 
and practical applications. 

While there is much long-term merit to the new strategic directions sug- 
gested for the archival profession to deal with the electronic records of govern- 
ments and major corporations, such as implementing formal functional require- 
ments for record-keeping through policy and procedure or within 
metadata-encapsulated record objects as part of business-acceptable communi- 
cation standards, these methodologies are much less relevant for private sector 
records, or even for the records of many small, transient, let alone defunct, 
government agencies, boards, and commissions. Archivists must not ignore 
present (if perhaps flawed) electronic records-creating realities or older legacy 
system records in order to pursue exclusively reengineering strategies for the 
future, or assume that metadata descriptions will replace the broad contextuality 
of archival "value added" descriptions. It seems clear that, for some years at 
least, the assumptions made by electronic records theorists about redesigning 



What is Past is Prologue 43 

computer systems' functional requirements to preserve the integrity and reli- 
ability of records, about enforcing organizational accountability through policy 
fiat, and about long-term custodial control being assigned to the creator of 
archival records will de facto privilege the powerful, relatively stable, and 
continuing creators of records capable of such reengineering, and thus, equally, 
will disadvantage private and transient record creators who are not so capable 
or for whom it is irrelevant. Indeed, the very limiting definition of an archival 
record, increasingly used by electronic records archivists, as consisting of 
evidence of business transactions, excludes, at least implicitly, any record-and 
their creators-not meeting this narrow accountability-driven definition from 
the very purview of archives and archivists. The "politics of memory" are 
apparently with us 

Conclusion I: What is the Past that Forms Our Prologue 

The challenge of the electronic record provides archivists with a perspective 
from which to reflect back on the archival discourse of the century, on the 
various interpretations of the interaction of theory and practice. Every archivist 
in almost every country shares the cumulative benefit of Muller, Feith, and 
Fruin's formal articulation of core archival principles; of Jenkinson's moral 
defence of the sanctity of evidence; of Schellenberg's attempts to address 
actively the voluminous records of complex modem administrations; of Booms, 
Sarnuels, and others' broadening of the archival vision from an administrative 
to a societal conceptual basis; of Taylor's imaginative transformation of fixed 
archival mindsets from past to flexible future mode; of the Canadian rediscov- 
ery and the Australian recasting of provenance in light of the complex 
contextuality of modem records; of Bearman's persistent challenges to archi- 
vists to move from being keepers to auditors if they hope to preserve prov- 
enance and protect the evidential accountability of archival electronic records. 
Yet despite the richness of archival thinking since the publication of the Dutch 
manual, whereby all archivists are the beneficiaries of those who have gone 
before, there remains today the need for a fundamental change in archival 
thinking. The major shifts in the archival discourse of this century suggest the 
need to recognize these patterns of change within that discourse and to debate 
the related issues and implications for archival methodologies and strategies, 
and then to incorporate the results into daily practice. In listening to the 
collective archival discourse from 1898 to the present, I believe that there are 
five such broad themes or changes that have emerged, and these in turn suggest 
to me the need to reconceptualize some of our basic theoretical concepts for the 
future. 

The first theme is a marked change in the very reason why archives exist. 
There has been a collective shift from a juridical-administrative justification for 
archives grounded in concepts of the state, to a socio-cultural justification for 



archives grounded in wider public policy and public use. This broad shift 
reflects in part the dominance during this century of historians as the driving 
force within the profession and in part the changing expectations by citizens of 
what archives should be and how the past should be conceived and protected 
and made available. Archives traditionally were founded by the state, to serve 
the state, as part of the state's hierarchical structure and organizational culture. 
Archival theory not surprisingly found its early legitimization in statist theories 
and models, and from the study of the character and properties of older state 
records. Such theory has since been widely adopted in many other kinds of 
archival institutions around the world. Public sanction for archives late in the 
twentieth century, or at least for taxpayer-funded non-business archives in 
democracies, has changed fundamentally from this earlier statist model: ar- 
chives are now of the people, for the people, even by the people. Few citizens 
would approve the expenditure of large sums of money to fund archives whose 
contents mainly featured bureaucrats talking to each other. While the mainte- 
nance of government accountability and administrative continuity and the 
protection of personal rights are still rightly recognized as important purposes 
for archives, the principal justification for archives to most users and to the 
public at large rests on archives being able to offer citizens a sense of identity, 
locality, history, culture, and personal and collective memory. Simply stated, it 
is no longer acceptable to limit the definition of society's memory solely to the 
documentary residue left over by powerful record creators. Public and histori- 
cal accountability demands more of archives, and of archivists. However, 
whether that socio-cultural justification is manifested by methodologies based 
on patterns of use, the study of society and its institutions directly, the func- 
tional provenance analysis of records creators, or some other means has not yet 
been resolved by archivists. 

The second theme emerging from the archival discourse relates to how 
archives and archivists have tried to preserve authentic, reliable records as 
evidence of acts and transactions. Archivists throughout the century have 
consistently sought to understand and illuminate the context or provenance of a 
record as much as its subject content. Archivists first accomplished this protec- 
tion of context by preserving in unbroken custody and in original order all 
surviving records no longer needed by their parent administration. Such records 
were most often closed series from defunct organizations, or were old, isolated, 
prestigious documents. Archivists have now dramatically shifted their focus. 
Today, they try instead to ensure that records are initially created according to 
acceptable standards for evidence and, going further, to ensure that all impor- 
tant acts and ideas are adequately documented by such reliable evidence. In a 
world of rapidly changing and very complex organizations that create volumi- 
nous and decentralized records, in a world of electronic records with their 
transient and virtual documents, their relational and multi-purpose databases, 
and their cross-institutional communication networks, no reliable record will 



What is Past is Prologue 45 

even survive to be available to the archivist to preserve in the traditional way- 
unless the archivist intervenes in the active life of the record, sometimes before 
it is even created. When such records are able to be preserved in archives, the 
comfortable notion of the permanent value of archival records over time will 
require similar modification, simply because the electronic record either will 
become entirely unreadable or must be recopied and its structure and function- 
ality reconfigured into new software every few years.78Traditional preserva- 
tion of archival records focused on proper standards for the repair, restoration, 
storage, and use of the physical medium that was the record. With electronic 
records, the physical medium becomes almost totally irrelevant, as the records 
themselves will be migrated forward long before the physical storage medium 
deteriorates. What will be important is reconfiguring the actual functionality 
and thus provenance or evidence-bearing context of the "original" record, and 
it is on that problem that archivists must increasingly focus their attention. 

The third broad theme relates to the source of archival theory. A century ago, 
archival principles were derived from a diplomatics-based analysis of indi- 
vidual documents or from the rules devised for the arrangement and description 
of groups or closed series of records received by archives from stable, mono- 
hierarchical institutions. A quite different perspective is now required. Because 
there are countless on-going series of multi-media records to appraise within 
unstable organizations, because such appraisal should often occur at the com- 
puter system-design stage before a single record has been created, modern 
appraisal focuses on the functions and transactions of the record creator, rather 
than on individual records and their potential uses. The focus has shifted, 
therefore, from the actual record to its functional process or context of creation, 
from the physical artifact to the "very act and deed" which first caused that 
artifact to be created. While this shift in archival perspective from the record to 
its context was initially stimulated by the spectre of virtual documents in 
computer systems and by the recent developments of function-based appraisal 
theory, it reflects some of the strategies for interrelational description of 
multiple-creator fonds, or postcustodial proposals for "archives without walls" 
existing on a world-wide Internet. Archival theory now takes its inspiration 
from analysis of record-creating processes rather than from the arrangement 
and description of recorded products in archives. As Eric Ketelaar concludes, 
"functional archival science replaces descriptive archival science, ... only by a 
functional interpretation of the context surrounding the creation of documents, 
can one understand the integrity of the fonds and the functions of the archival 
documents in their original context."79 

The fourth theme to emerge from our collective history over the past 
hundred years is related to the previous three. Because of the now-required 
active intervention by the archivist in record-keeping processes in order to 
ensure that the properties of reliable evidence exist for records, because of the 
need to research and understand the nature of function, structure, process, and 



46 Archivaria 43 

context and to interpret their relative importance as the basis for modern 
archival appraisal (and description), the traditional notion of the impartiality of 
the archivist is no longer acceptable-if it ever was. Archivists inevitably will 
inject their own values into all such activities, as indeed they will by their very 
choice, in eras of limited resources and overwhelming volumes of records, of 
which creators, which systems, which functions, which transactions, which 
descriptive and diffusion mechanisms, indeed which records, will get full, 
partial, or no archival attention. Archivists have therefore changed over the past 
century from being passive keepers of an entire documentary residue left by 
creators to becoming active shapers of the archival heritage. They have evolved 
from being, allegedly, impartial custodians of inherited records to becoming 
intervening agents who set record-keeping standards and, most pointedly, who 
select for archival preservation only a tiny portion of the entire universe of 
recorded information. Archivists have become in this way very active builders 
of their own "houses of memory." And so, each day, they should examine their 
own politics of memory in the archive-creating and memory-formation proc- 
ess. By doing so, with sensitivity and some historical perspective, archivists 
may better balance which functions, activities, organizations, and people in 
society, through their records, are to be included and which are to be excluded 
from the world's collective memory. 

The fifth and final theme is that archival theory should not be seen as a set of 
immutable scientific laws disinterestedly formed and holding true for all time. 
The leading archival thinkers in this century have imaginatively reinvented the 
concept of archives in ways that very much reflected, sometimes uncon- 
sciously, sometimes consciously, the dominant strains of public discourse in 
their time and place. Archival theory has reflected, and has evolved through, 
several such broader societal phases: from nineteenth-century European Posi- 
tivism to American New Deal managerialism, onward to the media-focused 
McLuhanism of the 1960s and to more recent postmodern historicism. If 
recognized, this changing nature of archival theory over time becomes a 
professional strength, not a weakness. Indeed, the best archival theorists have 
usually been those able to recognize and articulate broad, often radical changes 
in society, in organizational structure, and in record-keeping technologies, and 
then integrate the impact of these changes into archival work and archival 
thought. If Hugh Taylor and Tom Nesmith rightly urge archivists to undertake 
a new scholarship to study the very rich links between the authoring context 
and the resulting record, a similar research focus is needed for the profession 
concerning the relationship between the archivist and his or her contemporary 
society, both now and in the past. 

And, finally, an important qualifier. The history of archival theory, despite 
the foregoing simplified presentation because of space constraints, is not a 
linear evolution, with exclusive schools of thinkers, neatly ascending in some 
cumulative process to the glorious Archival Theoretical Consensus of the 



What is Past is Prologue 47 

present day. Archival history is instead a rich collage of overlapping layers, of 
contradictory ideas existing simultaneously or even blended together, of think- 
ers exhibiting differences of emphasis more than of fundamental ideas, of 
individual thinkers changing their ideas in light of new circumstances, of old 
ideas appearing in new guises in new places. The pendulum of thought swings 
back and forth, as one generation solves its predecessor's problems, but thereby 
creates new problems for the next generation to address, with ideas having their 
day, being discarded, and then even being revitalized in modified form in later 
work. And so it should be. 

Conclusion 11: What is the Prologue from our Past? 

Where, then, do we go in future? After surveying the archival ideas of the 
century, I believe that we are gradually developing a new conceptual or theo- 
retical framework for our profession. In the new century ahead, I think that 
archivists will continue to shift their emphasis from the analysis of the proper- 
ties and characteristics of individual documents to an analysis of the functions, 
processes, and transactions which cause documents to be created. Appraisal 
will therefore continue to change from being an assessment of records for their 
potential research value to becoming a macroappraisal analysis of the creator's 
key functions, programmes, activities, and interactions with clients, which the 
records subsequently selected for continued preservation should most succinctly 
mirror. Arrangement and description will concentrate less on physical record 
entities and media, and develop instead enriched "value-added" contextual 
understandings of the information systems and multiple institutions/persons 
that create records and of related system documentation and computer metadata. 
The role of archives within at least public administrations and corporate bodies 
may change from being a supplicant agency hoping for cooperation from record- 
creating entities in the transfer of old records to becoming an auditing agency 
that monitors creators' performance in maintaining and servicing certain cat- 
egories of archival records left under the creator's control.80 Reference and 
outreach services may accordingly change when archives gradually evolve from 
being primarily sites for the storage of old records that researchers visit to be- 
coming instead virtual archives where archivists, from their contextualized 
postings to the Internet, will facilitate access by the public anywhere in the 
world to thousands of interlinked record-keeping systems both under the con- 
trol of archives and those larger, more complex systems left in the custody of 
their creators. Preservation will certainly shift its focus from maintaining 
discardable physical storage formats to safeguarding through repeated migra- 
tions the structure and contextual functionality of the information itself. 

These coming conceptual shifts in archival practice suggest to me the need 
to redefine core archival theory. To respond to these challenges, provenance 
should change from being seen as the notion of linking a record directly to its 



single office of origin in a hierarchical structure, to becoming instead a concept 
focused on these functions and business processes of the creator that caused the 
record to be created, within and across constantly evolving organizations. 
Provenance is thereby transformed from the static identification of records with 
a structure to a dynamic relationship with a creating or authoring activity. 
Original order should change from being viewed as the notion of a physical 
place for each record within a single series of records, to becoming instead a 
logical reflection of multiple authorship and multiple readership, where, for 
example, data may be united in multiple ways into new conceptual or virtual 
"orders" (or "series") for different transactions by different creators. A record 
will therefore belong to or reflect several series or original orders, not just 
one.81In similar fashion, the concept of the record itself should change from 
being perceived as a single piece of recording medium that integrates the 
structure, content, and context of information in one physical place, to becom- 
ing a virtual composite of many scattered parts linked together (under varying 
software controls and business processes) to perform, or bear evidence of, a 
transaction or idea. Likewise, the archival fonds should not be conceived as 
reflecting some static physical order based on rules arising from the transfer, 
arrangement, or accumulation of records, but rather should reflect the dynamic 
multiple creatorship and multiple authorship focused around function and 
activity that more accurately captures the contextuality of records in the 
modem world. 

All these changes move the theoretical (and practical) focus of archives 
away from the record and toward the creative act or authoring intent or 
functional context behind the record. This new paradigm for archives replaces 
the profession's traditional intellectual focus on the physical record-that thing 
which is under our actual physical custody in archives-with a renewed focus on 
the context, purpose, intent, interrelationships, functionality, and accountabil- 
ity of the record, its creator, and its creation processes, wherever these occur. 
Because this suggested focus goes well beyond drawing inspiration for archival 
activity from the study of records placed in the custody of an archives, it has 
been termed a postcustodial mindset for archives.82 Such a postcustodial 
paradigm for archives, let it be quickly stated, does not mean abandoning 
archival principles or no longer acquiring records, but rather reconceiving 
traditional, Jenkinsonian guardianship of evidence from a physical to a concep- 
tual framework, from a product-focused to a process-oriented activity, from 
matter to mind.83 

By embracing this postcustodial and conceptual redefinition of provenance 
as the dynamic relationship between all connected functions, creators, and 
"records," archivists can develop an intellectual framework to address, with 
confidence, the challenges of integrating electronic records into their profes- 
sional practice, of appraising complex modem records with acuity, of describ- 
ing in rich context archival records in all media, and of enhancing the 



What is Past is Prologue 49 

contextualized use and understanding of archives by their many publics. A 
redefined sense of provenance also offers archivists, their sponsors, and their 
researchers a means to stop drowning in an overwhelming sea of meaningless 
data and to find instead patterns of contextualized knowledge, which in turn 
leads to the hope for wisdom and understanding. From the contextual princi- 
ples of the archival past, the guiding prologue to the archival future emerges. 
From the lessons of their history, archivists may find inspiration to guide 
humankind with greater sensitivity through these varied "houses of memory" 
that they so lovingly construct. And by so reflecting the postmodern and 
postcustodial ethos of their times, archivists today can facilitate "making 
present the voices of what is past, not to entomb either the past or the present, 
but to give them life together in a place common to both in mem01-y."~~ 

Notes 

1 This article has a long history and owes much to many colleagues, whom I want to acknowl- 
edge here in order to make clear my gratitude, and which history will make clear the 
provenance of a paper already cited in various existing versions. The paper was first commis- 
sioned in 1993 as the third plenary address to be delivered at the Thirteenth International 
Congress on Archives to be held in Beijing, China, in September 1996. After several drafts 
greatly benefitted from comments by colleagues (see below), a very long paper was finalized in 
May 1995, which was distributed to delegates at the Congress in English and Chinese. To 
reduce translation costs into the other ICA official languages (Spanish, German, Russian, and 
French) for Congress distribution, a second version was produced in December 1995, approxi- 
mately one-half the length of its predecessor, and this second, much tighter version forms the 
core of the present article, but with some additions from the first and with significant updating 
and refocusing, many more extensive explanatory endnotes, and especially overall rewriting to 
make the article more "Canadian," by setting Canadian archival traditions and contributions 
within the original broader international context. A brief third version highlighting only the key 
themes of the paper, approximately one-seventh the length of the original paper's text, was also 
prepared for actual delivery in Beijing, and that summary forms part of the conclusion of this 
article. The ICA will pro forma publish a significantly different version of the paper without 
any of these changes. I consider this version in Archivaria to be the definitive text. In writing 
the original version of the paper, I received the formal advice of twenty-eight archivists in six 
countries. I wish to thank sincerely these colleagues who took the time to comment (often very 
extensively) on my earlier drafts. Their criticisms have much improved the content of this 
version of the paper, as well as its predecessors, and I hope that none are distressed by the many 
changes subsequently introduced. Any errors that remain are my full responsibility. The 
readers were from Australia (Glenda Acland, Sue McKemmish, and Angela Slatter), China 
(Han Yumei), the Netherlands (Jan van den Broek and F.C.J. [Eric] Ketelaar), South Africa 
(Verne Harris), the United States (David Bearman, Richard Cox, Margaret Hedstrom, Jim 
O'Toole, and Helen Samuels), and Canada (Barbara Craig, Gordon Dodds, Luciana Duranti, 
Tom Nesmith, Hugh Taylor, and Ian Wilson); and my National Archives of Canada colleagues 
(Gabrielle Blais, Brien Brothman, Richard Brown, Jacques Grimard, Candace Loewen, Lee 
McDonald, John McDonald, Heather MacNeil, Joan Schwartz, and Jean-Pierre Wallot). The 
paper at various stages also benefitted from the careful editorial corrections of Ed Dahl and Tim 
Cook of the National Archives of Canada. I wish to thank Jean-Pierre Wallot and Lee 
McDonald for the rare luxury (in terms of my past publications) of significant time away from 
work to research and write the various versions of the paper, and to Sheila Powell, as General 



50 Archivaria 43 

Editor of Archivaria, for agreeing to publish a very long article in one rather than two or more 
segments and for her usual helpful editorial comments. 

2 Jean-Pierre Wallot, "Building a Living Memory for the History of Our Present: Perspectives on 
Archival Appraisal," Journal of the Canadian Historical Association 2 (1991), pp. 263-82, 
with citations from p. 282. 

3 Jacques Le Goff, History and Memory, translated by Steven Rendall and Elizabeth Claman 
(New York, 1992), pp. xvi-xvii, 59-60, andpassim. On medieval archives and their purposes, 
see Patrick J. Geary, Phantoms of Remembrance: Memory and Oblivion at the End of the First 
Millennium (Princeton, 1994), pp. 86-87, 177, and especially chapter 3: "Archival Memory 
and the Destruction of the Past" and passim; and Rosamond McKitterick, The Carolingians 
and the Written Word (Cambridge, 1989); also on the symbolic rather than evidential charac- 
teristics of some records, see James O'Toole, "The Symbolic Significance of Archives," 
American Archivist 56 (Spring 1993), pp. 234-55. For women and archives, see Gerda Lerner, 
The Creation of Feminist Consciousness: From the Middle Ages to Eighteen-Seventy (New 
York and Oxford, 1993), passim, but especially chapter 11: "The Search for Women's 
History;" see also Anke Voss-Hubbard, "'No Documents - No History': Mary Ritter Beard 
and the Early History of Women's Archives,"AmericanArchivist5 8 (Winter 1995), pp. 16-30. 
On World War I, see Denis Winter, Haig's Command: A Reassessment (Harmondsworth, 
1991), especially the final section: "Falsifying the Record." Milan Kundera, The Book of 
Laughter and Forgetting (1980), Part I ,  Section ii, cited in Justin Kaplan, ed., Bartlett's 
Familiar Quotations, 16th ed. (Boston, 1992), p. 761. For discussion about the "controlling" 
politics of archiving, see Teny Cook, "Electronic Records, Paper Minds: The Revolution in 
Information Management and Archives in the Postcustodial and Postmodernist Era," Archives 
and Manuscripts 22 (November 1994), especially pp. 315-20. 

Archivists need to explore this field of "memory scholarship" more carefully, for it puts into 
context many unquestioned assumptions underpinning archival theory and conceptualization, 
even if the authors (unlike those above) rarely explicitly address archives (except for Clanchy). 
See, for example, Jonathan D. Spence, The Memory Palace ofMatteo Ricci (New York, 1984). 
which is a fascinating exploration in cross-cultural history of the interaction of Ming Dynasty 
China and sixteenth-century Counter-Reformation Christian Europe, as well as a good intro- 
duction to the art of memory, which was then in the final throes of a very.  long-  history. For the 
original ground-breaking analysis of memory and its elevated place for over one thousand years 
in Western education and culture, and of various fantastic mnemonic devices (such as memory 
palaces, memory trees, and memory theatres), see Frances A. Yates, The Art of Memory 
(Chicago, 1966). Continuing analysis in that vein is Mary Canuthers, The Book of Memory: A 
Study ofMemory in Medieval Culture (Cambridge, 1990). The classic analysis of the shift from 
oral memory to memory recordings (or written records, and thus archives) is Michael Clanchy, 
From Memory to Written Record: England, 1066-1307,2nd ed. (Oxford and Cambridge MA, 
1993), although Patrick Geary (as cited above) respectfully questions some of Clanchy's 
central interpretations. For the use of the past to construct memories through various civic and 
heritage initiatives in order to defend one's status in the present, a whole range of recent studies 
have been produced: the pioneering study was Eric Hobsbawn and Terence Ranger, eds., The 
Invention of Tradition (Cambridge, 1983); and three of the best known are David Lowenthal, 
The Past is a Foreign Country (Cambridge MA, 1985); Michael Kammen, Mystic Chords of 
Memory: The Transfomtation of Tradition in American Culture (New York, 1991); and John 
Bodnar, Remaking America: Public Memory, Commemoration, and Patriotism in the Twenti- 
eth Century (Princeton, 1992). Biochemists, psychologists, poets, literary critics, and philoso- 
phers, among others, join historians (and one hopes archivists) in being drawn to the study or 
mystique of memory: what it is, how it works, and why it functions as it does, both in 
remembering and in forgetting. Their works could fill a library, but for a short, yet incisive 
introduction, see Mary Warnock, Memory (London and Boston, 1987). 



What is Past is Prologue 5 1 

4 Barbara L. Craig, "Outward Visions, Inward Glance: Archives History and Professional 
Identity," Archival Issues 17 (1992), p. 121. The fullest argument for archivists researching, 
writing, and reading their own history, including the many benefits this will have for daily 
practice and professional well-being, is Richard J. Cox, "On the Value of Archival History in 
the United States" (originally 1988), in Richard J. Cox, American Archival Analysis: The 
Recent Development of the Archival Profession in the United States (Metuchen, N.J., 1990), 
pp. 182-200. Lamentably few have followed Cox's sound advice, and oddly so considering the 
historical training of most archivists. 

5 The best short summaties in English are Michel Duchein, "The History of European Archives 
and the Development of the Archival Profession in Europe," American Archivist 55 (Winter 
1992), pp. 14-24; and LucianaDuranti, "The Odyssey of Records Managers," in TomNesmith, 
ed., Canadian Archival Studies and the Rediscovery of Provenance (Metuchen, N.J., 1993), pp. 
2940 .  Their notes point to many other sources and in other languages. Also useful is James 
Gregory Bradsher and Michele F. Pacifico, "History of Archives Administration," in James 
Gregory Bradsher, ed., Managing Archives and Archival Institutions (Chicago, 1988), pp. 18- 
33; as well as several of the essays on national archival traditions published in Oddo Bucci, ed., 
Archival Science on the Threshold of the Year 2000 (Macerata, Italy, 1992). A recent overview 
of the nature of the profession, including significant historical perspectives, is James M. 
O'Toole, Understanding Archives and Manuscripts (Chicago, 1990). 

6 Duchein, "History of European Archives," p. 19. 
7 S. Muller, J.A. Feith, and R. Fruin, Manual for the Arrangement and Description of Archives 

(1898), translation (1940) of the 2nd ed. by Arthur H. Leavitt (New York, reissued 1968), pp. 
13-20, 33-35, 52-59. The story of the Manual is best told in English in Marjorie Rabe Barritt, 
"Coming to America: Dutch Archivistiek and American Archival Practice," Archival Issues 18 
(1993), pp. 43-54. I have used the 1940 translations of the terms found in the Manual itself, 
rather than Banitt's modernization of them. More recently, see Cornelis Dekker, "La Bible 
archivistique nierlandaise et ce qu'il en est advenu," in Bucci, Archival Science on the 
Threshold, pp. 69-79. The best source of biographical information on the Dutch trio, including 
their not entirely happy interpersonal relations, is Eric Ketelaar, "Muller, Feith et Fruin," 
Archives et bibliotheques de Belgique 57, nos. 1-2 (1986), pp. 255-68. 

8 Cited by Frank Upward, who also makes this critical point, in his "In Search of the Continuum: 
Ian Maclean's 'Australian Experience' Essays on Recordkeeping," in Sue McKemmish and 
Michael Piggott, eds., The Records Continuum: Ian Maclean and Australian Archives First 50 
Years (Clayton, 1994), pp. 110-30. 

9 Muller, Feith, and F N ~M, a nual, p. 9 (authors' original preface). The Dutch themselves led 
the way in recognizing new administrative realities affecting record-keeping and thus in 
recasting or expanding the original rules; it is unfortunate that some others do not show the 
same flexibility towards their successors. As an example of such changes by the Dutch, see 
Herman Hardenberg, "Some Reflections on the Principles for the Arrangement of Archives," 
in Peter Walne, ed., Modern Archives Administration and Records Management: A RAMP 
Reader (Paris, 1985), pp. 11 1-14. Eric Ketelaar has shown that a nineteenth-century Dutch 
forerunner to the Manual's authors, Theodoor Van Riemsdijk, broached the idea of functional 
and organizational analysis as the basis of archival theory, but that his ideas were pushed aside, 
which thereby "blocked the development of archival theory for a long time." See "Archival 
Theory and the Dutch Manual," Archivaria 41 (Spring 1996), pp. 3 1 4 0 .  

10 Ernst Posner, "Some Aspects of Archival Development Since the French Revolution," in Ken 
Munden, ed., Archives and the Public Interest: Selected Essays by Ernst Posner (Washington, 
1967), p. 31; Lawrence D. Geller, "Joseph Cuvelier, Belgian Archival Education, and the First 
International Congress of Archivists, Brussels, 1910," Archivaria 16 (Summer 1983), p. 26. 

11 Cited in Barritt, "Coming to America," Archival Issues, p. 52. 
12 "Memoir of Sir Hilary Jenkinson," in J. Conway Davies, Studies Presented to Sir Hilary 



Archivaria 43 

Jenkinson, C.B.E., LL.D., F.S.A. (London, 1957). This "Memoir" is the best biographical 
sketch of Jenkinson, which can be supplemented by Richard Stapleton, "Jenkinson and 
Schellenberg: A Comparison," Archivaria 17 (Winter 1983-84), pp. 75-85. 

13 Hilary Jenkinson, A Manual of Archive Administration (London, 1968, a reissue of the revised 
second edition of 1937), pp. 149-55, 190. 

14 F. Gerald Ham, Selecting and Appraising Archives and Manuscripts (Chicago, 1993), p. 9. 
Even archivists very friendly towards Jenkinson opposed his views on appraisal; in a festschrij? 
in his honour, the leading archivists of Canada and Australia underlined the difficulties of 
Jenkinson's approach: see W. Kaye Lamb, "The Fine Art of Destruction," pp. 50-56, and Ian 
Maclean, "An Analysis of Jenkinson's 'Manual of Archive Administration' in the Light of 
Australian Experience," pp. 150-51, both in Albert E.J. Hollaender, ed., Essays in Memory of 
Sir Hilary Jenkinson (Chichester, 1962). 

15 See Patricia Kennedy Grimsted, Archives and Manuscript Repositories in the USSR: Moscow 
and Leningrad (Princeton, 1972), pp. 2 3 4 0 ;  and, more pointedly, her recent Intellectual 
Access and Descriptive Standards for Post-Soviet Archives: What Is to be Done?, International 
Research and Exchanges Board preliminary preprint version (Princeton, March 1992), pp. 9- 
23. From the 1930s on, she notes (p. lo), archivists had "to emphasize Marxist-Leninist 
conceptions of history and to demonstrate the ingredients of class struggle and the victory of the 
toiling masses. Archivists were fired for preparing 'objective' or purely factual descriptions of 
materials, rather than showing how a given group of documents portrayed struggle against the 
ruling class. Archival documents not pertaining to party themes were simply not described or 
their inherent nature and provenance not recorded." 

16 Jenkinson, Manual of Archive Administration, pp. 101-2. Jenkinson's sense of breadth in 
arrangement still survives in British archival practice. Although his "archive group" is now 
termed simply the "group," it retains Jenkinson's broad definition. Conversely, the term 
"archive group" itself relates to even broader thematic categories. See Michael Cook, The 
Management of Information from Archives (Aldershot, 1986). pp. 85-87, and Chapter 5 
generally, especially the examples on p. 92. The context of Jenkinson's ideas and their impact 
(and weaknesses) are nicely analyzed in Michael Roper, "The Development of the Principles of 
Provenance and Respect for Original Order in the Public Record Office," in Barbara L. Craig, 
ed., The Archival Imagination: Essays in Honour of Hugh A. Taylor (Ottawa, 1992), pp. 134- 
49. 

17 See, for example, the unabashed Jenk'insonianism of the Australians, perhaps represented best 
in Sue McKemmish, "Introducing Archives and Archival Programs," in Judith Ellis, ed., 
Keeping Archives, 2nd ed. (Port Melbourne, 1993), pp. 1-24; Sue McKemrnish and Frank 
Upward, eds., Archival Documents: Providing Accountability Through Recordkeeping (Mel- 
bourne, 1993); Sue McKemmish and Frank Upward, "Somewhere Beyond Custody,"Archives 
and Manuscripts 22 (May 1994), pp. 138-49; and most explicitly Glenda Acland, "Archivist - 
- Keeper, Undertaker or Auditor?," Archives and Manuscripts 19 (May 1991), pp. 9-15. For 
Canada, the most explicit statement is by Heather MacNeil, "Archival Theory and Practice: 
Between Two Paradigms," Archivaria 37 (Spring 1994), pp. 6-20. For a Canadian neo- 
Jenkinsonian perspective on appraisal, see Luciana Duranti, "The Concept of Appraisal and 
Archival Theory," American Archivist 57 (Spring 1994), pp. 32844.  In these examples, 
Australian neo-Jenkinsonians tend to follow the Master's spirit, while their Canadian counter- 
parts adhere more to the letter of his dictums. All Jenkinsonians should remember that even the 
Master himself dismissed as "fools" any archivists "unduiy" influenced by administrative and 
institutional concerns, and stated that researchers' "interests and needs must therefore be 
ultimately the governing consideration." In the same letter to Professor F.M. Powicke of 
Oxford, 22 January 1946, Jenkinson also asserted that "no Archivist can do his job efficiently 
without learning a little History deliberately ... and a good deal incidentally .... It would be 
unwise to try and prevent the Archivist practising occasionally the metier of Historian." Cited 



What is Past is Prologue 53 

in Laura Millar, "The End of 'Total Archives'?: An Analysis of Changing Acquisition 
Practices in Canadian Archival Repositories," (Ph.D. thesis, University of London, 1996), p. 
255. 

18 For the Italian scene and Casanova's work, see Bucci, "The Evolution of Archival Science," 
pp. 17-43. The quotations are pp. 34-35, and from his "Introduction," p. 11. 

19 The figures are taken from James Gregory Bradsher, "An Administrative History of the 
Disposal of Federal Records, 1789-1949,"Provenance 3 (Fall 1985), pp. 1-21. I have made the 
rounded conversions from imperial to metric measurements. 

20 Margaret Cross Norton, "Records Disposal," in Thornton W. Mitchell, ed., Norton on Ar- 
chives: The Writings of Margaret Cross Norton on Archives and Records Management 
(Chicago, 1975), p. 232, and "The Archivist and Records Management" in the same volume; 
Philip C. Brooks, "The Selection of Records for Preservation," American Archivist 3 (October 
1940), p. 226; on the contrast with Jenkinson, see Donald R. McCoy, The National Archives: 
America's Ministry of Documents, 1934-1968 (Chapel Hill, 1978), p. 178. Brooks' interven- 
tionist notion was re-articulated and explored further by Jay Atherton, "From Life Cycle to 
Continuum: Some Thoughts on the Records Management-Archives Relationship," Archivaria 
21 (Winter 1985-86), pp. 43-51, and the idea of front-end work by archivists on this records 
continuum underpins much current thinking about electronic records. Atherton's continuum 
formulation was itself anticipated by Ian Maclean of Australia: see his "An Analysis of 
Jenkinson's 'Manual of Archive Administration' in the Light of Australian Experience," pp. 
128-52; and Ian Maclean, "Australian Experience in Record and Archives Management," 
American Archivist 22 (October 1959), pp. 387418. The continuum concept has recently been 
reactivated, with much broader implications for archival theory that are welcomingly inclusive 
of all dimensions and sectors of archival work and ideas: sociaVcultural and 1egaVadministra- 
tive accountabilities, public and private sectors, individual and corporate creators, document- 
focused mles of evidence and functionaVcontextua1 linkages. See Frank Upward, "Australia 
and the Records Continuum," paper presented to the Society of American Archivists, San 
Diego, August 1996, publication forthcoming in Archives and Manuscripts. 

21 Ham, Selecting and Appraising Archives, p. 7. Schellenberg's fullest statement of his oft-cited 
principles is 'The Appraisal of Modem Public Records," National Archives Bulletin 8 (Wash- 
ington, 1956), pp. 1 4 6 .  An extract is available in Maygene F. Daniels and Timothy Walch, 
eds., A Modem Archives Reader: Basic Readings on Archival Theory and Practice ((Washing- 
ton, 1984), pp. 57-70. 

22 Quotations from Ibid., pp. 58-63.69. 
23 Ham, Selecting and Appraising Archives, p. 8. Schellenberg's influence remains strong; a 

recent textbook chapter asserted that his secondary values relating to "research uses" are still 
"the principal concern of archivists." See Maygene F. Daniels, "Records Appraisal and 
Disposition," in Bradsher, Managing Archives, p. 60. 

24 For an analysis of Schellenberg's personal evolution, especially regarding private archives and 
archival relations with librarians, see Richard C. Berner, Archival Theory and Practice in the 
United States: A Historical Analysis (Seattle and London, 1983), pp. 47-64, and passim. 

25 The Australians have been most articulate in objecting to the Schellenbergian distinction 
between "records" and "archives" as one that distracts from their common, unifying purpose as 
"archival documents" at any point in their life along the records continuum. See, for example, 
McKemmish and Upward, Archival Documents, pp. 1, 22, and passim; or Glenda Acland, 
"Managing the Record Rather Than the Relic," Archives andManuscripts (20 (May 1992), pp. 
57-63. For the Australian interpretation and implementation of the records continuum instead 
of the life cycle approach, see several of the authors (but especially Frank Upward) in 
McKemmish and Piggott, Records Continuum. 

26 Schellenberg, Management of Archives, pp. 162ff. For a parallel American statement at the 
time, and an influential source of thinking on this topic, see Oliver W. Holmes, "Archival 



54 Archivaria 43 

Arrangement - Five Different Operations at Five Different Levels," American Archivist 27 
(January 1964), pp. 21-41, and especially pp. 25-27. 

27 A growing number of critics strongly advocate the end of the record group and a return to a 
more strict adherence to provenance rather than to Schellenberg's practical compromise. The 
first objections were raised by Australian Peter Scott in "The Record Group Concept: A Case 
for Abandonment," American Archivist 29 (October 1966), p. 502, and passim; and more 
recently David A. Bearman and Richard H. Lytle, "The Power of the Principle of Provenance," 
Archivaria 21 (Winter 1985-86), p. 20; and Teny Cook, "The Concept of the Archival Fonds: 
Theory, Description, and Provenance in the Postcustodial Era," in Teny Eastwood, ed., The 
Archival Fonds: From Theory to Practice (Ottawa, 1992), especially pp. 47-52. The decade- 
long Canadian effort to design and implement a national system of bilingual descriptive 
standards, through Rules forArchiva1 Description (RAD), is also intended to address the worst 
failings of the Schellenbergian record group. While RAD does so by establishing a more 
contextual framework for records description than existed before in Canada, it also includes its 
own compromises (and thus blurring of provenance) by adhering to traditional European 
definitions of the archival fonds that originated from physical arrangement rather than creation 
activity, and by overlooking the major implications of Scott's work and that of later electronic 
records theorists (Bearman, Cook, Hedstrom, Brothman) concerning multiple creators and 
virtual series. Despite good intentions to the contrary, perhaps the Canadian archival fonds is 
really just another name for the record group? 

28 Cited in McCoy, National Archives, p. 180. The biographical details for Schellenberg may be 
found in "In Memoriam: T.R. Schellenberg," American Archivist 33 (April 1970), pp. 1 9 C  
202. 

29 Barbara L. Craig, "What are the Clients? Who are the Products? The Future of Archival Public 
Services in Perspective," Archivaria 31 (Winter 199&91), pp. 139-40, where she speculates 
on the impact of contemporary social mores on the development of archival ideas. 

30 Meyer H. Fishbein, "A Viewpoint on Appraisal of National Records," American Archivist 33 
(April 1970), p. 175. 

3 1 Maynard J. Brichford, Archives and Manuscripts: Appraisal & Accessioning (Chicago, 1977), 
p. 13. Despite growing protests against this approach to archives, it continues, with explicit 
acknowledgement of Schellenberg's influence; see Elizabeth Lockwood, "'Imponderable 
Matters:' The Influence of New Trends in History on Appraisal at the National Archives," 
American Archivist 53 (Summer 1990), pp. 394-405. 

32 F. Gerald Ham, "The Archival Edge," in Daniels and Walch, Modern Archives Reader, pp. 
328-29. 

33 For this reason especially, I have pointedly criticized the use-defined approach to archives: see 
Terry Cook, "Viewing the World Upside Down: Reflections on the Theoretical Underpinnings 
of Archival Public Programming," Archivaria 31 (Winter 1990-91), pp. 123-34; "Easy To 
Byte, Harder To Chew: The Second Generation of Electronic Records Archives," Archivaria 
33 (Winter 1991-92), pp. 210-1 1; and "Mind Over Matter: Towards a New Theory of Archival 
Appraisal," in Craig, Archival Imagination, pp. 40-42, and passim. Almost all the writers on 
contemporary archival frameworks in the following paragraphs also reject, at least implicitly, 
use-defined appraisal to determine the actual composition of archives. More explicitly on the 
subject, see Eric Ketelaar, "Exploitation of New Archival Materials," Archivum 35 (1989), pp. 
189-99. I agree wholeheartedly with Ketelaar that archives should not be appraised and 
acquired to support use; once acquired, however, I certainly agree (and have advocated) that 
their description, reference, and diffusion should reflect client needs as far as possible. 

34 That this utilitarian content-based approach would radically diminish, if not deny, the value of 
any archival theory, is best revealed in John Roberts, "Archival Theory: Much Ado About 
Shelving," American Archivist 50 (Winter 1987), pp. 66-74; and "Archival Theory: Myth or 
Banality,"AmericanArchivist 53 (Winter 1990), pp. 110-20. The leading proponent of the use- 



What is Past is Prologue 55 

based approach, Elsie T. Freeman (now Finch), also exemplifies this kind of thinking, when she 
dismisses traditional archival theory as mere "rules of order and practice (sometimes called 
principles);" see her "In the Eye of the Beholder: Archives Administration from the User's 
Point of View," American Archivist 47 (Spring 1984), pp. 112-13, 119. Note the title, which 
mirrors the content of Lawrence Dowler's "The Role of Use in Defining Archival Practice and 
Principles: A Research Agenda for the Availability and Use of Records," American Archivist 
51 (Winter and Spring 1988), p. 74, andpassim. For a supportive Canadian view of this largely 
United States perspective, see Gabrielle Blais and David Enns, "From Paper Archives to 
People Archives: Public Programming in the Management of Archives," Archivaria 31 
(Winter 1990-91). pp. 101-13, and especially p. 109. For a countering Canadian view, 
challenging Roberts's assertions, see Terry Eastwood, "What is Archival Theory and Why is it 
Important,"Archivaria 37 (Spring 1994), pp. 122-30, printed with two more responses by John 
Roberts in the same issue. 

35 Oddo Bucci makes the same observation, in "Evolution of Archival Science," p. 35, and ff. 
36 Abraham Lincoln's memorable phrase was first given an archival twist by Eric Ketelaar; see 

his "Archives of the People, By the People, For the People," South Africa Archives Journal 34 
(1992), pp. 5-16. 

37 Hans Booms, "Society and the Formation of a Documentary Heritage: Issues in the Appraisal 
of Archival Sources," Archivaria 24 (Summer 1987), (original 1972: translation by Hermina 
Joldersma and Richard Klumpenhouwer), p. 104. On the lack of legitimacy provided by 
Hegelian models based on a prediction of historical trends in society, or by the Schellenbergian 
dream of "a futurology of research interests," or by Marxist or other models using alleged 
"objective laws for social development," all of which models ignore the very "existential 
conditions of human existence," as well as the impossibility of ever knowing accurately what 
"society" is or means, see p. 100, and passim (pp. 69-107). For an amplification of Booms' 
views that records reflect or embody an "image" of society, see the work of his Bundesarchiv 
colleague, Siegfried Biittner, as described in Terry Cook, The Archival Appraisal of Records 
Containing Personal Information: A RAMP Study With Guidelines (Paris, 1991), pp. iv-v, 35- 
37; and inter alia through comments on Biittner's views by Hans Booms himself, 
"Uberlieferungsbildung: Keeping Archives as a Social and Political Activity," Archivaria 33 
(Winter 1991-92), pp. 28-29. 

38 Ibid., pp. 25-33 (quotations from pp. 31-33). 
39 See Cook, Archival Appraisal of Records; and "Mind Over Matter: Towards a New Theory of 

Archival Appraisal." Those who do not read my work carefully can occasionally get this 
important distinction confused, or even reversed, between the philosophical warrant for 
"societal" archives and the actual provenance-based appraisal strategies and research method- 
ologies developed to realize that warrant. As a result, some have even suggested that my work 
is part of the "archivist as subject-content historian" or "European documentalist" traditions- 
which are exactly the traditions against which I have been reacting (and have so stated 
explicitly) in articulating these new approaches! Attempting to reposition archivists from being 
passive receptors of records to active appraisers does not mean advocating their abandonment 
of provenance as the basis of archival decision-making (including appraisal), or nostalgic 
hankering to transform archivists into either European documentalists or Schellenbergian 
historians. For the critiques, see Angelika Menne-Haritz, "Appraisal or Selection: Can a 
Content Oriented Appraisal be Harmonized with the Principle of Provenance?' in Kerstin 
Abukhanfusa and Jan Sydbeck, eds., The Principle of Provenance: Report from the First 
Stockholm Conference on Archival Theory and the Principle of Provenance 2-3 September 
1993 (Sweden, 1994), pp. 103-31, abridged as "Appraisal or Documentation: Can We Ap- 
praise Archives by Selecting Content?' American Archivist 57 (Summer 1994); and Terry 
Eastwood, "Nailing a Little Jelly to the Wall of Archival Studies," Archivaria 35 (Spring 
1993), pp. 232-52; which I have rebutted with Terry Cook, "'Another Brick in the Wall': Terry 



56 Archivaria 43 

Eastwood's Masonry and Archival Walls, History, and Archival Appraisal," Archivaria 37 
(Summer 1994), pp. 96-103. 

In an otherwise interesting slant on the archivist's mttier, Elizabeth Diamond assumes that 
archival "value" in my approach would be determined by judging the importance of records to 
the "administrative historian;" see her "The Archivist as Forensic Scientist-Seeing Ourselves 
in a Different Way," Archivaria 38 (Fa11 1994), pp. 145-46. In so stating, she confuses 
methodology with theory. While the archivist doing macroappraisal must obviously do sus- 
tained research into the records of administrative activity (functions, business processes, 
structures, activities), he or she does so in order to discern the degree of sharpness of the 
societal image and citizen-state interaction revealed by the record-creating processes within 
those general administrative activities, not to focus on the history of administrations per se. It 
is research into the history and character of records, not administrations, to learn how and why 
records were created, and what those records-creation, records-organization, and contempo- 
rary record-use processes reveal about societal functions, citizen-state interaction, and govern- 
ance dynamics. The records which after this research are found to mirror most succinctly those 
societal functions and interactions are judged to have archival value. The theoretical stance and 
focus is societal, therefore, not administrative. Perhaps it is enough to say that research into 
records to understand their context is not the same as appraising records. 

40 For the actual approach, see Terry Cook, "An Appraisal Methodology: Guidelines for Perfom- 
ing An Archival Appraisal," (December 1991); and Terry Cook, "Government-Wide Plan for 
the Disposition of Records 1991-1996" (October 1990) both internal National Archives 
reports. For a proposed sophistication of these methodologies, although one still requiring 
fuller implementation strategies, see Richard Brown, "Records Acquisition Strategy and Its 
Theoretical Foundation: The Case for a Concept of Archival Hermeneutics," Archivaria 33 
(Winter 1991-92), pp. 34-56; and Richard Brown, "Macro-Appraisal Theory and the Context 
of the Public Records Creator," Archivaria 40 (Fall 1995), pp. 121-72. 

41 T.K. Bikson and E.F. Frinking, Preserving the Present: Toward Viable Electronic Records 
(The Hague, 1993), pp. 33-34. 

42 The original statement is Helen Willa Samuels, "Who Controls The Past," American Archivist 
49 (Spring 1986), pp. 109-24. A later article updates the theme, and contains additional cross- 
references; see Richard J. Cox and Helen W. Samuels, "The Archivist's First Responsibility: A 
Research Agenda to Improve the Identification and Retention of Records of Enduring Value," 
American Archivist 51 (Winter-Spring 1988), pp. 28-42. Two other oft-cited examples are 
Lany Hackman and Joan Warnow-Blewett, "The Documentation Strategy Process: A Model 
and a Case Study," American Archivist 50 (Winter 1987), pp. 12-47; and Richard J. Cox, "A 
Documentation Strategy Case Study: Western New York," American Archivist 52 (Spring 
1989). pp. 192-200 (quotation is p. 193). The working out of Samuels's approach, without the 
theoretical underpinnings, was first evidenced in Joan K. Haas, Helen Willa Samuels, and 
Barbara Trippel Simmons, Appraising the Records of Modem Science and Technology: A 
Guide (Chicago, 1985). 

43 For critiques, see David Bearman, Archival Methods, (Pittsburgh, 1989), pp. 13-15; and Terry 
Cook, "Documentation Strategy," Archivaria 34 (Summer 1992), pp. 181-91. 

44 Helen Willa Samuels, Varsity Letters: Documenting Modem Colleges and Universities 
(Metuchen, N.J., and London, 1992). p. 15, and passim. See also her overview of both 
documentation strategies and institutional functional analyses in Helen W. Samuels, "Improv- 
ing our Disposition: Documentation Strategy," Archivaria 33 (Winter 1991-92), pp. 125-40. 
Curiously, Samuels publicly launched (and later published in this latter essay) her new 
approach at the same 1991 conference of the Association of Canadian Archivists in Banff at 
which Hans Booms made the significant modification of his own ideas, in part because of his 
concern that his older documentation plan of assessing public opinion might be confused with 
Samuels's older documentation strategies, with which he disagreed! Both of these major 



What is Past is Prologue 57 

thinkers on appraisal matters, therefore, unbeknownst to each other, added significant new 
dimensions to their ideas, and moved in the same provenance-based, functions-driven direction 
for the same reason at the same time, in exact step with the new Canadian macroappraisal 
approach. For Booms on Samuels, see his "~berlieferungsbildung,"p . 32. For Sarnuels's own 
rejection of the American tradition of defining value through use and for her insistence on the 
centrality of provenance, see Varsity Letters, pp. 8, 13, and 16. For another, complementary 
approach to developing strategic plans for appraisal, see Joan D. Krizack, Documentation 
Planning for the U.S. Health Care System (Baltimore, 1994). 

45 The best analysis is Wilfred I. Smith, '"Total Archives': The Canadian Experience" (originally 
1986), in Nesmith, Canadian Archival Studies, pp. 133-50. For a supportive but critical view, 
see Terry Cook, "The Tyranny of the Medium: A Comment on 'Total Archives',"Archivaria 9 
(Winter 1979-80), pp. 14149.  

46 See Ian E. Wilson, "Reflections on Archival Strategies," American Archivist 58 (Fall 1995), 
pp. 414-29; and Shirley Spragge, "The Abdication Crisis: Are Archivists Giving Up Their 
Cultural Responsibility?", Archivaria 40 (Fall 1995), pp. 173-81. The reasons for the growing 
threat to "total archives" are studied in detail and with subtlety by Laura Millar, in her already- 
cited doctoral thesis: "The End of 'Total Archives'?: An Analysis of Changing Acquisition 
Practices in Canadian Archival Repositories." For a complementary analysis of other reasons 
for this threat, see Joan M. Schwartz, "'We make our tools and our tools make us': Lessons 
from Photographs for the Practice, Politics, and Poetics of Diplomatics," Archivaria 40 (Fall 
1995), pp. 40-74. Robert A.J. McDonald puts the case exactly right in "Acquiring and 
Preserving Private Records: Cultural versus Administrative Perspectives," Archivaria 38 (Fall 
1994), pp. 162-63, by stating that those undermining "total archives" either fail to understand 
the essence of the Canadian archival tradition or lack the imagination or nerve to recast "total 
archives" to flourish in economically difficult times. Merely doing what we think our sponsors 
want or need regarding their own institutional records, or what we think will please them and 
show that we are being good corporate "players," is, as Shirley Spragge says, too easy an 
abdication of the archivist's mission and responsibilities. 

47 Hugh A. Taylor, "Transformation in the Archives: Technological Adjustment or Paradigm 
Shift,"Archivaria 25 (Winter 1987-88). pp. 15, 18,24; "The Collective Memory: Archives and 
Libraries As Heritage," Archivaria 15 (Winter 1982-83), pp. 118, 122; "Information Ecology 
and the Archives of the 1980s." Archivaria 18 (Summer 1984), p. 25; and "Towards the New 
Archivist: The Integrated Professional," paper delivered at the annual conference of the 
Association of Canadian Archivists, Windsor, June 1988, manuscript, pp. 7-8. Other important 
statements in a large and continuing body of work are Hugh A. Taylor, "The Media of Record: 
Archives in the Wake of McLuhan," Georgia Archive 6 (Spring 1978), pp. 1-10; "'My Very 
Act and Deed': Some Reflections on the Role of Textual Records in the Conduct of Affairs," 
American Archivist 51 (Fall 1988), pp. 456-69; "Recycling the Past: The Archivist in the Age 
of Ecology,"Archivaria 35 (Spring 1993), pp. 203-13; and "Some Concluding Thoughts," to a 
special theme issue of the American Archivist 57 (Winter 1994), pp. 138-43, devoted to the 
future of archives. The fullest analysis of Taylor's thought is Tom Nesmith's "Hugh Taylor's 
Contextual Idea for Archives and the Foundation of Graduate Education in Archival Studies," 
in Craig, The Archival Imagination, pp. 13-37. Most of the essays in this festschrift reveal inter 
alia the profound impact of Hugh Taylor's ideas on an entire generation of archivists in Canada 
and elsewhere. 

48 Tom Nesmith, "Introduction: Archival Studies in English-Speaking Canada and the North 
American Rediscovery of Provenance," in Nesmith, Canadian Archival Studies, pp. 1-28; see 
p. 4 regarding Taylor's leadership in this rediscovery. 

49 Ibid., pp. 14, 18-19. See also Tom Nesmith, "Archives from the Bottom Up: Social History and 
Archival Scholarship," (originally 1982), in Ibid, pp. 159-84; and his introductory editorial, 
"Archivaria After Ten Years," Archivaria 20 (Summer 1985), pp. 13-21. To these ends, 



5 8 Archivaria 43 

Nesmith also teaches as the central core of the graduate-level archival education programme 
he created at the University of Manitoba a Tayloresque-humanist exploration of the nature and 
impact of record-keeping in society, historically and for the present day and future (see note 60 
below). 

50 Terry Cook, "From Information to Knowledge: An Intellectual Paradigm for Archives," 
Archivaria 19 (Winter 1984-85), pp. 46,49. 

51 Nesmith, "Introduction," p. 18. His book (Canadian Archival Studies) was also designed, in 
part, to showcase the rich variety of this exploration and rediscovery of provenance, based on 
the study and analysis of records and records creators. 

52 Bearman and Lytle, "The Power of the Principle of Provenance," pp. 14-27, especially p. 14 
for the quotation and footnote 1 for their sensitivity to the positive Canadian influences in 
receiving their work. 

53 See Luciana Duranti, "Diplomatics: New Uses for an Old Science," Archivaria 28 (Summer 
1989), pp. 7-27, for a general statement in the first of a series of six articles, and especially 
"Part V," Archivaria 32 (Summer 1991), for an explicit enunciation of the overall diplomatic 
method and approach, as opposed to its component parts outlined in the four earlier articles. 

54 For a flavour, see Heather MacNeil, "Weaving Provenancial and Documentary Relations," 
Archivaria 34 (Summer 1992), pp. 192-98; Janet Turner, "Experimenting with New Tools: 
Special Diplomatics and the Study of Authority in the United Church of Canada," Archivaria 
30 (Summer 1990), pp. 91-103; and Terry Eastwood, "How Goes It with Appraisal?," 
Archivaria 36 (Autumn 1993), pp. 111-21, as well as his article in note 34 above. For 
highlights of Luciana Duranti's work, see those cited in notes 5 and 53 above, as well as her 
main theoretical statements in "The Concept of Appraisal and Archival Theory;" "The 
Archival Body of Knowledge: Archival Theory, Method, and Practice, and Graduate and 
Continuing Education," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 34 (Winter 
1993), pp. 10-11; and "Reliability and Authenticity: The Concepts and Their Implications," 
Archivaria 39 (Spring 1995), pp. 5-10. Other Canadian archivists not within Duranti's 
immediate orbit have also defended the primacy of the record: Barbara Craig, for example, has 
repeatedly called attention to the record's importance, demonstrating thereby that there is the 
potential for much compatibility between the "history of the record approach (of which she is 
a good representative) and the "diplomatics" stream; see among others her "The Acts of the 
Appraisers: The Context, the Plan and the Record,"Archivaria 34 (Summer 1992), pp. 175-80, 
and well as her many writing on health and British government records. For a different, post- 
modernist, and certainly non-Jenkinsonian perspective on the importance of the record, as 
hermeneutic text to be read (in the sense of contextualized narration), see Brown, "Records 
Acquisition Strategy and Its Theoretical Foundation: The Case for a Concept of Archival 
Hermeneutics." As my critics rarely acknowledge, I have also defended the central importance 
of the record in archival conceptualizations; see, among others already cited, "It's Ten 
O'clock: Do You Know Where Your Data Are?" Technology Review (January 1995). pp. 48- 
53. 

55 This point is made explicitly by one of the few published case studies of applying diplomatics, 
whose author notes "that it will be necessary to employ other tools of the archivist's trade in 
order to corroborate the discoveries of diplomatics and to address questions left unanswered by 
diplomatics." Among such tools are the "History" of administration, law, and organizational 
culture (ideas, societal forces, etc.) and "Archival Theory," which I presume would encompass 
the wider provenance-based insights that the history of the record approach offers into the 
juridical context of creation. See Turner, "Experimenting with New Tools," p. 101. With 
billions of records to appraise, modem archivists should reverse Turner's formula, simply 
because no one can possibly undertake modern appraisal by performing diplomatic analyses on 
individual documents (which in some electronic and audio-visual environments do not even 
exist at the time of appraisal). Her formula would then read "that diplomatics can be usefully 



What is Past is Prologue 59 

employed to corroborate the discoveries and answer any questions left unanswered by the 
functions-based, provenance-driven macroappraisal." Diplomatics becomes, then, not unlike 
Rick Brown's suggested use of an archival hermeneutic, a means to corroborate macroappraisal 
analyses and hypotheses. 

56 This point about recognizing, celebrating, and merging the two traditions, rather than either 
ignoring or denigrating the other tradition, has also been made by Heather MacNeil, in 
"Archival Theory and Practice: Between Two Paradigms," pp. 17-18; however, she sometimes 
does not practise what she advocated: see her one-sided "Archival Studies in the Canadian 
Grain: The Search for a Canadian Archival Tradition," Archivaria 37 (Spring 1994), pp. 134- 
49; and the corrective offered by Tom Nesmith, "Nesmith and The Rediscovery of Provenance 
(Response to Heather MacNeil)," Archivaria 38 (Fall 1994), pp. 7-10. 

57 The danger has been suggested by Joan M. Schwartz, in "'We make our tools and our tools 
make us': Lessons from Photographs for the Practice, Politics, and Poetics of Diplomatics." 
There is nothing, in my view, in the application of diplomatics or neo-Jenkinsonian methods 
that inherently favours institutional over private archives, or indeed the administrative over the 
cultural perspective on archives. It is more a question of emphasis and lack of balance. The 
examples used by the principal authors involved and the history of the evolution of these 
methods certainly lead in these directions, as does the assumption of either positive institu- 
tional compliance with the related archival perspectives, or at least strong juridical and societal 
sanctions being readily imposed for non-compliance. Neither assumption is true for many late 
twentieth-century North American institutions, and are almost completely irrelevant for the 
targeting and appraisal of papers and related media of private individuals, and many private 
associations and groups. From these unrealistic practical assumptions comes the danger rather 
than from any logical fault in the ideas or theory. 

58 See notes 39 and 40 above. 
59 Bureau of Canadian Archivists, Working Group on Archival Descriptive Standards, Toward 

Descriptive Standards: Report and Recommendations of the Canadian Working Group on 
Archival Descriptive Standards (Ottawa, 1985); Wendy M. Duff and Kent M. Haworth, "The 
Reclamation of Archival Description: The Canadian Perspective," Archivaria 31 (Winter 
1990-91), pp. 2 6 3 5 ;  Eastwood, ed., The Archival Fonds; and numerous articles in the two 
thematic issues on descriptive standards of Archivaria 34 (Summer 1992) and 35 (Spring 
1993), especially those by Hugo Stibbe and Cynthia Durance. These two issues also contain 
articles by David Bearman, Kathleen Roe, and Terry Cook challenging some of the assump- 
tions and implementation strategies of the Canadian effort, particularly some R4D (Rules for 
Archival Description) definitions of the nature of the fonds, but there is no serious challenge to 
its provenance-enhancing intentions and contextualizing purposes. 

60 The two best articles on the substance of graduate education are Terry Eastwood, "Nurturing 
Archival Education in the University,"AmericanArchivist 5 1 (Summer 1988). pp. 228-52; and 
Nesmith, "Hugh Taylor's Contextual Idea for Archives and the Foundation of Graduate 
Education in Archival Studies," which outline the approaches at the University of British 
Columbia and the University of Manitoba, respectively. For a general framework, see Associa- 
tion of Canadian Archivists, Guidelines for the Development of a Two-Year Curriculum for a 
Master of Archival Studies (Ottawa, 1990). 

61 The European re-examination of provenance is often in the context of the electronic record or 
the voluminous records of large organizations. For examples, see Claes Granstrom, "Will 
Archival Theory Be Sufficient in the Future?," pp. 159-67; and Bruno Delmas, "Archival 
Science and Information Technologies," pp. 168-76, both in Angelika Menne-Haritz, ed., 
Information Handling in Ofices and Archives (Miinchen, 1993). The same affirmation is made 
by many of the European authors in Bucci, Archival Science on the Threshold; in Abukhanfusa 
and Sydbeck, The Principle of Provenance; and in Judith A. Koucky, ed., Second European 
Conference on Archives: Proceedings (Paris, 1989). The same argument was well presented at 



60 Archivaria 43 

the Montreal ICA by Angelika Menne-Haritz, "Archival Education: Meeting the Needs of 
Society in the Twenty-First Century," plenary address offprint, XI1 International Congress on 
Archives (Montreal, 1992), especially pp. 8-1 1. 

62 The best exposition of the Australian Series System (including a significant reconceptualization 
and updating of Scott's ideas) is in Piggott and McKemrnish, The Records Continuum, 
especially the essays by Sue McKemmish and Chris Hurley. For his own statement, see Scott, 
"The Record Group Concept," pp. 493-504; and his five-part series, with various co-authors: 
"Archives and Administrative Change - Some Methods and Approaches,': Archives and 
Manuscripts 7 (August 1978), pp. 115-27; 7 (April 1979), pp. 151-65; 7 (May 1980), pp. 41- 
54; 8 (December 1980), pp. 51-69; and 9 (September 1981), pp. 3-17. Scott's breakthrough 
was the product of a lively debate within the Commonwealth Archives Office (now Australian 
Archives), with Ian Maclean, the first Commonwealth Archivist, also having a very significant 
role, especially in terms of taking the series concept out of the archival cloisters and applying 
it to current records in agencies, and thus helping to mend the Schellenbergian split between 
records managers and archivists, and between "current" records and "o ld  archives. Yet it was 
Scott who primarily articulated the concept in theoretical writing for the broader profession. 

63 See Chris Hurley, "What, If Anything, Is A Function," Archives and Manuscripts 21 (Novem- 
ber 1993). pp. 208-20; and his "Ambient Functions: Abandoned Children to Zoos,"Archivaria 
40 (Fall 1995), pp. 21-39. 

64 The best summary of the fonds concept is by one of the leading archival thinkers of Europe: see 
Michel Duchein, "Theoretical Principles and Practical Problems of Respect des fonds in 
Archival Science," Archivaria 16 (Summer 1983). pp. 64-82 (originally 1977). For these 
maximalist-minimalist distinctions, see Cook, "Concept of the Archival Fonds," pp. 54-57. 

65 Indeed, the rethinking of descriptive paradigms for archives in a postcustodial framework by 
North Americans is explicitly due to Scott's inspiration: see Max J. Evans, "Authority Control: 
An Alternative to the Record Group Concept," American Archivist 49 (Summer 1986), pp. 
25 1-53,256,259, andpassim; Bearman and Lytle, "Power of the Principle of Provenance," p. 
20; and Cook, "Concept of the Archival Fonds," -p p- . 52, 6 7 4 8 .  Scott's large influence in his 
own country helps explain the Australian leadership in much postcustodial thinking, especially 
regarding revitalized records management and descriptive practice. For postcustodial thinking 
generally, and references to other postcustodial work, see Cook, "Electronic Records, Paper 
Minds: The Revolution in Information Management and Archives in the Postcustodial and 
Postmodernist Era." 

66 For the Australian interpretation and implementation of the records continuum instead of the 
life cycle approach, see many of the authors (especially Frank Upward) in McKemmish and 
Piggott, Records Continuum. For France, and its long-standing "prC-archivage" work within 
the government ministries which also reflects the continuum concept, see Jean Favier, ed., La 
Pratique archivistique franpise (Paris, 1993). The Canadian case has been stated in Atherton, 
"From Life Cycle to Continuum." 

67 McKemmish and Upward, Archival Documents, pp. 1,22, and passim. 
68 Glenda Acland, "Managing the Record Rather Than the Relic," pp. 57-63. She has been one of 

the key movers towards an accountability framework; see her testimony to government bodies 
cited in McKemmish and Upward, Archival Documents, pp. 13-15. 

69 See the revealing title of Acland's "Archivist - Keeper, Undertaker or Auditor?," in which she 
argues for the last role. 

70 Upward and McKemmish, "Somewhere Beyond Custody," pp. 14546,  and Frank Upward in 
Archival Documents, p. 43. For an interesting attempt to break out of this mode, see Sue 
McKemmish, "Evidence of Me," Archives and Manuscripts 24 (May 1996), pp. 2 8 4 5 .  

71 Regarding the latter, a great number of strategies and practices have evolved, or at least are 
being recommended to archivists, to deal with electronic records, although there is no space to 
discuss them in this essay devoted to conceptual discourse rather than practical methodologies- 



What is Past is Prologue 61 

which is not to say that those methodologies do not generate their own controversies, such as 
whether archives need acquire physically all electronic records in order to ensure their 
authenticity or the appropriate linkage of creator metadata and archival contextualized author- 
ity files. The best single source for strategic approaches to electronic records remains Margaret 
Hedstrom, ed., Electronic Records Management Program Strategies (Pittsburgh, 1993), which 
offers case studies, with analyses of critical factors of success and failure, of electronic records 
programmes at international (2), national (4), state (4), and university (1) levels, with an overall 
assessment, and an extensive (59 pages) annotated bibliography compiled by Richard Cox for 
readers to continue their explorations. See also David Bearman, "Archival Strategies," paper 
discussed at the SAA 1994 conference, and forthcoming in the American Archivist. 

72 For a sample, see David Bearman's works cited throughout these notes; ten of his essays are 
now collected into David Bearman, Electronic Evidence: Srategies for Managing Records in 
Contemporary Organizations (Pittsburgh, 1994); and a wide range of his commentary and 
analysis appears throughout all the issues ofArchives andMuseum Informatics, which he edits. 
The other principal American voice has been ~ a r ~ a rHeetd strom: see her ground-breaking 
SAA manual, Archives and Manuscripts: Machine-Readable Records (Chicago, 1984); and 
more recently "Understanding Electronic Incunabula: A Framework for Research on Elec- 
tronic Records," American Archivist 54 (Summer 1991), pp. 334-54; "Descriptive Practices 
for Electronic Records: Deciding What is Essential and Imagining What is Possible,"Archivaria 
36 (Autumn 1993), 53-62; and with David Bearman, "Reinventing Archives for Electronic 
Records: Alternative Service Delivery Options," in Hedstrom, Electronic Records Manage- 
ment, pp. 82-98. An early pioneer for electronic archiving was also American: Charles M. 
Dollar; see his "Appraising Machine-Readable Records," (originally 1978), in Daniels and 
Walch, Modem Archives Reader, pp. 7 1-79; and, more recently, Archival Theory and Informa- 
tion Technologies: The Impact of Information Technologies on Archival Principles and 
Methods (Macerata, Italy, 1992); and "Archival Theory and Practices and Informatics. Some 
Considerations," in Bucci, Archival Science on the Threshold, pp. 31 1-28. An early Canadian 
voice was Harold Naugler, The Archival Appraisal of Machine-Readable Records: A RAMP 
Study With Guidelines (Paris, 1984). 

73 Cook, "Easy to Byte, Harder to Chew: The Second Generation of Electronic Records Ar- 
chives," pp. 203-8. 

74 For a stimulating discussion, see Sue McKemmish, "Are Records Ever Actual?," in McKemmish 
and Piggott, The Records Continuum, pp. 187-203. 

75 This is the provocative argument of David Bearman and Margaret Hedstrom in "Reinventing 
Archives for Electronic Records," pp. 82-98, especially p. 97. Bearman's other key articles on 
strategic reorientation, differing tactics suitable for varying organizational cultures, and risk 
management is "Archival Data Management to Achieve Organizational Accountability for 
Electronic Records," in McKemmish and Upward, Archival Documents, pp. 215-27; and his 
"Archival Strategies." For tactics addressing the archivist's traditional functions and princi- 
ples, see Dollar, Archival Theory and Information Technologies, chapter four. 

76 David Bearman, "Multisensory Data and Its Management," in Cynthia Durance, ed., Manage- 
ment of Recorded Information: Converging Disciplines (Miinchen, 1990), p. 111; and "Archi- 
val Principles and the Electronic Office," in Menne-Haritz, Information Handling, p. 193. 

77 For a more detailed critique of the biases of electronic records archiving as it has been evolving, 
as well as an analysis of its strengths in affirming archival relevance in protecting evidence in 
context, see Teny Cook, "The Impact of David Bearman on Modem Archival Thinking: An 
Essay of Personal Reflection and Critique," Archives and Museum Informatics 11 (1997), pp. 
15-37. On the issue of metadata and archival description, see Heather MacNeil, "Metadata 
Strategies and Archival Description: Comparing Apples to Oranges," Archivaria 39 (Spring 
1995), pp. 22-32; with the countering case put by David Wallace, "Managing the Present: 
Metadata as Archival Description," in Ibid., pp. 11-21; and originally by David Bearman, 



62 Archivaria 43 

notably in "Documenting Documentation," Archivaria 34 (Summer 1992), pp. 3 3 4 9 .  An 
attempted reconciliation is David Bearman and Wendy Duff, "Grounding Archival Description 
in the Functional Requirements for Evidence," Archivaria 41 (Spring 1996), pp. 275-303. 

78 See James M. O'Toole, "On the Idea of Permanence," American Archivist 52 (Winter 1989), 
pp. 1G25, for an important analysis. O'Toole is also exploring the continuing relevance of the 
usually unquestioned concept of "uniqueness" in archival theory and practice, in a forthcoming 
article. 

79 Ketelaar, "Archival Theory and the Dutch Manual," p. 36. 
80 For a discussion of these categories and related circumstances that permit an archives to leave 

records with their creators for an open-ended period of time without threat, see Teny Cook, 
"Leaving Archival Electronic Records in Institutions: Policy and Monitoring Arrangements at 
the National Archives of Canada," Archives and Museum Informatics 9 (1995), pp. 14149. 
The footnotes in that article refer readers to the original 1990 debate, subsequently published in 
David Bearman, ed., Archival Management of Electronic Records (Pittsburgh, 1991), between 
David Bearman and Ken Thibodeau, moderated by Margaret Hedstrom, on the advantages and 
disadvantages of this strategy, a debate enjoined again by the contrasting conclusions of the 
projects at the University of Pittsburgh and the University of British Columbia on electronic 
records, and articulated anew by Luciana Duranti, Teny Eastwood, Frank Upward, and Greg 
O'Shea and David Roberts, in a special theme issue of Archives and Manuscripts 24 (Novem- 
ber 1996). 

8 1 For a very provocative analysis of archivists' understanding and assumptions-many being false 
and misleading-about "order" and about the nature of their own work in establishing, re- 
creating, and defending original and other "orders," as well as the first major postmodemist 
analysis of the archival enterprise, see Brien Brothman, "Orders of Value: Probing the 
Theoretical Terms of Archival Practice," Archivaria 32 (Summer 1991), pp. 78-100. 

82 The "postcustodial" term was first coined by F. Gerald Ham, in "Archival Strategies for the 
Postcustodial Era," American Archivist 44 (Summer 1981), pp. 207-16. Ham broached many 
of the same ideas without the label even earlier, in his ground-breaking "The Archival Edge," 
American Archivist 38 (January 1975). pp. 5-13, reprinted in Daniels and Walch, Modem 
Archives Reader, pp. 326-35. While the term "postcustodial" appears increasingly in archival 
literature, and certainly implicitly lies behind much recent thinking around electronic records 
and documentation strategies, its implications for the profession and for actual daily practice 
by the archivist have not been directly or systematically addressed by many writers-always 
with the already noted, although somewhat different, exception of the work of Australians Ian 
Maclean and Peter Scott decades ago and all of David Bearman's work. For more recent 
Australian discussion, see McKemmish and Upward, "Somewhere Beyond Custody," espe- 
cially pp. 13741,  and their own essays and introductory pieces throughout their volume 
Archival Documents, as well as Frank Upward's work on the records continuum (notes 8 and 20 
above). For an example of postcustodial appraisal thinking combined with actual work 
experience, see Greg O'Shea, "The Medium is not the Message: Appraisal of Electronic 
Records by Australian Archives," Archives and Manuscripts 22 (May 1994), pp. 68-93. 
Outside Australia, for suggested practical applications for appraisal and description of 
postcustodial thinking, see again Cook's "Mind Over Matter: Towards a New Theory of 
Archival Appraisal," and "Concept of the Archival Fonds;" and Hedstrom and Bearman, 
"Reinventing Archives." The fullest explicitly postcustodial analysis to date is Cook, "Elec- 
tronic Records, Paper Minds: The Revolution in Information Management and Archives in the 
Postcustodial and Postmodemist Era." I wish to underline here that "postcustodial" does not 
mean "non-custodial."  The postcustodial paradigm is a overarching conceptual mindset for 
the archivist applicable whether the records are transferred to the custodial care of an 
archives leji for some time in an distributed or non-custodial arrangement with their 
creator. 



What is Past is Prologue 63 

83 On this point and explicitly criticizing "postcustodial" assumptions that can, admittedly, be 
asserted too blithely as a radical break from the past rather than a difference of emphasis, see 
the fine essay by Heather MacNeil, "Archival Theory and Practice: Between Two Paradigms," 
pp. 1617.  She argues for good reasons that the substance of archives centred around "the 
protection and safeguarding of evidence" should be retained, even if our means and strategies 
to accomplish this end may have to change fundamentally. That has been also my perspective 
for some time and in this article. 

84 Carruthers, Book of Memory, p. 260.