Through the Eye of a Needle
       •••••
              Other Titles by Peter Brown
                      •••••

         Augustine of Hippo: A Biography (1967; 2d ed. 2000)
       Religion and Society in the Age of Saint Augustine (1971)
           The World of Late Antiquity (1971; 2d ed. 1989)
                The Making of Late Antiquity (1978)
                     The Cult of the Saints (1982)
            Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity (1983)
     The Body and Society: Men, Women and Sexual Renunciation
                    in Early Christianity (1988)
               Power and Persuasion in Late Antiquity:
                 Towards a Christian Empire (1992)
       Authority and the Sacred: Aspects of the Christianization
                    of the Roman World (1995)
The Rise of Western Christendom: Triumph and Diversity, A.D. 200–1000
                          (1996; 2d ed. 2003)
      Poverty and Leadership in the Later Roman Empire (2002)
Through the Eye of a Needle
                •••••

  Wealth, the Fall of Rome, and the Making
  of Christianity in the West, 350–­550 ad




               Peter Brown




         P r i n c eto n U n i v e r s i t y P r e s s

                    Princeton and Oxford
                   Copyright © 2012 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
         In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street,
                        Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TW

                                   press.princeton.edu

      Jacket photograph: A hoard of gold and silver coins buried in a wooden chest,
    along with precious ornaments and tableware, at Hoxne in East Anglia (Britain).
   Copyright © The Trustees of The British Museum; photo credit: Art Resource, NY

                                   All Rights Reserved

                  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
                                  Brown, Peter, 1935–
  Through the eye of a needle : wealth, the fall of Rome, and the making of Christianity
                        in the West, 350–550 ad / Peter Brown.
                                            p. cm.
                      Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-691-15290-5 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Church history—Primitive and early
 church, ca. 30–600. 2. Wealth—Religious aspects—Christianity—History. 3. Rome—
                          History—Empire, 284–476. I. Title.
                                   BR162.3.B77 2012
                             270.2—dc23   2011045697

               British Library Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data is available

                This book has been composed in Garamond Premier Pro

                              Printed on acid-­free paper. ∞

                        Printed in the United States of America

                               1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
 For Betsy
•••••
                      •••••

 Jesus said to him: “If you would be perfect, go, sell what you possess

     and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven;

       and come, follow me.” When the young man heard this

        he went away sorrowful; for he had great possessions.


  And Jesus said to his disciples, “Truly, I say to you, it will be hard

  for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven. Again, I tell you,

       it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle

         than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.”


 When the disciples heard this they were greatly astonished, saying:

“Who then can be saved?” But Jesus looked at them and said to them,

 “With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”


          —­Matthew 19:21–­26 (Revised Standard Version)
                   Contents
                   •••••




                        List of Maps
                              xv
                  List of Illustrations
                            xvii
                           Preface
                             xix

                            Part I
 Wealth, Christianity, and Giving at the End of an Ancient World
                                1
                         Chapter 1
                          Aurea aetas
                    Wealth in an Age of Gold
                                3
                     Chapter 2
                     Mediocritas
The Social Profile of the Latin Church, 312–­c a. 370
                        31
                     Chapter 3
                     Amor civicus
                   Love of the city
      Wealth and Its Uses in an Ancient World
                         53



                               ix
                          contents


                       Chapter 4
                   “Treasure in Heaven”
           Wealth in the Christian Church
                            72

                          Part II
                      An Age of Affluence
                              91
                      Chapter 5
                       Symmachus
         Being Noble in Fourth-­C entury Rome
                          93
                        Chapter 6
                    Avidus civicae gratiae
             Greedy for the good favor of the city
          Symmachus and the People of Rome
                             110
                        Chapter 7
                    Ambrose and His People
                             120
                        Chapter 8
                “Avarice, the Root of All Evil”
              Ambrose and Northern Italy
                              135
                    Chapter 9
                      Augustine
                     Spes saeculi
Careerism, Patronage and Religious Bonding, 354–­3 84
                        148
                        Chapter 10
                     From Milan to Hippo
  Augustine and the Making of a Religious Community, 384–­396
                              161
                         Chapter 11
 “The Life in Common of a kind of Divine and Heavenly Republic”
    Augustine on Public and Private in a Monastic Community
                              173


                               x
                            contents


                         Chapter 12
                       Ista vero saecularia
                Those things, indeed, of the world
      Ausonius, Villas, and the Language of Wealth
                               185
                         Chapter 13
                     Ex opulentissimo divite
                  From being rich as rich can be
Paulinus of Nola and the Renunciation of Wealth, 389–­3 95
                              208
                        Chapter 14
                    Commercium spiritale
                    The spiritual Exchange
   Paulinus of Nola and the Poetry of Wealth, 395–­4 08
                              224
                            Chapter 15
                 Propter magnificentiam urbis Romae
          By reason of the magnificence of the city of Rome
   The Roman Rich and their Clergy, from Constantine
                     to Damasus, 312–­3 84
                                 241
                           Chapter 16
             “To Sing the Lord’s Song in a Strange Land”
                   Jerome in Rome, 382–­3 85
                                 259
                       Chapter 17
                 Between Rome and Jerusalem
        Women, Patronage, and Learning, 385–­4 12
                           273

                            Part III
                          An Age of Crisis
                               289
                          Chapter 18
        “The Eye of a Needle” and “The Treasure of the Soul”
  Renunciation, Nobility, and the Sack of Rome, 405–­4 13
                                291


                                 xi
                      contents


                   Chapter 19
                    Tolle divitem
                 Take away the rich
        The Pelagian Criticism of Wealth
                         308
                     Chapter 20
                   Augustine’s Africa
                   People and Church
                          322
                    Chapter 21
              “Dialogues with the Crowd”
The Rich, the People, and the City in the Sermons
                   of Augustine
                         339
                   Chapter 22
              Dimitte nobis debita nostra
                 Forgive us our sins
  Augustine, Wealth, and Pelagianism, 411–­4 17
                        359
                 Chapter 23
                 “Out of Africa”
   Wealth, Power and the Churches, 415–­4 30
                      369
                        Chapter 24
        “Still at that Time a More Affluent Empire”
   The Crisis of the West in the Fifth Century
                             385

                      Part IV
                      Aftermaths
                         409
                   Chapter 25
                  Among the Saints
      Marseilles, Arles and Lérins, 400–­4 40
                       411




                          xii
                      contents


                    Chapter 26
           Romana respublica vel iam mortua
          With the empire now dead and gone
         Salvian and His Gaul, 420–­4 50
                         433
                  Chapter 27
               Ob Italiae securitatem
              For the security of Italy
        Rome and Italy, ca. 430–­c a. 530
                        454

                      Part V
                Toward Another World
                        479
                 Chapter 28
             Patrimonia pauperum
            Patrimonies of the poor
   Wealth and Conflict in the Churches
          of the Sixth Century
                     481
                     Chapter 29
        Servator fidei, patriaeque semper amator
Guardian of the Faith, and always lover of [his] homeland
  Wealth and Piety in the Sixth Century
                            503
                    Conclusion
                       527
                   Abbreviations
                        531
                        Notes
                         533
                    Works Cited
                 Primary Sources 641
                Secondary Sources 654
                        Index
                         719


                           xiii
           Maps
          •••••




          Front endpaper map
            Rome circa 400 AD
             Back endpaper
From Rome to a World without Empire, 450–­500
                     map 1
           Cities of the Roman West
                        7
                    map 2
               Villa Landscapes
                      190
                   map 3
      Christian Rome and Its Suburbium
                    243
                     map 4
       The Crisis of Empire, ca. 440–­450
                      386




                      xv
I l l u s t r at i o n s
    •••••




   (Figures follow page 258.)
          Figure 1
           Profusio
         Figure 2
        New Clothing
          Figure 3
     The Touch of Empire
         Figure 4
    The Giver of the Games
          Figure 5
           Populus
          Figure 6
     From the Gifts of God
         Figure 7
     A Collective Venture
         Figure 8
     Honor from on High
         Figure 9
   A Moment of Family Glory
         Figure 10
          Splendor


              xvii
              illustrations


                Figure 11
  Enjoying the Fruits of the Earth at Table
               Figure 12
         The Goddess and the Bride
                 Figure 13
        Abjectio: Christ before Pilate
                Figure 14
                 Mediocres
                Figure 15
          Christianity in the Home
              Figure 16
 An Argument in Stone: An African Basilica
                 Figure 17
Votum reddidit: He or she has repaid their vow
                Figure 18
                Halls of Light
                Figure 19
           The Managerial Bishop




                    xviii
                            P r e fac e
                           •••••




In this book I wish to examine the impact of wealth on the Christian churches of
the Latin West in the last centuries of the Roman empire and in the first century
of the post-­imperial age, roughly from the middle of the fourth century ad to
the consolidation of the post-­Roman, barbarian kingdoms in the period conven-
tionally associated with the “Fall of Rome.”
   I will begin with four opening chapters that set the scene. The first will de-
scribe Roman society in the fourth century ad. The second will examine the
social standing of the Christian churches in the transitional period between the
conversion of Constantine in 312 and the entry of the rich in ever greater num-
bers into the churches in the course of the 370s. The next two chapters will jux-
tapose the traditional ideal of giving to the city with the novel Christian ideal of
placing treasure in heaven through gifts to the church and to the poor. The issues
raised by the contrast between these two ideals will remain with us for the rest of
the book.
   The next thirteen chapters will introduce the reader to well-­known figures,
each one of them in a particular landscape. Each represents a different option for
the use of wealth and for the formation of attitudes to it. We will meet the great
pagan, Quintus Aurelius Symmachus, in the Rome and southern Italy of his
time. Then we will go north, to the Milan and northern Italy of his Christian
contemporary, Ambrose of Milan. For three chapters we will follow the young
Augustine, a very different person from a more modest background, from Africa
to Italy and back again, as he lived and thought his way through a series of reli-
gious communities, each of which was characterized by distinctive attitudes to-
ward the use of wealth among its members. We will leave Augustine in 397 as the
newly installed bishop of Hippo and as the head of a monastery so as to go far
to the north—­to the Gaul of Ausonius of Bordeaux. In Gaul, and in the adjoin-
ing provinces, we will savor the wealth of the rich landowners and courtiers, the

                                        xix
                                    preface


remains of whose villas still amaze us. We will do this in order to appreciate the
mystique of wealth and the attitudes toward the natural world that circulated
among such people. For this was the wealth Paulinus of Nola formally renounced
in 394. We will see how Paulinus came to make this renunciation; how he viewed
his own self-­chosen poverty; and how he came to devote his wealth to a building
project around the shrine of Saint Felix in Nola in southern Italy, which he de-
scribed in such a way as to make him the poet of wealth renounced and found
again as treasure in heaven. Then we will turn back to Rome—­but to the Rome of
the Christian churches. We will examine the circumstances in which the churches
gained wealth and standing in Rome from the time of Constantine onward. The
situation created by this slow buildup explains the tensions that accompanied
the arrival in Rome in 382 of Jerome, his abrupt departure in 385, and the con-
troversies about wealth, poverty, and patronage that he helped provoke and that
we know of largely through his vehement writings in the 390s and early 400s.
    After Jerome, the pace of the book changes. We have entered an age of mount-
ing crisis. The spectacular renunciation of their property by a young noble couple
(Pinianus and Melania the Younger) coincided with the onset of the Visigothic
advance on Rome. The sack of Rome in 410 brought another radical Christian,
Pelagius, along with his Roman patrons, as refugees to the shores of Africa.
When in Italy, Pelagius’s followers had circulated vehement criticisms of wealth.
They had insisted on its total renunciation. The consequent battle of ideas be-
tween Augustine and Pelagius amounted to a Punic War of the mind between
Italy and Africa. But it was not simply a war of ideas. As far as Augustine was
concerned, the pious habits of an entire Christian landscape were at stake. Hence
we shall go back a century so as to appreciate the fierce sense of agency that had
enabled the African churches to build up a position for themselves in African
society through drawing on the gifts of the faithful. We will then follow the at-
titudes toward wealth and religious giving that emerged from the preaching of
Augustine in the cities of Africa in the 400s. It was these attitudes that Augustine
placed in the path of the radical call to renunciation associated with the views
of the supporters of Pelagius. The message from Africa was firm. Wealth was not
to be thrown away in headlong renunciation; it was to be used in the churches.
Above all, it was to be used to expiate sin. In all subsequent centuries, Augus-
tine’s notion of the intimate relation between sin and religious giving infused the
giving practices of the Latin churches with a somber dye. Already in Augustine’s
old age, his views made themselves felt throughout the Latin West. This was in
the last days of the united empire. By 430 (as chapter 24 will show), all these
concerns came to be engulfed in the general crisis of the western empire. This
crisis brought to an abrupt end the affluence of the previous century and placed
the wealth of those who had survived the storm on a very different footing.


                                        xx
                                    preface


    We are dealing now with an impoverished society in the aftermath of violent
dislocation. The regions of the Roman world had drifted apart. Each region fared
differently; some did a lot better than others. Hence the surprising vividness
of the intellectual life associated with the still-­prosperous enclave of Provence,
which produced, at this time, the programmatic statements on monastic poverty
of John Cassian, a succession of startling charismatic leaders associated with the
island of Lérins, and the memorable diagnosis of the ills of the western empire in
its last days written by Salvian of Marseilles. In Italy also much of the old world
appeared to have continued. But this continuity masked deep changes. By the
end of the fifth century, the popes of Rome had ousted the Senate as the patrons
of the lower classes of the city. The estates of the Roman church had come to
rival, for the very first time, the wealth of the lay nobility.
    In the last two chapters we will look at western Europe as a whole. We will
follow the manner in which the Christian churches came to administer and de-
ploy their wealth. Last of all, we will see how the discreet pressure of wealth used
for religious ends (by bishops and by lay donors) altered the texture of Christian-
ity itself. With this, we have come to stand on the threshold of another world,
one very different from the ancient world with which we began our story. By
600 ad, the structures of the church and the expectations of the laity had
brought about a slow turning of the age. At last—­after three long centuries, and
only then—­the Christians of Europe began to face toward the Catholicism of
the western middle ages.
    It might be helpful to readers if I made plain why my book has taken this
particular shape.
    First: the geographical shape. This is not a book about the Roman world as a
whole. It is about the western, Latin world (from the western Balkans to Britain
and from Trier to the edge of the Sahara). I have made this choice in large part
because of the richness of the material provided by well-­known Latin authors
and because of the intrinsic interest of the social structures and of the historical
developments that were distinctive to the Roman West. But I have also done so
because the healthy state of late Roman studies as a whole has left me free to
concentrate on that one region with the confidence that there are and will be
many other scholars capable of doing justice to the equally fascinating theme of
the relation between church, wealth, and society in the eastern provinces of the
empire.
    Second: the chronological shape. As my title makes plain, I have chosen to
concentrate on the period between 350 and 550. This is, in many ways, an arbi-
trary choice, which I myself have not observed strictly. But I made it as much to
remind myself as to remind my readers of a crucial fact: many of the basic dates
of the late Roman period are less important than we think. To begin our account


                                        xxi
                                    preface


with the conversion of Constantine in 312 and to end it with the formal cessa-
tion of the western Roman empire in 476 or with the death of Pope Gregory the
Great in 603 might seem a straightforward way to bracket a conventional narra-
tive of the period. But to use these dates would be to smuggle in a deceptive tele-
ology. It would encourage us to press the fast forward button—­to assume that
the conversion of Constantine looked forward, almost as a foregone conclusion,
to the passing of the Roman empire and to the triumph of the church in western
society summed up in the papacy of Gregory the Great.
    The temptation to foreshorten history in this way is to be avoided at all costs.
The growth of wealth in the churches did not proceed at the brisk pace implied
by conventional narratives. The conversion of Constantine in 312 did not auto-
matically lead to the enrichment of the Christian church. This came later, in the
last quarter of the fourth century. The papacy of Gregory I did not mark the
apogee of a triumphant church, ready to take over the governance of the post-­
Roman West. It was a good half century earlier that the churches of Europe began
to feel, somewhat to their surprise, the weight of their own wealth. And they felt
this weight in a world where bishops had become partners of the great but had
by no means become their lords.
    Hence the third aspect of the shape of this book. My concern throughout has
been to do justice to the pace and to the diversity of developments that do not fit
easily into conventional narratives of political and ecclesiastical history. To a
large extent, I have attempted to do this by concentrating on a series of distinc-
tive figures, each of whom was placed in a distinctive landscape. In each such
landscape history moved at a different pace.
    We meet these figures in roughly chronological order as our story unfolds.
(Only in Christian Rome and in Christian Africa do we need a flashback across
an entire century to set the scene for figures such as Jerome and Augustine.)
    I have done this because the more I have studied the theme of wealth in the
churches the more I am convinced that the Roman empire was made up of dis-
tinctive regions. The Christian churches in each region (despite their frequent
interchanges and despite the theoretical claim to forming part of a universal
institution—­the Church, with a capital “c”) were as much the product of local
conditions as was any other feature of the Roman world. A true history of Latin
Christianity requires an unremitting sense of place. Each Christian region had a
landscape of its own. In delineating its distinctive features, one can never be cir-
cumstantial enough: the archaeology of sites, the evidence for the circulation
of coins and ceramics, styles of inscriptions on dedications and on tombstones,
works of local authors—­indeed, anything that the historian can find—­must be
brought to play in building up our picture of a particular landscape. Rather than
advancing triumphantly toward a clear goal along a single high road, the regional
churches of the West proceeded each at its own pace. They were frequently igno-

                                       xxii
                                    preface


rant of the affairs of their neighbors, and all were equally ignorant of the future
that lay in store for them. To view them separately, generation by generation,
struck me as the best way to convey the diversity of the Christian churches of the
late Roman West and the unforeseen nature of their rise in Roman society.
    By contrast, the fact that, in my narrative, each of these landscapes should be
related to a single figure or group of figures comes from a choice of my own. The
reader should know that, in concentrating on individual authors (Symmachus,
Ambrose, Augustine, Paulinus, and so on), I am making a virtue out of a neces-
sity. I am doing the best I can with the bad hand the past has dealt us. So much
evidence has not survived, and what has is distributed in ways that reflect the
accidents of survival quite as much as the intrinsic importance of the regions to
which the evidence refers. The later prominence as Fathers of the Church of au-
thors such as Ambrose, Augustine, and Jerome has ensured that their abundant
and circumstantial writings have survived to illuminate the Christian worlds of
Milan, Africa, and Rome. We can never be sufficiently grateful for this fact, and
not least because, in the case of these authors, their writings illuminate key re-
gions of the late Roman world. But this was a wide world. We must remain aware
that there were many other authors—­pagan quite as much as Christian—­in other
regions (or in the same region as our main authors) who have been lost to us, as
well as the fact that there are many regions that have remained strangely silent.
    It is poignantly easy to imagine an alternative history of the churches in the
Roman West. I frequently ask myself what this history would have looked like if,
for example, a writer of the ability and manifold activities of Augustine of Hippo
had emerged in southern Spain or beside the Danube; if the bishops of Trier had
been the subject of a collective biography like the Liber Pontificialis—­Book of
the Pontiffs—­of Rome; or if the shrine of Saint Alban (at Verulamium, Saint
Albans) in southern Britain had produced a hagiographer whose chronicle of
miracles—­replete with vivid local data—­had survived from post-­Roman Britain
to act as a companion to the works of Gregory of Tours.
    This is neither an idle nor necessarily a gloomy speculation. Even with figures
apparently as well-­known to us as Augustine, the recent discovery of hitherto
unknown sermons and letters—­not to mention documents that throw a new
light on the Manichaean movement to which he belonged for a time—­shows us
how much there is left to be discovered. Entire landscapes of the Christian West
may yet come to be better known to us through further discoveries of texts and
through the mobilization of other forms of evidence.1
    But the issue remains. How representative were the authors on which I have
concentrated? It can be argued that they were not: that their writings reflect the
high-­strung preoccupations of an intellectual elite far removed from the earthy
certainties associated with issues of wealth and poverty. I am unconvinced by this
argument. In matters of religion—­and especially in the study of major religious

                                       xxiii
                                     preface


movements such as the formation of the Christian churches—­the word “elite”
can be misleading. It invites us to assume an absence of contact between leading
minds and the wider body of opinion and practice that surrounds them. This is
a false assumption. I prefer the judgment of Louis Gernet, writing on Greek re-
ligion in the classical period: “An elite does not invent. It renders explicit what
many others think.”2
    It is because of this that I have chosen to concentrate on the theme of wealth
in the Christian churches. Wealth was a theme that lay heavy on everybody’s
mind. The issue of wealth flowed like a great braided river through the churches
and through Roman society as a whole. Wealth was not only about budgets and
rent books; the streams of that great and diverse river touched many banks. We
do not immediately think of all of these banks when we think of the economy of
the Roman empire. To take a few examples: The yearly miracle of the harvest
touched on the issue of the relation between man and the physical universe, and
between God or the gods and the abundance of nature. The less welcome prod-
igy of administrative effort that brought the imperial tax collectors and the col-
lectors of rents to shops and villages all over the Roman world raised the issue of
the legitimacy of wealth itself and of the empire that extracted it. By the time the
year was out, there would have been very few issues—­social and personal, secular
and religious—­on which the great and manifold stream of preoccupation with
wealth had not touched.
    Hence it was natural to focus on the issue of wealth in the Christian churches.
Some of the reasons for this choice were obvious. The New Testament had passed
on to the Christian communities of the later empire the challenge of Jesus to
the Rich Young Man, along with his equally disturbing comment on the young
man’s failure to meet this challenge: that it was easier for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God (Matt. 19:24).
Once the truly rich had entered the churches, at the turn of the fourth and fifth
centuries, these words took on a new immediacy. I am tempted to call this period
the Age of the Camel. Christians of ascetic temperament watched expectantly
to see which—­if any—­of the very large camels of their age were prepared to pass
through the eye of the needle through renouncing their wealth. Those who did
so received instant acclaim and have been studied with alacrity ever since. Com-
pared with the heroes and heroines of renunciation, the silent majority of Chris-
tians who retained their wealth have been allowed to sink back into obscurity.
We have tended to assume that they remained content with their failure to sell all
and give to the poor (Matt. 19:21). But failures they remain for us. We then go
on to describe (in a somewhat ironic tone) how worldly-­wise bishops offered the
average rich Christian a series of compromises—­almsgiving, church building,
testamentary bequests—­as so many consolation prizes for having failed the pri-
mal test of passing through the eye of a needle. We point out that it was from

                                        xxiv
                                      preface


these shamefaced compromises with the “world” (that is, with the norms of
Roman society) that the wealth of the churches grew—­and grew only too suc-
cessfully.
     I have written this book in part because I am dissatisfied with this way of see-
ing things. To treat the renouncers of wealth as the heroes and heroines of a
“true” Christianity and to view all other forms of religious giving as somehow a
betrayal of the essential radicalism of the Christian movement is to merely echo
the high-­minded language of the ascetic movement. It is remarkable how many
sober scholars in our own days write about the growing wealth of the church as
if it were no more than a regrettable result of the failure of late Roman Christians
to live up to the ideals of their faith. Many write about the growing wealth of the
church in a tone worthy of Jerome. For Jerome, the persistent advocate of ascetic
renunciation, the history of the Church was a history of decline from the first,
heroic days of the Apostles to “the dregs of our own times,” where the Church
“has grown great in power and riches and has shrunk in spiritual energy.”3
     To adopt this disapproving attitude is to overlook a crucial fact. We are in a so-
ciety where—­for pagans, Jews, and Christians alike—­religious giving was thought
of as a religious transaction. Renunciation of wealth was not the only act on
which the hand of God rested. Gifts to the poor, donations to the church, weekly
offerings, offerings for the payment of vows: each and all joined heaven and
earth in ways that were all the more deeply installed in the consciousness of be-
lievers for not being exhaustively analyzed. The imagined course of wealth from
earth to heaven through humdrum acts of pious giving was just as important
to Christian believers as was the occasional act of renunciation among the few.
Those who shied away from or who toned down the command of Jesus to the
Rich Young Man were not mere shirkers. Rather, they had surrounded their use
of wealth with a different imaginative charge from that of the advocates of radi-
cal renunciation. This charge empowered their daily acts of kindness and gener-
osity. It was from this rich imaginative humus, common both to the wealthy and
to distinctly ordinary persons, that the wealth of the church sprang.
     Hence the task of reconstructing the imaginative content of religious giving
(the flow of wealth from earth to heaven) has proved quite as important to me
as has been the business of following that flow on earth—­through establishing
the relative value of sums raised through great acts of renunciation, through do-
nations, and through daily offerings in the churches. Here I would appeal to my
friends in Jewish studies to come to my aid. For they also study, throughout the
Roman period, the considerable imaginative shift that accompanied the change
from a religion whose giving practices had once been focused on the economy
of a vast Hellenistic temple—­the Temple of Jerusalem—­to the low-­profile but
tenacious giving habits of synagogues and of Jewish communities scattered
throughout the Roman world. It seems as if this imaginative shift in Judaism

                                         xxv
                                     preface


echoes, in reverse, the history of the growth of Christian wealth. In Christianity,
we begin with religious giving on a modest scale (such as we will meet in early
fourth-­century Aquileia and in the church pavements of northern Italy in subse-
quent generations) and we end with the great temple-­like enterprises of the
shrines of sixth-­century Gaul and Italy. In both cases—­Jewish and Christian—­a
history of the imaginative background to religious giving remains to be written.
This book can offer only a portion of this imaginative history, limited to a par-
ticular time and region in the great, extended nebula of Christianities, which
reached from Britain to Central Asia and which, at this time, was flanked in al-
most every region by Jewish communities where religious giving was motivated
by cognate and comparable imaginative patterns.4
    But there is more to it than that. The issue of wealth in general touched on all
aspects of the life of the Roman empire and of the societies that succeeded it. For
this reason, the issue of wealth can be used as a diagnostic tool. To see wealth
in this way enables us to enter into the very heart of Roman society. To study
the creation and distribution of wealth in the fourth century; to follow (both in
pagan and in Christian sources) the disquiets and the controversies sparked by
the accumulation of wealth in the late Roman society of the fourth and fifth
centuries; to sense the mystique of wealth that, at that time, drew together a
governing class staffed equally by pagans and Christians; to trace, in the course
of the fifth and sixth centuries, the evaporation and the restructuring of wealth
in times of barbarian invasion, civil war, and regional state building: to do this is
not merely to write yet another social and economic history of the later empire.
It is to use the theme of wealth itself as a doctor uses a stethoscope. Through pay-
ing attention to the issue of wealth, we can listen in to the Roman empire of the
West in its last centuries and to western Europe as a whole in its first century
without empire. To do so is like overhearing the creaking of a great ship caught
in a storm on the high seas.
    This has meant that this book has been the most difficult book to write that
I have ever undertaken. For it was only by keeping together the abundant dis-
course on wealth generated in the pagan and Christian literature of the period
with a sense of the realities of wealth in Roman and post-­Roman society that I
could use the issue of wealth as a diagnostic tool in order to listen in to the pro-
cess I have called “the Making of Christianity in the West.” I was determined not
to keep separate the history of the religion and culture of the later empire from
the history of its society. Brave words, but hard to live up to in modern condi-
tions. For we live in the middle of a dam burst in the study of the society and
economy of the period. A dramatic turn in the study of the concrete circum-
stances of the Roman world has come to alter our image of late Roman society as
a whole and, consequently, of the role of Christianity in this society.


                                        xxvi
                                     preface


    Nothing is quite as it used to be. Let me sum up a few of these breakthroughs,
as they directly affect the history of Latin Christianity, in the form of a list of ifs
and thens. If the conversion of Constantine did not decisively place the Chris-
tian churches on the high ground of Roman society, then we must look else-
where (to the very end of the fourth century) to see this process happen. Then,
and then only, did Christianity dare to think of itself as potentially a majority
religion, because sure of the support of the wealthy. If it is shown that we have
seriously underestimated the vigor and diversity of the middling classes in the
cities of the late Roman West, then we must rewrite large tracts of the history of
the Christian communities in these cities, including the history of the recruit-
ment and the social horizons of their bishops and clergy. If Roman society in the
West was not characterized by the unchallenged dominance of a few great land-
owners, then we must revise much of what has been written about the role of
Christianity in Latin society both before and after the fall of the empire. To
begin with, we must question the reality content of the fiery sermons of Saint
Ambrose against the landowners of northern Italy. They may not have been as
ruthless and as all-­powerful as he implied. Rather than concentrate on the role
of a few exorbitantly rich senators, we must seek out the role of lesser figures,
such as the minor nobility of Rome and the provinces, who played a crucial role
in the endowment and building of churches and in patronizing Christian clergy-
men and teachers. Furthermore, if the senatorial aristocracy did not colonize the
upper ranks of the churches of Italy and Gaul as thoroughly and as rapidly as
many scholars have asserted, then the entire issue of the buildup of the wealth of
the church and of the rise of the status of the bishop in fifth-­ and sixth-­century
society becomes that much more complex, more conflicted, and (thank God!)
more interesting.
    Having spelled out these few but crucial themes on which I have been led to
change my mind in the past decade, I trust that my readers will follow me atten-
tively through my notes. I hope that they will catch, behind the cramped list of
titles, something of the excitement these titles inspired in me, as each of them
opened a window through which I saw what I never thought I would see—­a
vista of late Roman society from which many of the accustomed landmarks that
had once dominated the landscape of late Roman studies have vanished or have
come to seem less prominent than they had once been. Given the explosion of
late antique studies, it has been no easy task to keep up-­to-­date with current lit-
erature and with new discoveries. I have attempted to do this up to around the
end of 2010. To take a notable example, Brent Shaw’s masterly study of fourth-­
and early fifth-­century Africa, the draft of which he kindly shared with me, has
only now appeared in print—­Brent D. Shaw, Sacred Violence: African Christians
and Sectarian Hatred in the Age of Augustine (Cambridge: Cambridge University


                                        xxvii
                                     preface


Press, 2011). I commend it to the reader as a uniquely rich, vivid, and original
portrayal of the Africa of Augustine. I should also mention a yet more recent
book: Kyle Harper, Slavery in the Late Roman World, ad 275–­425 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 2011), which adds nothing less than an entire new
dimension to our view of Roman society in the fourth century. I am well aware
(indeed, I look forward with relish to the prospect) that new work, some of
which I have overlooked—­scattered as it now is through so many publications in
Europe and in the English-­speaking world—­will challenge readers to revise yet
further our views on the relation between Christianity and society in this hotly
debated period.
    This scene changing has been a hard-­won achievement. Much of it has taken
place through the reinterpretation of well-­known texts. But there is one direc-
tion from which a new wind has arisen: the field of late Roman archaeology. I
trust that I have made clear the extent of my debt to this field in the notes. As far
as my book is concerned, what is new about the field is less the material that it
addresses than the novel way in which this material has come to be interpreted.
Rather than remain content to use archaeological material merely to add further
documentation of known events, many young archaeologists have set out to dis-
cover landscapes no one had known before. The landscapes they have discovered
are often as thrillingly different from our conventional ideas of what late Roman
society and late Roman Christianity were like as are the first images of the sur-
face of a distant planet beamed back to earth by a space probe. For a historian of
the Christian churches, the thrill is precisely that it is well-­known landscapes
(the Roman catacombs being the most notable among them) that have been
rendered disturbingly unfamiliar. The reinterpretation of basic Christian prac-
tices through the skilled reinterpretation of archaeological material (such as the
Christian care of the dead, the nature of Christian votive piety, Christian memo-
rial inscriptions, and the Christian construction of places of worship) has lifted
the veil of clerical words on which so much of our text-­based knowledge of the
daily life of Christians had depended up until now. In entering a world rendered
strange again by the interpretative skill of archaeologists, we have been brought
that much closer to the unsung heroes and heroines of this book. We meet the
lay men and women on whose habits of giving the Christian churches depended.
Their pious practices and their expectations speak to us more clearly from their
graves, from the pavements of their churches, and from their graffiti at the tombs
of saints than they do from the pages of the Fathers of the Church.
    In this book I intend throughout to keep together the study of religion and
the study of what is now often called (in tones that invite unquestioning ap-
proval) “material culture.” To maintain the joining of these disciplines has be-
come more difficult every year. The astonishing expansion of late Roman studies
has brought with it a danger of over-­specialization. In many ways, specialization

                                       xxviii
                                     preface


is welcome, but over-­specialization poses a danger to synthetic ventures and to
attempts to see societies in the round—­to take their religion and culture quite as
seriously as their material bases.
    Yet we must struggle to maintain this unitary vision. Rigid distinctions be-
tween disciplines are not helpful. They bear little relation to the actual experi-
ence of research in the field. We soon learn that all aspects of the history of the
later empire are difficult of access. From the most seemingly ethereal theological
texts to the most seemingly concrete archaeological surveys, each body of evi-
dence, each in its different way, is a frail bridge to the past. None offers unam-
biguous results. In all our efforts, we are left peering over the edge of an abyss that
drops into an unimaginably distant world. We should be aware of the intellectual
vertigo that is inherent in our profession. I am told that, when they reach a cer-
tain high altitude, French mountaineers change from formal terms of address—­
the vous—­to the more intimate tu. It is an admirable practice. It breeds the right
spirit of solidarity in a group which, like ourselves, lives by dangling at great
heights. For the thrill is always there. No matter by which route we may approach
the late Roman period—­through Patristic texts, through historical works, through
legislative documents, through inscriptions, through excavations, or through
mapping patterns of trade revealed by the distribution of ceramics—­we are up
against the fact that the rise of Christianity in the West is a daunting theme.
   But it is just in this that the fascination of history lies; the student feels
   himself confronted by forces too mighty to be measured by any instru-
   ments at his disposal.5
   If I have communicated to readers of this book a little of this fascination, I
will only be passing on to them the joy of learning that so many of my friends and
colleagues in the field have, over my years of writing it, passed on to me.
   It is for this reason that I feel particularly indebted to my friends and col-
leagues. I have been more than fortunate. I can look back on the writing of this
book as marked by a succession of acts of rare intellectual generosity on the part
of many readers to whom I showed it in its many drafts. An annus mirabilis
brought as visitors to the Institute of Advanced Studies two of the luminaries
in my own heaven—­Rita Lizzi and Jairus Banaji. They followed my earliest draft
with unstinting care and critical discussion. Soon afterward, Johannes Hahn came
to the Princeton campus as a visitor. I could not have wished for a more alert
reader. His regular comments, perceptive and precise, gave a new dimension to
the notion of academic friendship. Julia Smith and Hamish Scott further strength-
ened my resolve by readings that were as tenacious as they were frank. Through-
out, I have been enlivened and guided by the comments of Kimberly Bowes and
Ed Watts. Their warm and searching readings kept me in mind of the sheer joy of
scholarship, as we entered together (in constant lively conversation) into land-

                                         xxix
                                     preface


scapes as yet barely opened up for the study of late antiquity. Helmut Reimitz
and Jamie Kreiner have shepherded this manuscript (both intellectually and
cybernetically, as we now say) as it reached the early medieval period and as it
emerged, in innumerable ill-­edited files, to its full length. One cannot be grateful
enough for such care, offered with such infectious zest. Many others at different
times have seen chapters or parts of this manuscript. It has been an encourage-
ment and a discipline for me to have their comments. Let me mention, if only to
express a debt that goes far beyond the writing of this book, Glen Bowersock,
whose presence and example have been an encouragement to me for many years.
Last but not least, I have been more than fortunate in the academic enivronment
in which I found myself in the years when I wrote this book. In the Program in
Hellenic Studies I found a warm hearth around which so many scholars of the
history and of the regions that I have long loved have been brought together, year
after year and event after event, by the skill and energy of Dimitri Gondicas.
   Last, but by no means least, I would like to acknowledge the work of those
connected with Princeton University Press—Jennifer Backer, Julia Livingston,
and Debbie Tegarden. With the greatest skill and good nature they have enabled
a manuscript which was (I must confess) something of a camel to pass through
the needle’s eye, and to achieve that standard of craftsmanship and beauty that
has been a hallmark of Princeton books.
   Throughout all this, my wife, Betsy, stands out. She has supported me unspar-
ingly from beginning to end. She has set aside time at all times to read each draft
with an unswerving eye for obscurities and for infelicities of expression and or-
ganization. She has constantly contributed her own rich store of historical knowl-
edge and her own distinctive sense (at once humane and wry) of the workings of
human nature in the past.
   We have traveled together to the many regions in which this history took
place. I offer her this book in the old and heavy sense of a vow completed, which
I have read on so many Jewish and Christian inscriptions of the later empire: I
give to her only a little of what she has given to me.

Princeton
March 24, 2011




                                        xxx
                            Chapter 1
                            •••••
           Aurea aetas: Wealth in an Age of Gold




         From Rusticulus (Little Farmer) to Censor (Civic Worthy)

                     Wealth, Privilege, and Power

In this chapter we will start with general considerations. We will deal first with
the distinctive manner in which wealth and social status came together in Roman
society. Then we will look at the way in which wealth was taken from the land.
After this, we will focus on a single century. We will attempt to sketch, inevitably
briefly, the structure of upper-­class society in the Latin West in the fourth cen-
tury ad. We will look at what was, in many ways, a new society, where new forms
of status and new ways of showing wealth had emerged as a result of a profound
reordering of the Roman empire in the period after 300 ad.
    Let us begin by asking the first question: What was “wealth” in late Roman
society? Those who observed the wealthy at this time tended to give a simple
answer. In the overwhelming majority of cases, wealth was land turned by labor
into food, which, in the case of the rich, was turned into sufficient money to be
turned into privilege and power.
    We can see this process at work on many levels of society. It can be illustrated
by a success story from the hinterland of fourth-­century Africa. An inscription
from Mactar, a city on the edge of the inland plateau of southwestern Tunisia,
tells how a truly “poor” man came into both wealth and privilege. His name is
missing from the tomb that he set up, but he is known to scholars as the “Har-
vester of Mactar.” He recorded his life in a long inscription. He was never entirely
landless. Having barely scraped a living from his own land, he made his way up as
a foreman of one of the great gangs of laborers (many of them landless men much
poorer than himself ) who would spread out over the plateau of eastern Numidia
(between modern Tunisia and Algeria) as harvest laborers. Twelve years spent

                                         3
                                   chapter 1


working “under the rabid sun” made him, at last, “the master of a house”—­the
owner of a comfortable farm. Finally, the income from his property made him
eligible to membership of the town council of Mactar.
   I sat in the Temple of the City Council [the “sacred” council hall of Mac-
   tar] and from a little farmer [a rusticulus] I have become a civic elder—­a
   censor.
His life of labor had “reaped the fruit of honors.”1
    By joining the town council, our “Harvester” crossed the most significant so-
cial threshold in the Roman world. This was not the modern threshold between
poverty and wealth. It was the all-­important, Roman threshold between faceless-
ness and “honors.” Membership in the governing body of a Roman city such as
Mactar linked the “Harvester” to privilege and to power. He ceased to be a mere
rusticulus—­a little farmer. As a town councillor (a curialis—­a member of the
curia, the town council—­or a decurio, which was a similar term) he became an
honestior, a more honorable person. For instance, he could no longer be flogged
or tortured. That, in itself, was no small privilege, which the average subject of a
notoriously cruel empire could not claim. His place on the town council and the
“honors” associated with his activities on its behalf made him a little aristocrat in
his own region.2
    There were five hundred cities like Mactar in Africa alone. In what is now
northeastern Tunisia, they covered the land in a tight grid. The nearest cities to
Mactar were only ten miles away on either side. Most had populations of little
more than two to five thousand inhabitants. A modern observer would have
called them “agro-­towns.” But this was not how they saw themselves. Technically
each was an autonomous republic sheltered beneath the vast umbrella of the
Roman empire.3
    To a modern person, this can appear to be a bizarre situation. It is as if the
infrastructure of France and Italy was made up of a network of little princedoms
of Monaco and Republics of San Marino. But while, in modern times, these
quirky survivals from the world of petty principalities and city-­states are tax
shelters, notorious for being uncooperative in making money saved within their
territories available to the revenue officers of France and Italy, in the Roman em-
pire it was precisely the opposite: cooperation with the imperial authorities in
the collection of taxes made the cities important and bound their elites to the
empire.
    We must always remember that, by modern standards, the Roman empire was
a “truly minimal state.”4 It delegated to local groups almost every task of govern-
ment except the control of high justice and the army. Police, maintenance of
roads, fortification, and, most important of all, the collection of taxes were tasks
delegated to the town councils of some 2,500 cities scattered like fairy dust over

                                         4
                        wealth in an age of gold


the surface of an immense empire. The empire rested heavily on the members of
these town councils. But it did so in return for giving them a free hand to bear
down as heavily as they wished on everybody else. A town councillor entered the
world of honors so as to become, also, a little tyrant. His principal duty was to
act as an agent of extortion in the name of the empire.
    Mactar (like so many other Roman cities) spoke of its town council as the
splendidissimus ordo—­“the most resplendent governing body.”5 It governed a ter-
ritory that extended around the town (in the case of Mactar) within a radius of
five miles. But it was the duty of the town councillors—­and not (except in states
of emergency) of the representatives of the Roman state—­to go out each year
to extract from the inhabitants of every ecological niche in this small territory
the taxes due to the state in money, labor, food, livestock, and other useful
materials.
    Taxes and demands for labor were presented to each city by the imperial bu-
reaucracy as lump sums. It was for the councillors to divide up these sums among
themselves and to collect them from all the inhabitants of their midget state. As
a result, in the case of Mactar and of innumerable small cities in every province,
the decisions of groups of between thirty and one hundred persons directly af-
fected the fate of thousands through the distribution of the tax load and through
its yearly collection.
    The Roman system of delegation to the cities ensured that this was an empire
where power was never limited to the top. It seeped downward to the smallest
city. The curiales (the members of the town council) policed the urban plebs on
behalf of the empire. Outside the city, the curiales patrolled a countryside inhab-
ited by rusticuli—­the “little farmers” whose fate the “Harvester of Mactar” had
avoided. From these farmers they drew their own income (in the form of rents
and produce) and, at the same time, they flexed the muscle of the Roman state at
their expense by collecting from them the taxes due to the emperor.
    Thus, in the late Roman empire, the rich remained rich because their persons
were sheathed in public authority. Even a modest farmer such as our Harvester
expected to wrap the authority of the empire around himself once he joined the
town council. It was in this direction that his laboriously accumulated wealth had
led him—­and in no other. In Rome there were no persons such as there were
in ancient China who could be acclaimed (as the great historian Sima Qian had
acclaimed the spectacularly rich merchants and monopolists of the Han empire)
as members of an “un-­titled nobility.”6 Wealth and “honors” were made to con-
verge. The one could not be achieved or maintained without the other. For this
reason, when approaching wealth in the later empire (as in most other periods
of Roman history) we must make a fundamental transition “from a [modern]
mental cosmos in which power depends largely on money to one where money
depends . . . largely on power.”7

                                        5
                                    chapter 1


    To a modern person, this situation produces strange tricks of perspective. It is
hard to judge social distances in the later empire. Persons and institutions that
seem to be separated by unbridgeable chasms of wealth often appear closer to
each other than we expect. Our Harvester was probably not notably richer than
many of the rusticuli among whom he grew up. All that was required to be made
a member of a town council was a capital of three hundred solidi (gold pieces).
This amounted to an income of around twenty-­five to thirty solidi a year.8 But
the “honors” associated with membership in the town council of Mactar placed
him (and would certainly have placed his descendants had he succeeded) within
sight of the very top of Roman society. Once our Harvester became a member of
the town council, legally and institutionally he and a senator had more in com-
mon with each other in terms of the privileges that they shared than he had with
any of his former neighbors, whose very bodies remained at the mercy of the
Roman state.
    We should always bear in mind the effects of this situation. The cities them-
selves were enormously diverse. Mactar was far from being a Roman town based
on a single, cookie-­cutter model. It had a gnarled identity all its own that reached
back for over half a millennium. In the third century BC it had been the capital
of a Numidian kingdom. Its town council maintained Punic titles for their civic
offices up to the second century ad. In the fourth century, Punic may well have
been spoken in its streets and in the countryside. But these diversities had been
folded into the wider structure of the empire by a remarkable system of delegated
power.9
    If there was any such thing as a “political nation” in the later Roman empire
(such as Sir Lewis Namier has delineated in his studies of the background of the
members of Parliament in eighteenth-­century England), it was not to be found
only in the Roman Senate, with its venerable past and traditional membership of
around six hundred persons. It was also to be found in the vast reservoir of talent
provided by some sixty-­five thousand curiales (what we call the “curial class,”
made up of members of the town councils) spread throughout the cities of the
western empire, not to mention the further tens of thousands of such persons in
the yet more heavily urbanized provinces of the Roman East.10
    The city-­based nature of late Roman society determined the geographical
range of this “political nation.” Let us conjure up for a moment a map of the
Roman West that shows the relative density of cities in each region. In the north-
eastern tip of Africa (stretching inland some 125 miles from Carthage), in Sicily,
in central Italy, and, far to the west, in southern Spain, cities lay no more than ten
miles (half a day’s journey) apart. Abutting this dense area was a larger block,
where cities appeared every twenty-­five miles. This included northern and parts
of southern Italy, the Dalmatian coast, the Mediterranean regions of Gaul, most
of modern Spain and Portugal, and much of north Africa to within sixty miles

                                          6
                           wealth in an age of gold




                                                              R




                                                              hin
                                                      Trier




                                                                 e
                                                                              Danube



                                          Rhone
                   Bordeaux
                                                                                    Aquileia
                                                                  Milan                   Salona
                                                                          Rome
                                      Barcelona                             Ostia

      Merida

                                                                           Carthage




                          Map 1. A World of Cities, ca. 400 ad
 The reader should know that this map of the overall distribution of cities in the Latin West
   in 400 ad was derived from a map of Christian bishoprics in ca. 600 ad. Roman cities
 survived largely because they formed the basis for the early medieval network of bishoprics
                                  in most regions of Europe.

inland from the coast. Beyond this vivid core, in much of Gaul, in Britain, along
the Danube, and in the hinterlands of Africa, cities lay more distant from each
other. The impact of their distinctive structures was muffled by great stretches of
a countryside occupied by villages, estates, and rural sanctuaries.11
    Almost without exception, the principal protagonists of this book, Christian
and non-­Christian alike, lived in the first two zones. Apart from a few of senato-
rial origin, almost all the authors that we meet came from curial families. Indeed,
until the very end of this period, the alarms and excitements associated with the
rise of Christianity in the Roman West took place only on the brightly lit stage
of ancient cities, which ranged from the off-­scale megalopolis of Rome, through

                                                  7
                                   chapter 1


cities such as Milan, Carthage, Bordeaux, Barcelona, and Arles, to innumerable
little towns such as Mactar in north Africa and their equivalents elsewhere. Only
in Augustine’s Africa, in the fourth century, can we catch the voices of Christians
in the countryside. Only after the fifth century does a rural Christianity emerge
out of tantalizing silence in the countryside of Gaul, Spain, and Italy.


      The Wider View: The Rich in a Changing Empire, 100–­400 ad

Now let us, for a moment, take a big step backward, so as to view the rich against
the landscape of Roman society as whole.
    The first thing that we notice is that our Harvester of Mactar was very low on
the scale of the rich. Even in his own region, many town councillors would have
been far richer than he was. Above him stretched a steep pyramid that became
vertiginously high and narrow toward the top. At the very top of this pyramid
lay fortunes the likes of which would not be seen again in Europe until the mil-
lionaires of the industrial age.
    We must remember that this was a very small pyramid compared with the
overall population of the empire. From top to bottom, all the rich put together
made up no more than what modern modelers of the Roman economy call, with
commendable moral restraint, “the fortunate decile” of the total population of
the empire. They were the lucky 10 percent. Ninety percent of the subjects of the
empire did not partake in the relative prosperity that the Harvester of Mactar
and his like had achieved. Most persons lived miserable lives, at a standard of
living that never reached beyond that enjoyed by the populations of other pre­
industrial empires, such as Moghul India. Like Moghul India, the Roman empire
was a colorful place. But the color wore off very quickly as one descended the
social scale. We should always bear this in mind. The noise generated by a vivid
Christian discourse on wealth and poverty (written by members of the curial
class and largely addressed to the inhabitants of the cities) affected only a small
proportion of the overall population. It has to be set against the vast silence of a
wider world “that failed even to begin to share in the moderate amount of eco-
nomic growth” that had placed our Harvester and many like him in the town
halls of cities such as Mactar.12
    Taking a wider view of Roman history, many scholars have been tempted to
think that the fourth century itself was an age dwarfed by the achievements of
the empire in previous centuries. Romans of the fourth century have often been
presented as the inhabitants of a deeply impoverished empire, busied among the
ruins of their former greatness and engaged in desperate and violent attempts
to hold back, for a moment, an ineluctable process of decline that had begun
around the year 200 ad. It used to be widely believed that the decline and fall of

                                         8
                         wealth in an age of gold


the western empire in the generations after the Gothic sack of Rome in 410 only
marked the end of a story of progressive breakdown. The damage had already
been done. Socially, economically, and culturally the ancient world had come to
an end in the crisis of the third century. The fourth century was already a sinister
prelude to the European middle ages.
    This melodramatic view dominated the historiography of the first part of the
twentieth century. Readers of this book will soon realize that this is not the opin-
ion of this author. From the late 1940s onward, a dam burst of studies on every
aspect of the culture, economy, and society of the fourth century has revealed it
to be a period in its own right, marked by a strange vigor all its own.13
    But the issue of proportion cannot be dismissed. The fourth century ad was
not the second century ad. The economic explosion that had accompanied the
consolidation of Roman rule in the first two centuries had been a prodigious
event. It left its imprint in a Mediterranean whose bottom is still littered with the
wrecks of Roman ships in numbers that tower above those of the wrecks of any
previous or future century until modern times. The lakes of Sweden and the ice-
caps of Greenland show deposits of lead that spike in the same period, almost
certainly as a result of an unprecedented volume of emissions into the atmo-
sphere associated with the mining and purifying of silver in huge quantities in
Roman Spain.14 The fourth century lies on the far side of this great peak of wealth.
But how far down the slope had it fallen? What were the chances that, having
slipped that far, it would continue to be a recognizably Roman society? By what
devices, and at what human cost, could further slippage be avoided?
    Very briefly, the answer may prove to be that it is the second century ad that
needs explanation, not the fourth. The second century has rightly been called “this
most unusual period of European history.”15 We should not see it as a golden age,
against which to measure the achievements and expedients of all later centuries.
Rather, it was a costly fluke. Coming after a century of peace, the second century
was characterized by extensive overbuilding in many regions, as new local elites
competed to become more Roman than the Romans. Traces of ecological strain
already appear along the Rhineland frontier in the second century.16 The impact
of plague from the 170s onward may well have led to a long-­term demographic
downturn whose slow rhythm escapes the conventional periodizations of impe-
rial history.17 Altogether, this was a society that had pushed hard against the lim-
its of the possible for any preindustrial empire.
    From the third century onward, the Roman empire had to face up to the limi-
tations that were usual for any empire. As a result, it passed through what we call
the “crisis of the third century.” But this crisis is better seen not as a catastrophe
but as a return to reality after a period of extraordinary good fortune. After 200
ad, the empire came up against problems all great empires have had to face. It
found itself confronted by enemies it could no longer dominate with effortless

                                          9
                                    chapter 1


ease. The relatively peaceful manner by which the imperial office had been passed
on from one super-­rich Italian family to another gave way to a series of military
coups. These, in turn, led to civil wars that drained the provinces of supplies in
an unpredictable manner and without the compensation of new conquests. Shaken
at the top by usurpations, civil wars, and serious military defeats, the vast mass of
the empire settled down to the grauer Alltag—­to the gray normality of surviving
as best it could.
    Most great empires face the problem of survival most of the time. In the case
of the Roman empire, however, the extraordinary flare of prosperity associated
with the second century has tended to make all succeeding centuries of Rome
seem to be periods of decline. But it may be better to see the third and fourth
centuries less as centuries of irrevocable disaster than as periods marked by a
strenuous effort to mobilize the resources of what remained an impressively re-
silient society in order to survive for the long haul.18
    Somewhat paradoxically, the empire was saved in the crisis of the third cen-
tury by the regionalism of Roman provincial society. The sheer size and diversity
of the empire cushioned the impact of repeated crises at court and along its fron-
tiers. These crises were localized. In the vast federation of regions that made up
the empire, there were always resources to fall back upon in safer and more pros-
perous provinces. By working through the cities, the Roman system of taxation
had co-­opted this regionalism rather than undermined it.
    And the regions held firm. Many provinces emerged from the crisis of the
third century largely unscathed. We tend to forget this because survival lacks
glamour. Survival creates silences. These silences do not happen only because
things have gone wrong; they often happen because things have kept on keeping
on. For example, provinces that had once flaunted the benefits of Roman urban
life (such as the cities of Spain) held onto their gains. The cities continued. But the
thrill of novelty had worn off. No one felt any longer the need to erect those up-
beat inscriptions, recording feats of generosity and public building in the cities,
which delight historians of the second century ad.19
    Africa, in particular, was a world little touched either by civil war or by major
barbarian invasion. In and around Mactar and other regions, rural settlement
continued to pile building upon building like a coral reef throughout the third
and fourth centuries. Pottery kilns producing fine wares covered the country-
side.20 Inscriptions recording public works and acts of generosity continued in
the cities of Africa. But even there, by the end of the third century, the pace of
building had slackened.21
    This was partly because, in many provinces of the West, the priorities for pub-
lic building changed in a significant direction. In many parts of Gaul and Spain
(and even eventually in Rome itself, with the Walls of Aurelian, put up in the
270s) walls replaced theaters, baths, and temples as the public building works

                                          10
                         wealth in an age of gold


par excellence. We should not think of these walls as mere fortifications hastily
thrown up in panic at the approach of barbarians. Carefully designed and mas-
sively built, they radiated the message of a calculated intention to survive, and to
survive with Roman grandeur, even in a world that was felt to be less secure than
it had been two centuries earlier.22
    What survived was the empire itself. The emperors and their servants were
more than usually vocal on that point. In the third century, the empire passed the
crucial test of loyalty. It was widely thought in most regions that the alternative
to Rome was chaos. To have survived this test was no small achievement. A cen-
tury later, after the barbarian raids of 405–­6 and the sack of Rome in 410, the
western empire would fail to conjure up the same degree of loyalty. It fell apart
irrevocably after a generation of barbarian invasion and civil war that was no
more severe than that through which the empire had passed in the course of the
third century.
    For this reason, it is important to note the terms on which the empire sur-
vived the crisis of the third century. It did so by harnessing many of the most
daring innovations of a time of emergency to ancient Roman institutions whose
kinetic energy, gathered over the centuries, had by no means come to a stop. For
instance, taxation was sternly rationalized. It was extended to all provinces and
exacted with unprecedented determination.23 But the collusion between cities
and empire, which had begun in the first days of Roman rule, still provided the
mechanism through which these taxes were collected. It is for this reason that
any account of the particular profile of fourth-­century society in the West must
begin at the roots of wealth—­with the harvest, with the taxes, and then with the
unusual manner in which, in the fourth century, tax, harvest, and markets were
brought together with decisive effect to restructure the life of the Roman rich.


                                 Harvest Shocks

First let us deal with what had barely changed since previous ages. Wealth came
mainly from labor on the land. This means that, every year, over 60 percent of the
wealth of the Roman empire was gathered at harvesttime by a labor force that
amounted to over 80 percent of the overall population. Every year the harvest of
basic crops swept across the Roman world, beginning in the Middle East, cir-
cling the Mediterranean, and ending in Britain and on the Rhine. The harvest of
grain began in spring in the Middle East and was not over until late summer in
northern Europe. Throughout the Mediterranean, wine and oil came in the late
fall and in early winter. Only Egypt, where the Nile rose and fell in a heavy, mud-­
red flood between June and September, was miraculously exempt from the march
of the seasons.24

                                        11
                                   chapter 1


    Before the time of the harvest, rich and poor alike waited. The Mediterra-
nean is notorious for the variability of its harvests, due to unstable climatic con-
ditions. The carefully tended fields were menaced by flattening cloudbursts,
by random scything by hailstorms, and by the perpetual menace of prolonged
drought (along its eastern and southern shores) and of “dry” winters (winters
without snow and thus without moisture) in the plateaus of its hinterlands, no-
tably in Anatolia. “Harvest shocks” caused by unforeseen shortfalls in the crops
were the norm. In all areas except Egypt, yields could vary by over 50 percent
from year to year.25
    Not surprisingly, therefore, wealth was widely thought of as lying in the hands
of the gods. A good harvest was the smile of God or of the gods spreading across
an obedient landscape. In 311, one of the last pagan emperors (the eastern em-
peror Maximin Daia) informed the citizens of Tyre that his persecution of the
Christians had pleased the gods. The weather itself had changed for the better:
   Let them look at the standing crops already flourishing with waving heads
   in the broad fields, and at the meadows, glittering with plants and flowers,
   in response to abundant rains and to the restored mildness and softness of
   the atmosphere.26
Christians, also, took no chances. They resorted quite as much as did non-­
Christians to supernatural measures to protect and nurture their lands. Like ev-
erybody else, they called in ritual experts with a reputation for success in such
matters. A southern Spanish council of the early fourth century forbade Chris-
tian landowners to call in Jews to bless their fields “lest they make invalid and
ineffective, our [Christian] blessing on the fruits of the earth which they receive
from God.”27 Examples of magical spells have survived. In the Oued Siliane in
Tunisia, a stone was placed in the hills looking down over the fields:
   Oreobezagra, Abraxas, Mokhtar . . . Adonaï, lords and gods, keep away,
   turn away from this estate and from the fruits which grow in it—­from the
   vines, from the olive-­trees, from the sown fields—­the hail, the mildew,
   the anger of hurricanes, the swarms of locusts, so that none of these
   plagues may attack this estate and the fruits that are all found there.
   Rather, protect them, always intact and healthy, as long as these stones,
   on which these sacred names are inscribed, remain in place in the earth
   and all around.28
   From January onward, the year was scrutinized for omens of the coming har-
vest. The Feast of the Kalends of January caught the imagination of pagans, Jews,
and Christians alike,29 for it was a frank feast of wealth present and of wealth to
come. The inhabitants of Provence would pile their tables with good things on
the day of the Kalends of January. They hoped, through this uncanny display of

                                        12
                         wealth in an age of gold


 abundance in bleak midwinter, to bring about the miracle of abundance at the
 next harvesttime.30
    The rabbis of Palestine knew what was at stake all over the Mediterranean and
 beyond. They pointed out that the great prayers of the Jewish New Year were
 made for dew and rain, “So that, finally, the members of God’s people should not
 come to depend upon each other like slaves.”31 In the eyes of contemporaries, the
primary cause of social stratification was the crushing imbalance in exposure to
the risk of harvest shocks between the rich (who were cushioned against such
shocks) and the poor farmers, whose sole resources lay dangerously open to the
weather. It was these harvest shocks that all too often tipped the balance toward
 misery, debt, and dependence in a rural population that had to produce enough
 to raise the money needed to pay their rents and taxes.
    For everyone, the harvest was a time of finality. The piles of grain gathered on
 the threshing floor were all that there was. And only a small portion of these piles
 would remain in the hands of the farmers. For, far away, in January also, the em-
 peror decided the tax budget of the year. Copies of the document, stating the
­liability of each province, would then be passed down to every city within the
province. Members of every town council were held responsible for raising a
given sum from within the territory of their city. Vested with imperial authority,
the town councillors descended on the villages and farmsteads within the terri-
tories of their city.32
    Then they came again, not as collectors of taxes but as landowners calling in
 their rents. Altogether, by the time the tax collector and the landowner (who
 were often one and the same person) had passed by, there was not much left for
 the farmer. It is usually calculated that, with rent and taxes deducted, the farmers
 would have to face the coming year with under one-­third of the harvest on which
 they had labored. A peasant family could live on such amounts. But, given the
 prevalence of harvest shocks throughout the Mediterranean, the farmers had
 very little buffer against risk, should the sky not “soften” in the coming year.33
    Furthermore, a complex system of rent collection enabled many urban land-
 owners (especially those resident in great cities) to be like the emperor. They were
 distant figures, with little or no direct involvement in the life of the peasantry.
 The dominus, the ultimate owner of the land, was represented on the spot by a
 hierarchy of little domini—­major tenants and estate administrators on the make.34
 It was they, and not the distant landlords, who were the little tyrants of the lo-
 cality. In this respect, estate managers were not unlike the curiales who bullied
 the peasantry in the name of the emperor. Managers shielded their masters from
 direct experience of violence and extortion on the land. Outside Hippo (Bône/
 Annaba, Algeria), a bailiff once raped a nun who had come to the estate to buy
 wool. As bishop of Hippo, Augustine could do nothing about this outrage on
 the spot. We know about the incident only from a letter Augustine wrote to an

                                         13
                                   chapter 1


absentee landowner, for whom such matters must have appeared as distant as the
far side of the moon.35
    The insistence on the payment of rents in-­kind should not be seen (as it once
was by scholars of the early twentieth century) as a symptom of the reversion of
the Roman world to a primitive economy, reduced to the bartering of food.36
The opposite was the case: a demand for payment in foodstuffs assumed a mar-
ket for foodstuffs. Farmers could bring their produce into the nearest town. But
the rich had privileged access to wider and more lucrative markets. They alone
could defeat distance. They could move their goods over large distances so as
to supply major cities and hungry armies. The rich alone could also defeat time.
They could store the abundance of the harvest and wait to sell when the prices
were at their highest. Even in good years, the price of grain edged slowly upward
to double its price as it became more scarce in the months before the next har-
vest. Those who could store the surplus of the harvest by gathering it into their
granaries were the ones who could take advantage, every year, of this rise in
prices. Further harvest shocks might turn the regular sale of grain into a “killing”
in times of shortage.37
    Not surprisingly, therefore, granaries emerge as the economic villains of the
ancient world. Quite as much as does the sight of factories spewing toxic waste
into the atmosphere in modern times, great granaries were a sight calculated to
trigger disquiet in late Roman minds. Large Roman villas flaunted the wealth of
their owner by being built up on solid granaries, endowed with heavy, locked
gates.38 The ruins of the granaries of the great fourth-­century villa of Sâo Cucu-
fate, in southern Portugal, still stand ten feet high above the plain of the Alen-
tejo, adjacent to the huge cylindrical weights, which are all that survive of the
villa’s olive presses.39 The greatest granary of all, of course, was that of the em-
peror. Every year, the emperor of Constantinople led a solemn procession to the
great Imperial Granary outside the city to watch the first installments of the
grain levy from Egypt pile ever higher on its floor.40 Inhabitants of Constanti-
nople called this warehouse, bluntly, Lamia—­“Jaws.”41


                              A New Age of Gold

Since the time of Hesiod and the great grain silos of the Bronze Age, the storage
and sale of foodstuffs was an unchanging feature of the landscape of the Mediter-
ranean. What changed significantly in the fourth century was the manner in
which the tax system of the Roman empire created a situation in which the rich
were able to change food into gold to their great advantage.
   To sum up a complex development: From Constantine onward, the Roman
state flooded the economy with gold. The gold solidus became the symbol of a

                                        14
                         wealth in an age of gold


new order. As its name suggests, the solidus was a solid drop of gold. In the reign
of Constantine, a pound of gold yielded seventy-­two gold coins. It was with these
coins that the emperor consolidated loyalty at the top through spectacular feats
of generosity. He paid his army and his high officials in this new, strong currency.
Following this example, the imperial bureaucracy as a whole insisted on receiv-
ing as many taxes as possible in gold. The result was a situation where those with
access to gold coins towered above those whose only wealth still consisted in
debased bronze coinage or in the unsold produce of their own fields. Silver coin-
age survived throughout the fourth century, but it tended to be pushed to one
side by the prestigeful, new gold coins.42
    By the end of the fourth century, a “poverty line” had come to be drawn in the
social imagination of contemporaries between the areas of society where the
mighty solidus circulated and a bleak social hinterland where the solidus was ab-
sent or difficult to obtain. In the words of the anonymous author of a treatise en-
titled De rebus bellicis (On Military Problems), who wrote, perhaps, in the 360s:
   It was in the age of Constantine that extravagant grants assigned gold in-
   stead of bronze . . . to petty transactions . . . [and hence] there ensued an
   even more extravagant passion for spending gold, which is considered the
   more precious substance . . . which meant that the houses of the rich were
   crammed full and their splendor increased to the detriment of the poor—­
   for those of little means went under, as the result of [official] violence.43
    As the writer pointed out, the Aurea aetas (golden age) of which the ancients
had dreamed, as a moneyless utopia at the dawn of time, had become a new and
frightening “age of gold,” characterized by violence and a degree of social stratifi-
cation that was unprecedented even by Roman standards. The humblest servants
of the Roman state now found that they could collect their fees and salaries in
golden solidi. Town councillors extracted as much money as possible from tax-
payers or, failing that, stored and sold for gold the food that they had collected
from the countryside. At the top of society, emperors and senators came to ex-
press their incomes in terms of entire centenaria—­hundred-­pound ingots of pure
gold.44 All categories of the rich and the potential rich were brought together in
one stupendous effort. They drove a primitive system of taxation and markets
to its limits in order to perform, each year, the magic by which mere natural
produce—­the resources of a predominantly agrarian society—­reached them as
revenue, in the form of golden solidi.
    It is perhaps more than a coincidence that Christian preaching on treasure in
heaven should have taken on such a strong imaginative resonance in the cities of
the Mediterranean and on the estates of Christian landowners at this time. For
this was a time when, in the form of the solidus, so much treasure had, indeed,
become available—­charged, as only valuable coin can be, with the hint of infinite

                                         15
                                        chapter 1


possibilities: for (in the words of Jorge Luis Borges, in his chilling story “The
Zahir”) “any coin . . . is . . . a repertory of possible futures . . . money is future time.”45
    Let us follow for a moment the track of gold at the very top of Roman society
in the fourth century.
    In late Roman society, as in all other periods of Roman history, wealth had to
be seen to be believed. And what was seen at the top—­notably, but not exclu-
sively, at Rome—­was expected to border on the incredible. A full decade after
the Gothic sack of Rome, in 410, Olympiodorus, a Greek diplomat, visited Rome.
In his History he described a city bathed in memories of recent glory:
   Each of the great houses of Rome contained within itself . . . everything
   which a medium-­sized city could hold. . . . Many of the Roman households
   received an income of four thousand pounds of gold per year from their
   properties, not including grain, wine and other produce which, if sold,
   would have amounted to one-­third of the income in gold. The income
   of the households at Rome of the second class was one thousand or fifteen
   hundred pounds of gold. When Probus, the son of Olybrius celebrated his
   praetorship [in 423–­25] he spent twelve hundred pounds in gold [on the
   spectacular public games associated with this occasion]. Before the cap-
   ture of Rome [in 410] Symmachus the orator [a pagan senator, whom we
   will have many occasions to meet in upcoming chapters] . . . spent two
   thousand pounds when his son . . . celebrated his praetorship. Maximus,
   one of the wealthy men, spent four thousand pounds on his son’s praetor-
   ship. The praetors celebrated their festive games for [only!] seven days.46
    We should be grateful for this set of numbers. They are some of the few statis-
tics that we possess from the late Roman world. But we must be careful. As with
all other ancient statistics, the credibility of these huge sums hangs on a slender
thread.47 Assuming that the figures originally given by Olympiodorus were not
either grossly exaggerated or garbled by later transmission, we are looking at
persons whom Chris Wickham has rightly described as “the richest private land-
owners of all time.”48
    What mattered to Olympiodorus and his readers were the memorable ex-
penditures on the games incurred by individual senators. For the games placed
the wealth of each family on display. Hence the sums spent by a senator such as
Quintus Aurelius Symmachus amounted to 144,000 gold solidi. This was thirty
times more than any senator of the eastern empire was expected to expend on
games in Constantinople. The incomes of Roman senators were derived from
rents and from the sale of produce. Olympiodorus may have been less precise in
recording them than in recording the costs of the games. They formed the loom-
ing backdrop to the explosions of wealth made visible in vast palaces and in head-
long shows. But, at 288,000 solidi a year, the incomes of major senators of Rome

                                              16
                        wealth in an age of gold


amounted to the equivalent of the tax revenue of an entire province or the cost
of supplying Rome with grain for an entire year.49
    What we know best is the blaze of this wealth, not its sources. It was the blaze
that contemporaries wished to tell us about. Not surprisingly, the moment that
Christian members of the Roman aristocracy began to renounce their family
fortunes, their biographers seized on the opportunity to provide statistics that
were intended to be quite as stunning as those offered by Olympiodorus. For
instance, the young heiress Melania the Younger was remembered as having en-
joyed, around the year 405, an annual income of 120,000 gold solidi (some 1,660
pounds of gold).50 Thirty years later, as an old woman, presiding over a convent
in the Holy Land, Melania told her biographer an eerie story. The inner cham-
bers of her palace, where a part of her wealth had been stored in the form of gold
coins and ingots of pure gold, prior to distribution to the poor, had seemed to
shimmer with an unearthly glow. A thought sent from the Devil crossed her
mind at that moment. How could any kingdom—­even the kingdom of heaven—­
equal such wealth?51
    Contemporaries had no illusions as to the relationship between wealth and
power among such persons. Power was expected to accompany wealth and to
draw yet more wealth to itself in mighty gulps. Writing around 390 ad, Ammia-
nus Marcellinus, the last great pagan historian of Rome, fastened on a larger-­
than-­life figure from the immediate past, Sextus Petronius Probus (who died
around 388):
   Then [in 368] Probus was summoned from Rome to take up the Praeto-
   rian Prefecture—­a man known throughout the Roman world for the bril-
   liance of his family background, for the power of his influence and for the
   sheer extent of his riches, owning estates scattered here and there in every
   part of the empire. Whether these were justly come by or not, it is not for
   the likes of me to judge (non iudicioli est nostri).52
   Not surprisingly, descriptions of the wealthy in the late Roman West have
been tilted in the direction of the super-­rich. Olympiodorus gave his stunning
figures for the incomes and outlays of senators out of frank admiration. He was
delighted to note that so much old-­world splendor had survived in Rome after
the Gothic sack of 410.53 By contrast, the portrait of the rapacity of Probus was
offered by Ammianus Marcellinus as a criticism. Ammianus Marcellinus had his
own ax to grind: he was a pagan and Probus was a leading Christian senator.54
But social historians have tended to put the two accounts together. In so doing,
they have created a memorable stereotype of a corrupt grandee. In the words of
Domenico Vera, Probus (in effect, the Probus of Ammianus Marcellinus, not the
Probus we might know from other sources) has become “both a mythical figure
and, at one and the same time, the Ideal Type of an entire class.”55 What we must

                                        17
                                   chapter 1


now do is proceed down the social ladder, to meet the rich of the provinces. Here
we find persons whose wealth was less spectacular than that of the super-­rich of
Rome. But they were considerably more vigorous than we had once been led to
suppose.


          Salvo Vitale felix Turissa: While Vitalis is alive and well,
                               Turissa prospers

                       The Rich in the Provinces

The tendency to look at only the very top of late Roman society has created a
more than usually tenacious stereotype. It stands in the way of our understand-
ing of late Roman society in the West as a whole. We have allowed ourselves to
assume that fourth-­century society was dominated without exception by a class
of great landowners such as we imagine Petronius Probus to have been. This was
how the great Russian historian Mikhail Rostovtzeff described them, with char-
acteristic vigor and confidence, in the last chapter of his Social and Economic
History of the Roman Empire of 1926:
   Purchase, lease, patronage . . . were all used to make the senatorial class the
   class of large landowners par excellence, and to form vast estates scattered
   all over the provinces and resembling small principalities. Few lived in the
   capital or in the cities. The majority of them built large and beautiful for-
   tified villas in the country and dwelt there, surrounded by their family,
   their slaves, a real retinue of armed clients, and thousands of rural serfs and
   dependents. We are well acquainted with their mode of life from the de-
   scriptions of Ausonius, Paulinus of Pella [and others,] . . . from the numer-
   ous ruins of their villas, and from some mosaics which portrayed on their
   floors the beauty of their châteaux. . . . Thus, more than ever before, society
   was divided into two classes: those who became steadily poorer and more
   destitute, and those who built up their prosperity on the spoils of the ru-
   ined Empire—­real drones, who lived on the toil and travail of other classes.
To give further weight to his words, Rostovtzeff placed on the adjacent page an
illustration of a late Roman mosaic from north Africa. In it, the landowner is
shown riding out, already in “barbaric” hunting costume (with flowing cloak
and embroidered tunic), from a villa that had apparently taken on the aspect of
a walled fortress.56
    It is important to linger on Rostovtzeff ’s view of the great landowners of the
West. For by correcting it, we can measure the progress of late Roman scholarship
since his days.

                                         18
                         wealth in an age of gold


    First: Archaeological surveys in many regions have effectively demolished
what has been called “The Black Legend of the Latifundium.”57 There is little
evidence on the ground for the existence of huge estates “resembling small prin-
cipalities.” Even the greatest villas stood in a landscape dotted with small proper-
ties.58 The work of Domenico Vera has shown that, in many regions, the wealthy
drew a large proportion of their wealth from the rents of innumerable small farms.
The microfundium and not the latifundium was the most prominent feature of
the late Roman countryside.59 Furthermore, there is little evidence that the rural
population became “steadily poorer and more destitute” in the course of the
fourth century.60
    Second: Rostovtzeff spoke of the labor force of the villas as if they were “rural
serfs.” He had in mind the serfs of the middle ages or of his own Russia in mod-
ern times. But this was not necessarily the case. In the fourth century, tenant
farmers were not tied to the land by the Roman government working in collu-
sion with the great landowners, as happened to the peasants of eastern Europe in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The work of Jean-­Michel Carrié has
cast serious doubt on this particular view of the late Roman peasantry. He has
argued that what has come to be called “the late Roman colonate” may not have
been as widespread or as coercive a system as we had thought. It did not turn
peasants into serfs.61
    Ever since Carrié’s groundbreaking studies on the colonate, disagreement
reigns as to whether a system of enforced residence on the estates existed at all
and, if it did, whether it was an empire-­wide institution. What is at stake in this
disagreement is not a purely legal issue. The debate centers on the extent to
which agrarian production in the later empire was based on forced labor and, if
so, on what kind of forced labor. Were landowners guaranteed a stable labor
force through state coercion? Or did they use their own, rough methods to make
sure that their tenants remained in place and that enough workers turned out
every year to take in the harvest?
    It seems that an element of constraint hovered in the background even when
the landowners’ relations with their farmers took the legal form of free contracts
between landlords and tenants. The threat of violence (both physical and through
the calling in of debts) was constantly brought to bear upon the peasantry. For
this reason, the estates of the later empire were brittle structures. The passing of
an army in a civil war or the dislocation caused by a barbarian raid could mean a
loss of control in the countryside. It could be the signal for the massive emigra-
tion of farmers in search of freedom and of better conditions elsewhere. The
peasantry had not been immobilized by law. But the fear of their potential mo-
bility and a wish on the part of the landowners to tie them down was in the air.62
    Altogether, a tense relationship had developed between landowners and their
farmers in many regions. Landowners faced tenants who could not be treated

                                         19
                                    chapter 1


out of hand as “rural serfs.” But nor were these tenants contented little farmers
who paid rent alone to a distant landlord. The fourth-­century scramble for gold
ensured that the rural population was driven as hard as, if not harder than, in any
other period of ancient history. In the words of Andrea Giardina (in a vigorous
defense of the traditional view of the Roman colonate as a coercive institution):
“Productivity and suffering may well go hand in hand.”63
    The crisis of the fifth century put this cruel system to the test. The landowners
of the West, great and small alike, found that they could no longer take their
peasantry for granted. They could no longer rely on a weakened Roman state to
enforce their demands. As a result, landowners had to work harder to retain con-
trol of their labor force in the face of higher levels of violence and dislocation
caused by civil war and barbarian invasions. Many devices—­from the provision
of fortified refuges to the building of churches on the estates—­show a novel con-
cern to strengthen vertical links between peasantry and landowners such as had
not existed in the insouciant days of the fourth-­century age of gold. Those who
strengthened their links to the peasantry on the ground had a better chance of
surviving, while the scattered holdings of absentee members of the super-­rich
(which had depended, to a great extent, on a strong and unified empire) were
easily dismantled.
    Third: Rostovtzeff (and many scholars after him) placed the landowners of
the later empire firmly in the countryside. They believed that the crisis of the
third century had left the cities of the Roman West irrevocably depleted. It was
assumed that the late Roman aristocracy took to the land en masse. It became a
ruralized class, whose power over the land anticipated that of feudal lords of later
times. One of the great excitements of the scholarship of the last half century has
been the realization that, in the fourth and early fifth centuries, no such thing
happened. The landed aristocracy never abandoned the cities. From Britain to
Carthage, their villas were usually placed within easy distance of the towns and
of the Roman roads that led through the towns. Their town houses were quite as
magnificent as their country villas.64 Even the mosaic Rostovtzeff chose to illus-
trate the castle-­like isolation of a fortified villa of the later empire has been con-
vincingly reinterpreted as conveying a diametrically opposite message. The walls
in the background were city walls. The mosaic advertised the landowner’s proud
relationship to his own city; it did not celebrate withdrawal from the city to a
fortified dwelling in the depths of the countryside.65
    Fourth: The stereotype inherited from Rostovtzeff has caused us to imagine
that all late Roman landowners were on the scale of a Petronius Probus or a Me-
lania. They were no such thing. Most were rich town councillors; they were not
members of the super-­rich. None of them, in any region, could think of himself
as the unchallenged lord of the countryside. Each landowner found himself com-
peting with rivals who were usually his equals in provincial society. In most re-

                                          20
                         wealth in an age of gold


gions, they were not overshadowed by great absentee landowners such as Probus
and Melania.
    This can be seen through the archaeology of the villas of the late Roman
West. Some fourth-­century villas—­such as Piazza Armerina in Sicily or Car-
ranque in Spain—­are enormous. They are, as it were, the Petronius Probuses of
villa architecture. Just as Petronius Probus has become notorious for his wealth
and corruption, so these villas have become well-­known for their overpowering
grandeur.66 But they were not the only villas. Many more have been discovered
in Britain, Spain, Gaul, and Italy. They were smaller affairs, often clustered within
short distances of each other. They did not stand out as lonely châteaux, domi-
nating the region as if they were the centers of a medieval seigneurie. Rather,
they were designed to make a splash. As befitted monuments to success, they
were bright and ingeniously built. They radiated a sense of good taste and of lux-
ury enjoyed in a peaceful land. They were not the work of proto-­feudal lords but
the products of a highly competitive class of local, urban aristocrats. The ambi-
tions of such persons were intense, but they were usually limited to the horizons
of their city and their province.67
    And many such landowners did succeed. On the Mediterranean coast of
northeastern Spain, the mosaic of a late Roman villa shows a figure crowned
with a walled crown. Normally such a figure was the emblem of the Good For-
tune of a city. But, in this case, it represented the Good Fortune of the land, in-
tertwined with the good fortune of its owner. The inscription reads:

   Salvo Vitale Felix Turissa.
   (While Vitalis is alive and well, Turissa prospers.)

Vitalis was proved right. Boosted in his own time by the landowner’s careful at-
tention, Turissa still survives today, as Tossa de Mar (Gerona, Spain).68
   But what is significant about this buoyant inscription is that Vitalis of Turissa
was not a member of the super-­rich. Nor, as far as we can see, was he the owner
of a vast latifundium, such as Rostovtzeff ’s peremptory words had long encour-
aged us to imagine him to be. The villa of Turissa was owned by a “little big
man”—­by a provincial landowner, probably drawn from the urban nobility of a
neighboring city on the Mediterranean coast, such as Barcelona.


                      New Elites in a New “Age of Gold”

The case of Vitalis of Turissa makes us realize that, in the later empire, as in
many other periods of ancient history, the great landowners, though spectacular,
never stood alone. They were never the sole masters of their world. In a pertinent

                                         21
                                  chapter 1


critique of the views of many social historians, Walter Scheidel has pointed out
that we have been misled by a “binary tunnel vision.” This presents Roman soci-
ety as brutally divided between the very rich and the very poor, with no inter-
mediary groups. He has rightly insisted that “It is perfectly possible to reconcile
the dominance of a disproportionately affluent elite with the presence of a sub-
stantial middle.”69
    Let us look, for a moment, below the great, toward Scheidel’s “substantial
middle.” We will find, throughout the provinces of the West, a social landscape
densely populated with vivid and resilient figures. In the society of the fourth-­
century West, the future lay not with grandees such as Probus but with land-
owners of the provinces, like Vitalis of Turissa.
    This had happened because of a major reshuffle of the upper classes of the
West. Here the long reign of Constantine (306–­37) proved crucial. As in the days
of the “Roman Revolution” of the emperor Augustus that followed the civil wars
of the Roman Republic, so, in the reign of Constantine, the emperor turned to a
wider social constituency than hitherto to find support for a new style of empire.
Constantine and his successors reached out to the widespread “political nation”
represented by the elites of the town councils in the provinces. Many of the per-
sons recruited and honored by Constantine were not only leaders in their indi-
vidual cities. Their wealth and marriage connections made them leaders of pro-
vincial society as a whole. They were far from being upstarts; many came from
long established families in their region. Their incomes amounted to thousands of
gold coins. They towered above little men such as our Harvester of Mactar. But
they were not members of the super-­rich like Petronius Probus, whose estates
spanned southern Italy, north Africa, and other regions of the Mediterranean
like the branches of a modern “multinational” company. From Constantine on-
ward, the emperors tipped the balance in favor of these provincials by making
membership of the Senate available to them.70
    Provincial aristocrats were joined by imperial servants—­by courtiers, bureau-
crats, and military men. As a result, the traditional Senate of Rome was dwarfed
by an empire-­wide class of newly minted members, all of whom were granted the
senatorial title of vir clarissimus—­“most brilliant man”—­and their wives and
daughters that of femina clarissima. At least two thousand persons at any one
time now settled back into local society with the privilege of senatorial rank. As
a result, hardy relics of the ancien régime, linked by long traditions to the Roman
Senate, fought for honor, power, and riches alongside the barons d’empire created
by a succession of new Napoleons—­by the emperors Constantine, Constantius
II, and Valentinian I.71
    As a result of this new situation, the small group of nobles closely associated
with the Senate of Rome found themselves jostled—­even in Rome itself—­by
an influx of provincials and government servants. The resident nobles of Rome

                                       22
                        wealth in an age of gold


showed great tenacity when faced by this situation. Despite the fact that they
had lived under Christian emperors since the conversion of Constantine in 312
ad, many nobles remained staunch pagans throughout the fourth century. They
were by no means sidelined. Their vast wealth and inherited prestige gave them
access to governmental circles. Petronius Probus was not the only Roman sena-
tor of the fourth century who remained a vigorous political player.72
    In the newly reconstituted elite of the empire, the nobles of Rome repre-
sented Old Money. Many noble families reached back for centuries. They had
also enjoyed centuries of residence in a region of exceptional economic prosper-
ity. We must always remember that southern Italy and north Africa (and not
northern Italy, Gaul, or Spain) were the economic center of gravity of the late
Roman West.73 This was where the Roman families connected with Old Money
were to be found. Yet, despite the advantages such persons still enjoyed, an influx
of new men set the power of the Roman nobility against a backdrop far more
diverse than had existed in previous centuries. The huge wealth of men such as
Probus no longer enabled them to dominate west Roman society as a whole.


                             The Album of Timgad

      Status and Privilege in the Fourth-­C entury West

Economic and social historians still debate the extent and the causes of the ag-
gressive monetarization of the late Roman economy. In these debates, the role of
the late Roman state is central. There are those who think that no preindustrial
empire as cramped by distance and by primitive agrarian methods as that of
Rome could have produced a state apparatus that was capable of galvanizing an
entire economy through its tax demands alone. The fourth-­century Roman state
may not have been as effective as some recent scholars have come to believe that
it had been. Many have argued that, at best, the fourth-­century empire witnessed
a flexing of state power that was unusual but doomed to be short-­lived.74
    These are valid doubts. Yet we cannot deny that the most remarkable feature
of the fourth century was the manner in which the emperors and their court
took center stage in determining the hierarchy of Roman society. Gradations of
wealth also took on a more blatant quality. Those who received imperial privi-
leges stood out above the rest. This new stratification was connected in the pub-
lic mind with access to the mighty solidus, gained in the first instance through
imperial service.
    When he described the effects of the post-­Constantinian gold rush, the writer
of the tract On Military Problems went on to add that adflicta paupertas—­the
resentful state of the newly impoverished—­was responsible for the crime and

                                        23
                                     chapter 1


political instability of his age. His use of the word paupertas should not mislead
us. As with so many other Roman authors, the “poverty” he referred to was not
that of the peasantry or of the urban poor. What was at stake was not poverty: it
was impoverishment—­the impoverishment and loss of power of persons who,
until then, had not considered themselves to be “poor.” The author addressed a
segment of Roman society (in which even members of the traditional Senate
might be included) who resented the fact that they had missed out on the new
age of gold.75 Let us look at how this restructuring of Roman society happened
on the ground, at the level of the cities.
    In 367–­68, an inscription was set up inside the hall of the imposing curia,
the City Hall, of the Numidian city of Thamugadi (modern Timgad in southern
Algeria). The town councillors of the city were listed in order of precedence.
Known to us as the Album of Timgad, it amounted to a social diagram of a pro-
vincial society in the post-­Constantinian empire.76 Ten viri clarissimi (newly cre-
ated senators) stood out at the very top. At least five of these were local men. A
further thirty councillors led the town council of Timgad. They were a true oli-
garchy. They were usually referred to as the principales, the “leading men” of the
city. Then came the rank and file. In Timgad, this consisted of around 150 decu­
riones or curiales.
    These curiales were ordinary town councillors (such as the Harvester of Mac-
tar had become). Though sheathed in the honor of public service, and raised
by that honor alone above the “little farmers” of the countryside and the plebs
of their city, they were the group on which “afflicted poverty” threatened to fall
most heavily. They were held responsible both for the dreary work of local gov-
ernment, linked to the supervision of the life of the city, and for the financially
risky and grim task of collecting the imperial taxes. They were made responsible
for any shortfall in the tax yield of the area controlled by their city. If they failed,
their precious privilege of freedom from torture and the lash could be with-
drawn. Yet, though harassed, this group was far from consisting only of little
men. Some curiales bore family names that reached back, in Timgad, for at least
one and a half centuries.77
    Most interesting of all, a full seventy former members of the town council of
Timgad, though they came from local families, were exempt from service in the
town council. For they had become bureaucrats, serving as officials of the gov-
ernment in Timgad and all over Africa. They now served not the city but the
empire. In this manner, an original group of sixty to seventy families, who had
ruled a city of ten thousand inhabitants and its region for at least two centuries,
had come to be splintered by the new age of gold. The gap between the privileged
and the less privileged groups in the town council was determined by imperial
privileges gained through imperial service. Some were exempted, as a result of


                                          24
                         wealth in an age of gold


this service, from the demands made by their city upon their money and their
time. Others, less fortunate, were “grounded.” They were tied to the narrow ho-
rizons of their hometown. They might be rich, but they had every reason to feel
insecure and resentful in the face of their more successful peers who had sought
out new opportunities as imperial servants.78
   Altogether, this vivid and precise glimpse into a provincial society, provided
by the Album of Timgad and by related inscriptions, places the wealth of the
very rich in perspective. Seen from the ground up, Roman senators—­let alone
men of legendary wealth and influence such as Petronius Probus—­were distant
figures. The people who usually mattered were the landowners, the government
servants, and the holders of imperial privileges in cities such as Timgad, scattered
throughout the Roman West.79


                                  Amici maiores

                          Patronage and Power

This was a social system that put a premium on upward social mobility. Like a
similar, vast, and protocol-­ridden organization (the British Navy in the days of
Scott of the Antarctic), late Roman society was structured in such a way that
“Ambition was not an option . . . but a necessity.”80 For lesser members of the
town council, the only way out of a life of boredom and occasional humiliation
at the hands of the imperial authorities was to escape toward the top, by seeking
wealth, power, and privilege in a new system of honors linked to imperial service.
Hence the crucial importance, in this period, of a very ancient Roman institu-
tion, patrocinium. Recent studies have shown that patronage was as strong as
ever in the later empire and that patronage still wore its ancient, Roman face.81
Patronage was a fact of life. As a Calendar of 354 made plain, a Roman was sup-
posed to note that when the moon was in Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, or Aquarius the
time had come yet again “to ask for a favor, to have a conversation with a man of
power.”82
    Let us look for a moment at the career of one well-­known son of a town
councillor—­Augustine, the future bishop of Hippo. From the early 370s up to
the time of his conversion in 386, Augustine’s career depended at every stage on
the patronage of others. As a young teacher, he was supported by a patron from
his home town of Thagaste, Romanianus. Romanianus gave Augustine financial
support and almost certainly intervened to make him exempt from the duties he
owed to the city of Thagaste as the son of a town councillor.83 It was this exemp-
tion that set Augustine free to rise to the top. He moved from patron to patron


                                        25
                                  chapter 1


as he made his way up, moving ever further from Thagaste. In Rome, in 384, the
patronage of friends from a sectarian group, the Manichees, made him known to
none other than Symmachus, who was a well-­known pagan and senator in the
traditional mold. Chosen to teach at Milan, he may have traveled north with Sym­
machus’s backing.84 A year later, he was at it again. Now he hoped for a governor-
ship through the intervention of amici maiores, “friends in high places,” whose
salutatio—­the daily reception held for clients and petitioners—­he struggled to
attend regularly, despite his heavy workload as a teacher.85
   Augustine’s friend Alypius was no different. Unlike Augustine, who was the
son of a town councillor of modest means, Alypius came from the inner circle of
the elite of Thagaste. But he also followed the same strategies for advancement as
did Augustine. When studying in Carthage, Alypius went out of his way to make
himself known through regular attendance at the salutatio of a senator who re-
sided in Carthage.86 Arrived at Rome, Alypius soon came up against the more
sinister face of patronage. He was working as the legal adviser to a high official:
   There was at that time an extremely powerful senator. Many people were
   kept under his power by bribes or subdued by terror. He wanted as usual
   to use his influence to obtain something which by the laws was unlawful.
   Alypius resisted. A bribe was promised. He scorned it. . . . Threats were
   made. He kicked them away, and everyone was amazed at so exceptional
   a character who neither wished to have a friend nor feared to have as an
   enemy a powerful person . . . who had innumerable methods of either ben-
   efiting or injuring people.87
However, when we next meet Alypius, at Milan in 385, he was out of a job. The
upright young provincial may have picked the wrong senator to offend.
    If there was any traditional Roman mechanism that might have held a frac-
tured elite together, it was the well-­tried mechanism of patronage. We need only
look at the correspondence of the Roman senator Quintus Aurelius Symmachus
to see a major patron at work. One quarter of his letters were ones of recom-
mendation. Through his letters, Symmachus reached out to spin a spider’s web
that led from his palace in Rome to every level of the upper classes of the western
empire. Mauretanian bishops appear alongside Spanish horse breeders; high
courtiers and formidable barbarian generals were addressed on behalf of up-­and-­
coming rhetors and doctors. Symmachus’s letters are a microcosm of a remark-
ably diversified elite.88 But the sheer diversity of the social world that Symma-
chus attempted to cover through his letters was a cause of weakness. In the fourth
century, there were too many patrons, drawn from too many potentially conflict-
ing groups. No single line of patronage could reach from top to bottom to the
advantage of a single, established group. For all too many persons on the make,
all roads no longer led to Rome.

                                        26
                         wealth in an age of gold


                                     Splendor

                      The Éclat of the Local Rich

What was remarkable—­and distinctively late Roman—­about the members of
these differing sections of the wealthy was the extent to which their shared im-
plication in the imperial system imposed on them a rare homogeneity in dress
and styles of living. They stood for a new ordering of society. They were expected
to look the part.
    For instance, the new rich and powerful shared a radically new dress code.
Late Roman dress broke significantly with the classical restraint associated with
traditional Roman clothing. The new clothes of the elites carried into every lo-
cality the values of the court and of the army. Based on military uniforms, they
pointedly elided the distinction between military and civilian, Roman and bar-
barian. A tight, belted tunic, decorated with great panels of woven silk, was worn
over subtly embroidered trousers. A heavy cloak (also bright with colored stripes
and patches) hung over the body, held on the right shoulder with a golden fibula
brooch of barbarian workmanship.
    With this style of costume went a new way of expressing social distance. The
carefully folded Roman toga had to be carried with classical poise. The toga
stressed the supremacy of civilian values even in a society committed to war. It
demonstrated the role of a classical education in producing persons whose self-­
control and poise in public were as delicately balanced as were the sentences of
the ancient authors whose writings they had internalized. The folds of expensive
but simple cloth that hung on their bodies in the form of a toga reflected a simi-
lar unruffled poise.89
    Not so the wearer of the new style of dress. This dress spoke of the energy of
persons stepping into new and strenuous roles. It consisted of contrasted layers.
The tunic and trousers closed in the body, sheathing it in opulent textures. But
the great cloak held in the “bite” of a fibula brooch swung from the shoulder
with a barbaric sweep. It billowed out behind hunters in the chase. It fluttered
around the great as they swept past their clients like ships in full sail, showing
to the outside world “great painted walls” of floating, embroidered silk.90
    Such dress ensured that, in the provinces as in Rome, the rich looked like no-
body else. The dress of upper-­class women was not affected by the specifically
male desire to imitate the barbarian taste of the military. It showed itself, rather,
in spectacular jewelry and in the use of precious textiles—­pendant earrings,
bracelets, necklaces, and heavy golden chains falling over brightly dyed silks and
cloth of gold. Given the restrictions on women’s ability to dispose of property, the
most available form of wealth, for a woman, was the splendor that sheathed her
body. In that sense, women represented disposable wealth at its most alarmingly

                                        27
                                  chapter 1


mobile—­a fact that was not lost on the critics of clergymen who studiously paid
court to Christian matrons. Women carried liquid wealth on their own bodies
and kept it stored in great chests in their own bedrooms. Christian women from
the aristocracy could load a church with silk veils and altar coverings made from
textiles taken from their private wardrobe. A noble woman could finance the
foundation of an entire basilica in the middle of Rome through the sale of her
jewelry alone.91
    Altogether, rich men and women alike were expected to stand out like birds
of paradise in a flock of starlings. Looking at the inventories of the goods of
townsmen in sixth-­century Ravenna, one can see immediately who was poor, by
late Roman standards, and who was rich. Stephanus had a shirt of silk and cotton
in scarlet and bright, leek green, a silk robe of variegated green, linen trousers,
two woven tapestries, and a slave called Proiectus. Guderit, by contrast, was a
freedman. He had one old dyed shirt, one decorated shirt, and an old short coat
of thick material. Guderit was no beggar. He owned a little property and had a
roof over his head in a major Roman city. But he was colorless. He lay on the dim
side of the sharp, late Roman boundary between rich and poor.92
    Yet we must remember that dress and other vibrant signs of wealth were not
seen only as advertising private gains. Luxury and drama served public needs.
From the third century onward, the tendency had been to replace massive public
buildings by splendid ceremonial occasions. Public shows continued when civic
architecture, with its more lasting impact, slackened. From the emperor down-
ward (in his pearl-­studded diadem and purple robes as heavy with religious rev-
erence as church vestments), those who held public power condensed this power
on their own persons. The public appearances of emperors, governors, and city
leaders were mere nanoseconds of display compared with the silent mass of the
classical buildings that former centuries had piled up to show the glory of their
cities. But these high ceremonial occasions were seen as explosions of splendor, of
éclat, that spoke of the majesty of city and empire in a fully public manner that
was intended to leave the onlookers stunned.93
    Last but not least, the signs of wealth in the later empire could be modulated
according to the means of their owners. Late Roman dress was flashy. It was clearly
marked by striking features—­by great embroidered bands and roundels woven
into stretches of heavy material, held in place by the costume jewelry of brooches
and ornamented belts. But, precisely because such costume was so vivid, it could
be reproduced in non-­precious materials. Among the lesser gentry of the prov-
inces, carefully dyed wool and linen substituted for the silk and cloth of gold of
the truly rich.94 In the same manner, in the villas and town houses of provincial
notables, ingenious stucco work, frescoed walls, and carefully laid floor mosaics
imitated the encrusted splendor of gold and marble with which the houses of the
truly rich blazed with unimaginable opulence.95 African ceramics—­masterpieces

                                        28
                         wealth in an age of gold


of a thriving fourth-­century industry—­relayed, in cheap but skillful copies, the
exuberant scenes of classical mythology associated with the silverware of the
great. Ceramic reproductions of plaques in ivory and precious metal echoed, on
the tables of notables in provincial cities, the splendor of high office and the
thrill of the great games associated with the nobility of Rome.96 There was room
for many differing levels of the rich, associated with differing uses of precious
materials. Far from the centers of power, landowners in what is now southern
Portugal might dine in exquisitely constructed halls, decorated by elegant, small
pieces of statuary. But they dined without display. They were content to use local
pottery, carefully molded to echo the sophisticated wares of Africa.97
    What is striking about the local elites of the fourth-­century West was that
they never lost sight of the imperial court. Fragmented and highly factionalized,
local families competed fiercely to display their new wealth. And they did so by
drawing on a common language which, to a surprising degree, was empire wide.
Architectural styles that had been developed in imperial capitals or in vast impe-
rial villas were picked up and circulated throughout the provinces, often skillfully
miniaturized to suit the pockets of local clients. Such borrowings brought a touch
of “imperial” solemnity and architectural sophistication to town houses and
country villas, some of which were no more than expanded farmhouses.98
    This was true down to the most humble details and in the most distant regions.
In Britain, an empress could appear in the form of a pepper pot on the table of a
Roman military man (whose buried utentsils and hoard of coins were discovered
at Hoxne in East Anglia). She was made of light silver, rendered solemn and opu-
lent by having her diadem and jewelry highlighted by a thin wash of gold.99
    Indeed, it is in southern Britain that we can best appreciate the reach of em-
pire in the fourth-­century world. In a major villa at Woodchester, fifteen miles
west of Cirencester, an exquisite piece of mythological sculpture has been found.
It stood near a large mosaic of Orpheus, in a palatial hall.100 Woodchester villa
may have been the official residence of the governor of the province of west Brit-
ain. The province stretched from the Cotswolds across the Severn valley to the
barely Romanized mountains of Wales. Thus, the governor’s mansion at Wood-
chester lay on the farthest edge of the late Roman social order set in place by
Constantine. Yet the marble statue in refined classical style that was discovered
in the villa came all the way from the eastern Mediterranean. It may even have
been produced by a workshop set up by the emperor Theodosius I in Constanti-
nople in the years after 380.101 If this is the case, then the statue at Woodchester
villa provides an extraordinary instant photograph of the speed with which pre-
cious objects followed those engaged in governmental service from one end of
the empire to the other.
    The glory of a villa such as Woodchester is all the more poignant because we
know that it had not many years to go. Within half a century, Britain would no

                                        29
                                   chapter 1


longer be part of the Roman empire. After 410 the Roman imperial government
withdrew, and the sharp, state-­created hierarchies of the fourth century vanished
in a swift and brutal flattening out of post-­imperial British society.102 In conti-
nental Europe, the crisis of imperial authority associated with the barbarian in-
vasions of the fifth century brought the age of gold to an end, if in a less dramatic
and irrevocable manner than in Britain. In the later part of this book, from the
420s onward, we will enter a different, less buoyant age. For what happened in
the fifth century was a replay of the crisis of the third century from which, how-
ever, no restored empire would emerge.
    But this is to anticipate. So drastic a development could not have been fore-
seen in the mid-­fourth century, when our story begins. At that time, the message
from on high was plain: in their dress, in the elaborate décor of their homes, even
in the tableware and in the precious objets d’art that linked them to persons and
ceremonials associated with the very summits of wealth and power, the rich were
different from everybody else—­and they were different because they were, all of
them in differing ways, implicated in the workings of a mighty empire.
    And so, as we have seen, the fourth-­century age of gold was also an age of
empire. It was this combination of large disposable incomes reckoned in gold
coins with imperial privileges gained through imperial service or through impe-
rial favor that gave a distinctive flavor to the wealth of the wealthy. It is against
this background that we should now turn to examine the position in fourth-­
century society of the most novel (and, certainly, the most unexpected) group of
all to receive the privileges Constantine had offered so lavishly to his supporters.
Let us look at the leaders of the Christian churches and their congregations to
whom Constantine decided to grant both peace and privilege as a result of his
famed conversion to Christianity in 312 ad.




                                        30
                           Chapter 2
                           •••••
                                 Mediocritas
The Social Profile of the Latin Church, 312–­ca. 370




                               A Transitional Age

This chapter is about the Christianity of the Roman West in the period roughly
between the conversion of Constantine in 312 and the election of Ambrose as
bishop of Milan in 374. It is not easy to approach this period, as it is a tantaliz-
ingly transitional age.
   By contrast, we are used to the more brilliant—­indeed, more strident—­Latin
Christianity of the late fourth and early fifth centuries. This was the age of Am-
brose, Jerome, Augustine, and Paulinus of Nola. It has been aptly characterized
by Sir Ronald Syme as the last (and in many ways the richest) of the “three clas-
sical epochs” of Latin literature.1 In that age, Latin Christianity was caught, for
the first time in its history, in the arc light of an abundant literature. For this
reason alone, the brilliant period between 370 and 430 will form the heart of
this book.
   To approach the age that preceded it is like stepping out of bright sunlight
into the shade of a catacomb. We have to adjust our eyes to an unaccustomed
dimness. Yet, like many apparently dim ages, the sixty years that fell between the
conversion of Constantine and the election of Ambrose set the stage for the
shimmering epoch that succeeded them. It is important to go back to that earlier
time in order to understand the low-­profile but tenacious Christianity that gave
way to the more assertive religion that emerged after 370 ad.
   This chapter, therefore, will lead up to a decisive change in the tone and pace
of Latin Christianity. It will show that the distinctive features of the period be-
tween 312 and 370 derived, in large part, from a strange paradox. The first Chris-
tian emperor thrust the bishops and clergy of the Christian church forward as
a privileged body. But, at the same time, he denied them any purchase on the
upper reaches of west Roman society. Having looked at the consequences of

                                        31
                                    chapter 2


Constantine’s policies, the chapter will then examine the social composition of
the churches in the first half of the fourth century. It will conclude with a brief
sketch of the social tone of the Christian communities at the moment when,
slowly but surely, these communities came to be joined by representatives of the
wealthy classes. It was the gathering pace of the entry of the rich into the Chris-
tian churches in the period after 370—­and not the conversion of Constantine
in 312—­that marks the true beginning of the triumphant Catholicism of the
Middle Ages.


          Seu gentilis seu christianus quaecumque: Whether a pagan
                or a Christian, whoever [he or she] might be

                    Christianity in a Pagan World

In order to understand the situation of the Latin churches at the beginning of
our period, we must tackle (inevitably briefly in the compass of one chapter) two
of the most intractable problems that beset any historian of late antiquity. We
must come to some conclusion about the nature and the implications of the
conversion of Constantine in 312.2 Then we must confront the equally daunting
prospect of establishing the social niche in which the Christianity in the Latin
world of the first half of the fourth century had developed.
    The two themes are interrelated. For what we think of the aims of Constan-
tine and of the role he intended the Christian churches to play in Roman society
affects what we think of the social texture of the Latin Christian communities
and of the pace and the impact of the entry of the rich into the Christian churches
at this time and in subsequent generations.
    Let us begin with the paradox inherent in the conversion of Constantine in
312. In converting to Christianity, Constantine set himself aims that were con-
siderably narrower than we might at first expect from a decision whose conse-
quences were to prove so momentous for the history of Europe and the Middle
East. Though the first Christian emperor has been the subject of intense study, it
is still difficult to discover his intentions at the time and, above all, to determine
the extent of his ambition on behalf of the Christian faith. A few general remarks
(offered with due hesitancy, given the highly complex and contested nature of the
field) might help clear the ground.3
    Constantine did not act out of political calculation. He did not perceive that
Christianity was on the way to becoming a majority religion in any part of his
empire—­not even in the more densely Christianized East and certainly not in the
Latin West, where Christianity seems to have made considerably less progress.4
If Constantine intuited Christianity as the wave of the future, it was not in terms

                                         32
                   the social profile of the church


of the observed expansion of the Christian communities.5 Rather, in the austere
words of James Bury, Constantine’s conversion had been “the most audacious act
ever committed by an autocrat in defiance of the vast majority of his subjects.”6
    If Constantine calculated, he did so in supernatural terms in an age that took
the choice of supernatural protectors seriously. His conversion to Christianity
was an act of supreme willfulness, such as only a charismatic Roman emperor
could have undertaken. He put himself under the protection of the Christian
God, and in so doing, he deliberately chose a God as big and as new as himself.
He chose an all-­powerful and transcendent deity who owed nothing to the past.
The Christian God and those who worshiped Him had no need of other, smaller
gods. Constantine hoped that this God would protect both himself and his em-
pire as effectively as He seemed to have protected His church and His people,
the Christians, in times of persecution.7
    In return for this protection, Constantine rewarded the Christian clergy with
appropriate privileges. For it was they (and not the average Christian) who were
the ritual experts. They knew best how to conduct “the worship of the Most
High God.”8 Furthermore, in order to enjoy the continued protection of his new
God, Constantine was prepared to devote great pains to keeping the worship of
that God immune from error and division. From 312 to his death in 337, Con-
stantine, and then his son, Constantius II (337–­61), patrolled the Christian
episcopate ceaselessly to make sure that the worship they offered to God was cor-
rect and pleasing to Him.9
    But that was almost all that Constantine was prepared to do. The non-­Christian
subjects of his empire were left largely to themselves; the Roman West remained
a predominantly pagan world. The eastern provinces of the empire, reorganized
around Constantine’s personal foundation—­the city of Constantinople—­were
the laboratory in which he and his successors were encouraged by Christian en-
thusiasts to carry out the grandiose experiment of a fully Christian empire. But
what might have begun to seem possible to Christians in Constantinople and
the Levant was still beyond the bounds of the imagination in Rome and the west-
ern provinces.
    To understand this apparent shortfall in the long-­term aims of Constantine,
we must be clear about the horizons of the possible that were envisioned by
Christians themselves in the early fourth-­century West. Constantine certainly
thought of himself as a Christian. But he was not a Christian of the middle ages,
nor was he even a Christian of the late fourth century. It was enough for him that
the Christian God should be recognized, that Christians should no longer be
persecuted, and, above all, that the Christian clergy should be privileged and
protected.
    Christians of the age of Constantine appear to have accepted this narrow
estimate of the limits of the possible. If they looked to the future, they did not

                                        33
                                    chapter 2


envision the emergence of Christianity as a majority religion. They had always
claimed that Christianity was a “universal” religion, but by universal they meant
that anyone anywhere could become a Christian. They were proud of the fact
that Christians could be found everywhere. But this did not mean that they ex-
pected that everyone everywhere would become a Christian. As Claire Sotinel
has put it: Christians of that time could imagine “Christianity as present in all
parts of a [social] universe, but not a social universe that was entirely Chris-
tian.”10 That awareness only came later. But it did come. Ninety years after the
conversion of Constantine, Christian Latin preachers found that they could
propose a “majoritarian” rather than a merely universal brand of Christianity.
Preaching at Boseth, a small town in Africa, in 404, Augustine of Hippo claimed
that
   All are astonished to see the entire human race converging on the Cruci-
   fied, from emperors down to beggars in their rags . . . persons of every rank
   have already come, of every level of income and of every form of wealth. It
   is high time for all and sundry to be inside the Church.11
But this was the voice of a strident new age. No such voice was to be heard in the
age of Constantine.
    Altogether, we are dealing with what Paul Veyne has recently called a bipolar
society.12 The Roman empire was not a “Christian empire” but one in which the
religion of the new Christian God had unexpectedly become prominent. But it
was also an empire where Christians expected (and were expected by others) to
remain no more than a privileged minority.
    Vivid evidence from Britain shows what it was like to live in such a bipolar
society. Some time in fourth-­century Britain, Annianus, son of Matutina, had a
purse of six silver pieces stolen from him. He placed a leaden curse tablet in the
sacred spring of Sulis Minerva at Bath in order to bring the miscreant to the
attention of the goddess. On this tablet, the traditional list of antithetical cate-
gories that would constitute an exhaustive description of all possible suspects—­
“whether man or woman, boy or girl, slave or free”—­begins with a new antithesis:
seu gentilis seu christianus quaecumque, “whether a gentile or a Christian, whom-
soever.” As Roger Tomlin, the alert editor of the tablets, has observed, “it is tempt-
ing to think that a novel gentilis/christianus pair was added as a tribute to the
universal power of Sulis.”13
    At the shrine of Sulis Minerva at Bath in the fourth century, “Christianiza-
tion” meant little more than knowledge of yet another worldwide category of
persons whose deeds were open to the eye of an effective goddess of the post-­
Constantinian age. It is a glimpse of Christians set in a landscape still crowded
with other gods.


                                         34
                    the social profile of the church


       “Our State is sustained more by religion than by official duties,
                           physical toil, and sweat”

                       Christianity and Privilege

This situation goes some way toward explaining the uncertain public profile of
Latin Christianity up to at least the 370s. It was a privileged religion. But its lead-
ers were by no means socially dominant. They lacked the raw muscle of wealth
and inherited status that distinguished the traditional leaders of late Roman
society.
    From 313 onward, Constantine granted to bishops and clergymen the same
privileges that had always been accorded by Roman emperors to those who fur-
thered the cultural and religious ends of Roman society. The Christian clergy
merely joined a long list of privileged persons, which already included pagan
priests (whose exemptions Constantine maintained), professors, doctors, and
the leaders of Jewish synagogues.14 These privileges consisted of exemption from
many forms of public service and even (but more grudgingly) from certain forms
of personal taxation.15
    What was at stake in these privileges was not mere monetary advantage; it
was the precious commodity of leisure. As we have seen, the Roman empire had
always been a “minimal state.” It worked through delegating as many tasks of
government as possible to local authorities—­especially to the town councillors
(the curiales) and to the trade associations (the collegia and the corpora) in the
cities.16 These duties varied widely from building roads and city walls to collect-
ing firewood for the public baths and driving herds of horses for delivery to the
Roman cavalry, to mention only a few. Imperial demands for labor bit into the
time of town councillors—­and even, for the average townsman (who was subject
to corvée labor), into their own bodies—­quite as deeply as the imperial taxes bit
into their pockets.
    To receive exemption from such duties was to step into an altogether enviable
oasis of leisure. This was the precious leisure Constantine went out of his way to
ensure that every Christian bishop and Christian priest would enjoy so that they
could devote themselves wholeheartedly to the worship of their God. In the
words of a law issued by Constantius II, the pious son of Constantine, in 361, the
exemptions given to bishops and clergymen had been granted because “our State
is sustained more by religion than by official duties, physical toil and sweat.”17
    It was not a popular ruling. Members of the Christian clergy who claimed
exemptions were instantly challenged by their fellow townsmen. This is not sur-
prising. Curiales and collegiati had always looked with hard eyes on shirkers who
claimed exemptions of any sort. For taxes and tasks were allotted to groups. The


                                          35
                                   chapter 2


more members each group lost through some of their number receiving personal
exemptions, the more “official duties, physical toil and sweat” would be left to
be borne by the few who remained. We are dealing with a zero-­sum situation of
the nastiest sort. We know of Constantine’s privileges for the clergy through
edicts that show that they were frequently challenged and frequently needed to
be defined and reasserted.
    Yet despite the alarm and jealousy caused by Constantine’s grants of exemp-
tions to bishops and clergymen, a strict ceiling was placed on them. First things
came first. Except for a few years at the end of the reign of Constantius II, neither
the Christian bishops and clergy nor their churches were ever granted exemption
from the land tax, which was the principal tax of the empire.18
    Hence a paradox. These privileges contributed greatly to the social status of
the clergy. But, in themselves, they did not place Christian bishops and clergy-
men anywhere near the top of Roman society. Put briefly: the clergy became
distinguished because they were privileged. By contrast, most leaders of local
society in the senatorial or curial class had gained their privileges because they
were already distinguished. Many had been substantial landowners before they
were folded into the imperial system of honors fostered by Constantine. This was
not so with the Christian clergy. Of all the “new men” thrown up by this age of
change, the Christian clergy were by far the newest. As a result, around 350, the
Christian church stuck out somewhat awkwardly in the Latin world, like a skel-
eton on which the flesh and sinews of real social power had not yet grown.
    This was in no small part due to the fact that the Christian clergy still stood
at the head of an invisible class. They were the leaders of religious communities
that had grown up in the interstices between rich and poor in the cities of the
Roman world. It is to these low-­profile persons that we must now turn.


                                    Mediocritas

                       Christianity and the Plebs

As long ago as 1958, in a lecture given at the Warburg Institute in London
A.H.M. Jones, the great social historian of the later Roman empire, suggested
that “the main strength of Christianity lay in the lower and middle classes of the
towns, the manual workers and clerks, the shop keepers and merchants.”19 Though
delivered in passing and in a somewhat impressionistic manner, all subsequent
research (especially that conducted on the social origins of the clergy) has proved
Jones’s insight to be substantially correct.20
   What is more difficult to assess is how such persons of the “lower and middle
classes of the towns” fit into the society of the fourth century. It is here that

                                         36
                   the social profile of the church


significant changes in scholarly opinion have taken place. It used to be widely
believed that the principal characteristic of the late Roman cities had been a
drastic polarization between the wealthy few and a deeply impoverished major-
ity. The rich life of the trade associations (the collegia) of classical Roman times
was said to have vanished in the crisis of the third century. Scholars assumed
that by the year 300, the “middle” had been well and truly taken out of the
Roman city.
    But the recent, careful work of Jean-­Michel Carrié has made clear that the
members of the collegia continued to play a significant role in the organization
and social life of every late Roman town.21 Far from having withered away, they
continued in much the same way as they had done in classical times. They were
organized by the government so as to provide reserves of labor and money, but
the collegiati never became mere cogs in a fiscal machine. They feasted together,
marched together in civic processions, and continued to bury their members in
common burial grounds irrespective of religious affiliation.22
    It was precisely among such persons that the Christian congregations had de-
veloped. To appreciate this, we need only go out to the catacombs of Rome. For
those who like to imagine Christianity as a religion of the humble and oppressed,
these catacombs come as a surprise. Despite their romantic modern associations,
only small sections of them go back to the days of the persecuted church. Most
of what has survived dates from after the conversion of Constantine. What the
Roman catacombs reveal is not a world of the oppressed but the exuberant and
socially differentiated urban society in which the Christians of the fourth cen-
tury participated fully.
    In the galleries of the catacombs we find the tomb inscriptions of men and
women whose livelihood derived from the needs of the rich in a great city known
for its luxuries and for its games.23 Unlike the great marble sarcophagi of the
truly rich, the simple plaques that covered graves carved into the tufa rock were
not luxurious. In the words of one such plaque, these tombs were created de
parbula mediocritatem [sic]—­“from the humble means” of their owners.24 The
plaques refer to artisans, tradesmen, and minor officials. We meet women as
weavers of silk. We meet men as makers of mirrors. We meet barbers with their
instruments. We meet grooms leading fine horses.25 Most surprising of all, in a
Christian cemetery, we meet a comic pantomime artist, Vitalis:

   O death, what shall I do with you . . .
   You know nothing of merriment.
   You do not appreciate jokes.
   But from these jokes I won out.
   I became known through the whole world.
   From these I gained a handsome house and income.26

                                        37
                                    chapter 2


Medieval pilgrim-­monks were puzzled to discover this fourth-­century fragment
of Cockney cheerfulness close to the church of San Sebastiano on the Appian
Way outside Rome. They opined that Vitalis was “the son of Cato, a great Court
Jester of his time.”
    Rome, as a vast metropolis, might be considered an exception. But the Chris-
tian sarcophagi of a small provincial city, Salona (modern Solin, a little to the
north of Split on the Dalmatian coast of Croatia), show a similar grouping of
minor officials and tradesmen. Sarcophagi were not cheap: they were sold for
ten to fifteen solidi, the equivalent of a quarter to a third of a year’s salary for a
teacher of Latin grammar.27 Those who owned such sarcophagi must have stood
at the top of the little pyramids formed by the trade associations to which they
belonged—­engravers, glassmakers, candlestick makers, traders, lawyers, and mem-
bers of government bureaus.28 Many must have been employers rather than mere
workmen.29 But they were there. They had not vanished in the crisis of the third
century.
    People such as these provided the local Christian communities with their
clergy. We know of this because of one of the fiercest zero-­sum conflicts of all to
be fought out in the cities on the issue of “official duties, toil and sweat.” Town
councillors had never been a closed caste. They constantly reached out to recruit
richer members of the plebs so as to increase the number of persons who could
share the collective burden of taxes and other duties. All over the empire, town
councils were on the lookout for wealthy plebeians (farmers or townsmen) who
had been caught in an updraft of financial success. Their income exposed such
persons to forced co-­optation into their local town council. Though this promo-
tion might be a cause for self-­congratulation (as we saw in the case of the Har-
vester of Mactar), it was also a bid on the part of the town council to mobilize
every possessor of wealth in the area to perform the gray tasks of taxation and of
maintaining law and order.30
    But the town councils were not the only group interested in rich plebeians.
Christian communities also turned to them to act as clergymen. Like their bish-
ops, many clergymen sought ordination so as to avoid civic duties.31 Yet ordina-
tion was never simply a tax dodge. It was a recognition of a person’s standing
within the Christian community. Rich plebeians were the natural leaders of a
congregation that consisted largely of the sections of the plebs who were inte-
grated into trade associations. As late as the 420s, Augustine wrote that in the
cities of Africa, when the collegiati suffered, the clergy also suffered. In more
comfortable times, the collegia were prepared to let go of a few of their members
so as to serve in the local church. This permission was not forthcoming when
taxes and civic corvées became heavy.32
    Altogether, the social niche of the Christian congregations of the earlier part
of the fourth century seems to have consisted largely of moderately well-­to-­do

                                         38
                   the social profile of the church


townsfolk. They did not think of themselves as rich. But they were by no means
paupers.33 Indeed, their cheery comfort shocked the bishop of Barcelona; around
380, he tried to preach to his congregation on the need for penance and self-­
abasement in the Lenten season. As they told their bishop:

   It is good that we are middling persons [mediocres]. It is not for us to live
   in houses sheathed with marble, to be weighed down with gold, in flowing
   silks and bright scarlet. But all the same we have our little places in gardens
   and by the sea-­side. We have good quality wine, neat little banquets and all
   that goes with a sprightly old age.34


                      De Dei dono: From the gift of God

      Christian Giving and the Wealth of the Churches

Mediocris is an open-­ended term. The bishop of Barcelona did not necessarily use
it only in reference to plebeians. It applied as well to minor landowners and to
lesser members of the town councils. But the word pointed toward a contrast.
It referred to a world beneath the rich whose complexity and resilience we have
tended to underestimate. In order to appreciate the resources of this world, we
should go to Aquileia, northeast of Venice, now lying some miles inland from
the head of the Adriatic. For a modern visitor to Aquileia, the great mosaic floor
unearthed beneath the medieval basilica is an astonishing, silent testimony to
a long-­lost Christianity. This mosaic covered the floor of a substantial basilica
(56 feet wide by 122 feet long) that had been built by bishop Theodorus, prob-
ably soon after the conversion of Constantine.35
    At the top of the main nave, a mosaic inscription on a circular disk summed
up Theodorus’s achievement as bishop of Aquileia:

   O happy Theodorus, with the help of Almighty God and the help of the
   flock given to you by heaven you have blessedly accomplished and glori-
   ously dedicated all these things.36

   The mosaics in the middle of the nave made plain what the inscription
meant. Wealth had flowed into the church. Octagonal panels of mosaic showed
chubby servants in late Roman dress as they gathered the good things of the
earth. Their busy activity evoked the many scenes of bucolic, innocent prosper-
ity that were placed on the mosaics of contemporary villas. At the center, a
winged Victory, with a laurel crown on her head and a palm in her hand, stood
above two full baskets. These were the “first fruits” offered by the laity to the
church.

                                         39
                                  chapter 2


    Further down the nave, eight bust-­length mosaic portraits made clear who
the members of this flock might be. They show three generations of men and
women with dress that indicated (or at least aspired to emulate) senatorial status.
There could hardly have been a more clear celebration of the generosity and rela-
tively high social status of “the flock given [to Theodorus] by heaven.”37
    The pavement (and, one suspects, the entire building) had been funded by lay
donors working in collaboration with their bishop. The floor mosaic alone would
have cost at least four hundred golden solidi to lay down. This was a small outlay
compared with the vast wealth of a senator, but it was not an inconsiderable sum.
It was the equivalent of the annual income of eighty poor families, or of the
combined yearly salaries of ten teachers of Latin grammar.
    Thus, at the very beginning of the Christian empire, the church of a major
port city such as Aquileia (the fourth-­century “Queen of the Adriatic”) was al-
ready surprisingly rich. The economic position of Aquileia may account for the
presence of so much wealth, but it does not account for the manner in which
this wealth was acquired and used. We are dealing with polyfocal wealth. It was
wealth pointedly divided between the bishop and a local lay elite, some of whom
were of considerably higher status than the clergy and the average members of
the congregation.
    For the laity, to give to the church in this manner was a pious act. Another
mosaic inscription, which may have been laid down at the same time in an ad-
joining part of bishop Theodorus’s basilica, showed that a single person, Janu-
arius, had given an impressive donation of 880 feet of mosaic (861 square feet,
which cost around fifty solidi). He did so de Dei dono: “from the gift of God.”38
This succinct phrase echoed the solemn prayer of King David, when he endowed
the first temple of Jerusalem: For all things come from Thee, and of Thine own have
we given Thee (1 Chron. 29:14).
    This was a votive formula shared by Jews and Christians. It also occurred in
Jewish synagogues, such as that at Aphrodisias in Caria (in modern southwest-
ern Turkey)39 and—­if at a later time—­at Sardis.40 As in the synagogue, wealthy
Christian donors claimed that by contributing to the church, they were giving
back to God a little of the wealth He had showered upon them.
    Yet despite the wealth of many of its members, the church of Aquileia re-
mained the center of a surprisingly low-­profile Christian community. As Claire
Sotinel has pointed out in a decisive recent study of late Roman Aquileia, there
is a significant hiatus between the precociously opulent basilica of bishop The-
odorus, perched on the riverside within full view of the port, and the “timid
Christianity” of the city as a whole. We are dealing with a rich Christian commu-
nity. But it was not a church prepared to take over the high ground of Aquileian
society.41


                                        40
                   the social profile of the church


    Christians were not alone in maintaining a prosperous but essentially low-­
profile existence. In the fourth century and later, Jewish synagogues throughout
the empire thrived in exactly the same manner.42 Church and synagogue alike
provided a space where the moderately rich could shine through pious dona-
tions. In the inscriptions on the pavements of both churches and synagogues we
can look below the stunning expenditures still offered by the truly rich to their
hometowns as a whole (which we will describe in chapter 3). Instead, we meet a
more unassuming form of giving, practiced by a class that usually hovers on the
edge of invisibility. In religious buildings, such as churches and synagogues, do-
nors gave gifts to their community. But when they gave, they made clear that
they gave also—­indeed, primarily—­to God. In 244–­45 the leaders of the Jewish
community at Dura Europos (on the Euphrates in modern Syria) placed their
names on a row of tiles on the ceiling of their great, newly frescoed synagogue.
Over twenty feet above the floor, they could barely be read by the congregation.
Rather, these inscriptions were intended for the eyes of God alone. On them, the
builders announced that they had brought their work to completion, “with their
money . . . and in the eager desire of their hearts.” In this phrase, they echoed the
prophet Isaiah: The desire of our soul is to Thy Name, and to the remembrance of
Thee (Isa. 26:8).43
    Altogether, in churches and in synagogues, panels of mosaic and inscriptions
dedicated by relatively small men and women were the common coin of a new
style of beneficence, proudly displayed within the walls of holy buildings. The
church of Theodorus at Aquileia is an early example of what later became wide-
spread. When more wealth became available to the churches, around 400, the
“polyfocal” habit of giving remained and flowered. From Brescia to Ljubljana,
from Aquileia to Florence, mosaic pavements made up of panels contributed by
individual donors or by their families became regular features of the churches.44
    In terms of the overall expense of building the church itself (which might
have cost as much as two thousand solidi), mosaic panels on the floor were a
small item.45 As pavements are usually all that survive, we do not know whether
the rest of the church was also paid for by individual contributions; whether the
bishop paid for the rest out of church funds; or whether he relied on a single rich
patron or group of rich patrons. What matters is the message these mosaics com-
municated. Individual members of the congregation—­laity and clergy alike—­
went on record as fully paid-­up contributors to their local church. They did so
“with glory and rejoicing.”46
    Compared with the vast sums lavished by Roman aristocrats on their palaces
and shows, all this was small change. But the gifts offered by the faithful were
frequent, and the habit of pious giving was extraordinarily widespread. In the
little city of Durobrivae (Water Newton, on the edge of the Fens), the prosperity


                                        41
                                   chapter 2


of the Christian community may have been related to the neighboring iron mines.
The church boasted an impressive silver Eucharistic chalice, given by a pious
donor—­“Dependent on Thee, I honor Thy holy altar.” The church also con-
tained a collection of thin silver leaves, each marked with the XP Christogram.
These leaves were similar to those offered, as ex-­votos, in pagan temples in Brit-
ain. Even in the transitional generations that followed the conversion of Con-
stantine, this steady pattern of pious giving had begun to impart solidity and a
touch of splendor to churches even in a little town such as Durobrivae, which lay
at the far edge of the Latin West.47
    It is important to note the connection of many of these acts of Christian giv-
ing with the Eucharist. At this time, the Eucharistic liturgy was the most stable
condensation of the ideal of offerings made to God that would be blessed by
Him and then redistributed to the faithful. The paradigm of the Eucharist en-
sured that different forms of giving in the churches were treated as equally im-
portant. Giving panels of mosaic to the church was a holy action; it was just as
much a gift to God as was giving alms to the poor. We moderns might see a dif-
ference between Christian charity to the poor and Christian support for the in-
frastructure of their local churches. Fourth-­century Christians seldom made this
distinction; all pious gifts were treated as equally significant. All were offerings
made to God from the good things that He had given to humankind. All were
thought of as springing from a single paradigm of giving—­first to God and then
to one’s fellows—­that was summed up in the solemn offering of the Eucharist.48


                                     Operatio

   Giving in the Churches, from Cyprian to Constantine

Mosaic pavements showed Christian donors in action as supporters of their local
churches. They could not show the other side of Christian giving—­the poor who
gathered to receive alms in the church, at the church door, or at the houses of the
faithful. Yet almsgiving also was an integral part of Christian practice. Long
before the conversion of Constantine, the Christian care of the poor had been
impressive.49 In the works of bishop Cyprian of Carthage (248–­58) operatio—­
giving alms to all categories of persons in distress—­was a key word. For Cyprian,
operatio was the secret of the “vigor” of the church. It showed that the Spirit of
God was at work in the community.50 Pious giving was never a random expres-
sion of compassion. The leaders of the churches were careful to steer it toward
a clear purpose. Pious giving was mobilized to maintain the resilience of the
churches in times of persecution—­to support those put in prison by the authori-
ties and to provide shelter for refugees from other cities. Poorer members of the

                                        42
                   the social profile of the church


congregation who had stood firm at a time when others had lapsed were re-
warded by being singled out to be the recipients of alms raised by collections
among the faithful.51
    A bishop such as Cyprian was also aware that the flow of alms helped bridge
social fissures within the Christian community. After Rome, Carthage was the
wealthiest city of the western Mediterranean. Ever since the days of Tertullian
in the early third century, its Christian community had included some rich and
well-­placed persons.52 A bishop of frankly “absolutist” temperament, Cyprian
was determined to rule these rich members as effectively as he ruled all other
members of his flock.53 He did so by insisting that the rich should spend their
money on the church that he himself headed and on no other. He urged rich
virgins to let only the poor “feel the weight” of their wealth. They were not to use
their money outside his church. Still less were they to use their money to patron-
ize rivals to Cyprian within the church by funding individual clergymen.54 He
also insisted that those who had lapsed in times of persecution should do pen-
ance in his church. This meant, in practice, that they should expiate their sins
through generous alms to Cyprian’s poor alone.55
    Cyprian’s view of almsgiving had been fiercely inward looking. Christians were
to support Christians; there was little or no outreach to the non-­Christian poor.
Yet precisely because of his fierce emphasis on solidarity, Cyprian had been able to
mobilize a remarkable amount of money. On one occasion, he gathered through
donations from the faithful one hundred thousand sesterces to ransom fellow
Christians captured in a raid by Berber tribesmen.56 This was the equivalent of a
month’s salary of three thousand workmen (or half the yearly salary of an impe-
rial secretary). His letters were full of such movements of funds. They provide
“practical evidence of the church constituting a society within a society.”57
    Cyprian was not alone in this. Rome was the richest church in the Latin West.
By 251, its bishop claimed to be able to support 1,500 widows and distressed
persons—­a body of persons as large as the largest of the artisan associations of
the city.58


      “For the wealthy must support their duties to the secular world”

   Privilege and the Care of the Poor after Constantine

Thus when Constantine turned to Christianity what he saw were not only the
worshipers of an all-­powerful God but a community of pious givers to the poor.
It was precisely this aspect of the Christian churches that enabled him and his
successors to add a significant quid pro quo to the privileges they had granted to
the churches. The imperial laws made clear that the bishops and clergy received

                                        43
                                   chapter 2


their privileges not only because they prayed for the empire but also because they
looked after the poor.59
    What was equally obvious, however, was the de haut en bas tone with which
these privileges were granted. The bishops and clergy were privileged precisely
because they were not expected to be the equals of the rich. They were not to
look above themselves, by recruiting members of the curial class. They were not
even allowed to receive wealthy plebeians into the clergy. Instead, their business
was to look downward to the poor. As Constantine explained in an edict issued
in 329: “The wealthy must be there to support the obligations of the secular
world, while the poor are maintained by the wealth of the churches.” In the words
of Rita Lizzi Testa, commenting on this edict, imperial privileges presented the
clergy “as poor and as principally occupied with the poor.”60 This was a view with
which the overwhelming majority of the populations of the Roman West (Chris-
tian as much as non-­Christian) were expected to concur.
    Yet it was a view that was rapidly becoming out of date. At the end of the
century (around 390), the pagan historian Ammianus Marcellinus (to whom we
owe the memorable portrait of the sinister wealth of Petronius Probus) looked
back with calculated disapproval at the novel splendor of some Christian bish-
ops. He sketched a memorable vignette of the contested election by which Da­
masus had become bishop of Rome a generation earlier, in 366. Riots had accom-
panied this election: “In a single day, a hundred and thirty seven corpses of the
slain were found.” The moral of the tale for Ammianus and his readers (Chris-
tian and non-­Christian alike) was that clergymen had got above themselves.
Even at the end of the fourth century, the ideal clergyman was still one whose
role in society had been laid down in the laws of Constantine—­an unobtrusive
figure. Many clergymen, so Ammianus claimed, still exemplified this ideal. Da­
masus and his rival should have
   followed the example of some provincial bishops, whose extreme frugality
   in food and drink, unpretentious attire and downcast eyes commend them
   to the Eternal Deity and His true worshippers as pure persons who know
   their place . . . ut puros et verecundos.61
   It is worthwhile to pay attention to this passage. We do not often see the Chris-
tian clergy described from the outside by a non-­Christian. Ammianus chose his
words carefully. For a Roman, verecundus was a charged word. It summed up the
quintessentially Roman virtue of knowing one’s place. Verecundia was a virtue
of the subelites. Experts such as schoolteachers, grammarians, and doctors were
expected to show verecundia in the presence of their social superiors. For all the
indispensable skills they communicated to their patrons, they remained “social
paupers” compared with the real leaders of society. They were not to be “pushy.”
In Ammianus’s opinion, Christian bishops should be no different. Verecundia,

                                        44
                   the social profile of the church


and no virtue of a more thrusting kind, was what suited the clergy best.62 Clergy-
men had their niche in Roman society; they should stay there.


                        Aula pudoris: A hall of restraint

                The Rich in the Churches, ca. 350 AD

Of all the developments in the history of late Roman Christianity, the entry of
the rich and powerful into the church was, in many ways, the most predictable.
Despite Christian rhetoric of identification with the humble and oppressed, the
Christian communities had never been socially monolithic. They were open at
both ends, both to those considerably poorer than the well-­to-­do plebeians who
made up the bulk of the Christian congregations and to those who were consid-
erably richer and more distinguished. By the year 350, the rich were already there,
waiting in the wings, as it were, to make their presence felt in the churches.
    In 343 the Latin bishops assembled at Serdica (modern Sofia, Bulgaria) ex-
pressed concern that “a rich man or a jurist from the forum or a former adminis-
trator” might be chosen by a congregation as their bishop without having served
in the clergy. Their ruling against “quickie” ordinations of this kind betrayed
the alarm of studiously “mediocre” persons, groomed by long years of service in
a low-­profile institution, at the prospect of being taken over from on top.63 Their
fears were justified. Only a generation later, Ambrose—­a senator and an acting
governor—­would step directly into the bishopric of Milan with no preparation
whatsoever. But what of the rich laity who did not seek clerical office? What sort
of rich were they, and what did they hope to find in the churches? Let us con-
clude by suggesting a few answers to these questions.
    Taking a wide view of the matter, there is nothing surprising about the fact
that rich Christians should appear in increasing numbers as the fourth century
progressed. The”hands-­off ” policy of Constantine with regard to paganism it-
self was flatly contradicted by the social revolution he himself had furthered.
As we saw, this amounted to a restructuring of the traditional elites in such a
way as to ensure that more roads than ever led to the court and fewer to the
traditional centers of social power. Apart from the brief and chilling reign of
the pagan emperor Julian the Apostate (361–­63), the rulers of the Roman world
remained Christian. One should not underestimate the “gentle violence”
brought to bear on upper-­class society by the permanent presence of a Christian
court, even in times when the policies of the emperors (and their choice of pub-
lic servants) tended to remain religion blind. To be close to the court was to be
increasingly surrounded by persons for whom the old religion meant little or
nothing.

                                        45
                                     chapter 2


    The statistical study conducted by Michele Salzman on the religious choices
of the elites of the western empire in the fourth century has provided a socio-
logical chart of the Christianization of the West. Her results agree with common
sense. Salzman found many upper-­class Christians among those whose careers
took them close to the emperor. Many Christians also came from provincial
elites where imperial service and imperial privileges had proved decisive in re-
shaping traditional society. Far fewer conversions to Christianity seem to have
occurred in regions such as Rome, its hinterland, and parts of Africa, where (as
we have seen) old money still ruled and where the traditional classes and their
clients were most solidly entrenched.64
    What we should think of is a map of western Europe where, in large areas of
Britain, Gaul, Spain, and the Balkans, Christianity was confined to the cities and
dwarfed by a largely pagan countryside. In Rome and in large parts of Italy, de-
spite a vivid Christian presence, the old religion remained prominent. Elsewhere
the local elites were as fragmented in their religious loyalties as they were in ev-
erything else. But they were more open to the Christianity of the court because
they were even more dependent on the favor of the emperor than were the no-
bility of Rome.
    A commonsense map of this kind has much to commend it. But it offers a
somewhat flat picture of the religious texture of the Christian churches of the
West to which the upper classes turned. It does not explain what members of the
upper classes (whether they were converts or came from Christian families)
found to be agreeable—­even thrilling—­in the churches themselves. Let us try to
evoke something of the attraction that becoming members of a Christian con-
gregation held for such persons.
    Many Christian writers and thinkers emphasized the fact that it was not easy
to be a Christian. The Christian basilica itself was presented as a sedes iustitiae, an
aula pudoris: “a seat of righteousness . . . a hall of restraint.”65 All classes met in it
to worship a deity who was “implacable on sin”; whose eyes were not “blocked by
stomach walls” but penetrated straight to the heart; and whose commands “left
no room for the dissident will.”66 Thus wrote Lactantius, the African Christian
rhetor and tutor to the son of Constantine. It is an austere and authoritarian
picture, such as one might expect from a person entrusted with the education of
the son of an absolute monarch.
    But the churches were not only presented as places of moral zero tolerance.
They were also seen as places of forgiveness, which implied the breaking of
boundaries. In the tradition of Cyprian, release from the imprisoning bonds of
sin was vividly concretized, on a day-­to-­day basis, by the breaking of social bound-
aries through outreach to the poor. The uncannily unmoved deaths of the mar-
tyrs proved that death, the ultimate boundary, had been erased. Furthermore, the
growing cult of the martyrs was based to a large degree on the previous Christian

                                           46
                   the social profile of the church


conviction that the dead remained close to the living.67 Boundaries between the
rich and the poor, between the living and the dead, between heroic figures (the
martyrs) and the average believer were not abolished. But they were held in deli-
cious suspense in the imagination of fourth-­century Christians. This imaginative
erosion of boundaries contradicted the common sense of the abrasive and com-
partmentalized world around them.
    Taken altogether, the combination of moral rigor with a sense of deliverance
from many of the burdens associated with the normal world ensured that the
Christian churches might be viewed by some as places of relief. In that sense,
Christianity can be seen as having provided the last of a series of “escape hatches”
such as Roman society had always offered to members of the upper classes. As
Seth Schwartz has recently pointed out, countercultural communities of various
kinds had long acted as places of consolation and as safety valves for well-­to-­do
persons who found the pace of life too fast and too expensive—­driven too re-
lentlessly by considerations of honor and reciprocity.68
    The best known of these countercultural communities had been the little
groups of like-­minded souls that had gathered around philosophers in classical
Greece and in early imperial Rome. These groups had allowed harassed or dis­
illusioned members of the elite to experiment with forms of alternative living.
Ideals of friendship, of a shared, disinterested search for wisdom, of relaxed hier-
archy and indifference to money matters were supposed to predominate in such
groups. One should not underestimate the attraction of such groups both in
classical Rome and in late Roman times.
    But philosophical circles had always been small and were limited in their so-
cial outreach. Most were devoted to non-­supernatural therapies. By contrast, the
Christian churches claimed to offer all this on a wider scale in a manner that
joined all classes and took account of heaven as well as earth.69 Indeed, by the
year 350, the Christian churches were already the largest escape hatches that had
ever been opened in the ancient world. Supposedly led by high-­minded, “pure,”
and unpretentious persons—­studiously separated from secular power—­they had
the air of a dignified, morally bracing, and even exciting experiment in counter-
cultural living.
    The Constantinian revolution needed such a counterculture. It had involved
an upheaval of society that resulted in the widespread and abrasive fracturing
and reconstitution of the upper classes. Whether they came into the churches as
winners or losers, the rich Christians of the middle and late fourth century were
largely products of that revolution. They would have found through member-
ship in a Christian congregation the equivalent of a social and moral urban lung.
    If we look carefully, we can see traces of what the churches offered not only in
texts (where these offers might be suspect as being no more than wishful think-
ing) but on the ground. The overall impression given by well-­known Christian

                                        47
                                   chapter 2


artifacts and sites (such as the Roman catacombs and the mosaic pavements of
northern Italy) is of patterns in giving and burial that pointed to what may best
be called an atmosphere of relaxed hierarchy. This was no utopian equality of the
sort that romantic historians of the early church once imagined in the nineteenth
century. Nor are we faced with a revolutionary democracy. But what we do see is
significant. It is late Roman society with a gentler face.
   In a brilliant recent study of the distribution of space and monuments in the
Roman catacombs, John Bodel has pointed to the absence of clear social bound-
aries in the Christian monuments of this time. Social differences were by no
means obliterated. By 350, the catacombs included Christian family vaults with
brilliant paintings and marble inlays, in which great sarcophagi rested. But nei-
ther were these differences insisted on. The Christian vaults were not fenced off
as many pagan mausolea and columbaria had been. The great rows of graves pro-
vided for household dependents in a pagan columbarium, which rose from the
ground like the slots of a dovecote, had been clearly marked off by border stones
and fences, “the traditional boundaries of place in the Roman world.”70 By con-
trast, Christian family vaults were not hemmed in by marks of privacy. One passed
them, like open palaces abutting on a crowded lane, in order to reach the hum-
bler graves that lay all around them. To enter a predominantly Christian cata-
comb was to enter “an alien, somewhat disorientating world,”71 characterized by
   A heterogeneous mixture of persons of different wealth and status [which
   appeared to have] no distinctively unifying beliefs about the representa-
   tion of privilege and rank.72
    The panels on mosaic pavements give the same impression. These panels var-
ied from city to city; some were more frank about hierarchy than were others.
In Vicenza, for instance, there was no mistaking the importance of the votive
mosaic panel laid down by Felix, a vir clarissimus (honorary senator) and his
womenfolk. It was placed in the middle of the church, opposite the door as one
entered.73 But in Verona, by contrast, the three-­hundred-­foot donation of a simi-
lar vir clarissimus, Rufinus, was both off-­center and matched by two other donors
who did not flaunt a title.74
    It was the same with other Christian artifacts. The sarcophagus of Marcia
Romania Celsa (which has been discovered at Arles), the wife of Januarinus, one
of Constantine’s Christian consuls, was no different from many others that were
purchased from Rome by less well-­known persons. There is a striking contrast
between the somewhat subdued statement of Celsa’s status, through a barely fin-
ished sarcophagus, and the splendidly assertive masterpieces of marble carving
that had been used by pagans of the same class in the third century.75
    These are small hints in themselves, but they point to a distinctive social tone.
In entering the churches, the rich might well have found a countercultural niche,

                                         48
                   the social profile of the church


a little to one side of the abrasive realities of the late Roman social system. One
should not underestimate the attractions of such a situation. A Christian church,
like a burial complex, could act as “a sort of oblique expression of an ideal social
order divorced from the compromising realities of life.”76
    A place where hierarchy could be muted without being abandoned had con-
siderable appeal in a competitive and ceremonious age. Nor should we under­
estimate the dangerous thrill—­one that was continuous with former Roman
philosophical countercultures—­associated with the opportunity for symbolic
dissidence provided by the cult of the martyrs. In an age of absolutism, the
Christian cult of the martyrs made it possible to establish a small area of inner
distance from the powers that be. Though the imperial system was never directly
resisted, it could be relativized. It was treated as a mere “power of this world.” It
was robbed of its overbearing mystique by a comforting sense of the superior
power of the God for whom the martyrs had died.
    But there were problems in store for such churches, not the least of which was
the fact that the Christian churches were by no means the only places where
easier social relationships could happen among Christians. If the church pre-
sented itself (in a countercultural manner) as one big family, so one big family
could just as well present itself as a church. It is an anachronism to think that to
be a Christian in the age of Constantine inevitably meant becoming a member
of a particular Christian congregation, subject to the rule of priests and bish-
ops who were usually of lower social standing than the richer members of the
congregation.
    To write a history of the relations between the laity and the clergy in the later
empire involves a silent first step. The laity had to become a laity in the strict
sense—­a laos, a people of the church in the church. They had to relate to their
clergy within the walls of a specific building that was associated first and foremost
with the clergy. We should not take this step for granted. The work of recent
scholars such as Kimberly Bowes (on household religion in town and country-
side),77 Kate Cooper (on the aristocratic houses of Rome),78 and Claire Sotinel
(on the nature of the Christian community in Aquileia)79 have pointed to alter-
native histories of the churches.
    The seemingly straightforward history of the relationship between bishops,
clergy, and laity in the fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries was played out against
the shadow of an alternative ordering of the Christian community. This was a
household-­based Christianity in which bishops and clergymen played a less prom-
inent role than they might have wished. It was a tenacious alternative that did
not vanish in the bright new dawn of the Constantinian age. Private Christian
cult continued to take various forms long after the official recognition of the
Christian church and its leaders and the consequent consolidation of the power
of the bishops. It took forms that ranged from pious groups assembled around

                                         49
                                   chapter 2


favored teachers in the palaces and villas of the rich to chapels set up beside fam-
ily mausolea in the depths of great estates. Throughout this book we shall follow
a constant, muffled dialogue between the public church and more private, “un-
churched” forms of Christianity that lasted up to the end of the sixth century.


                               “Interesting Times”

      The End of the Constantinian System in the West

But this is to anticipate. In many ways the Constantinian system had shielded
the Christian communities from their own rich members. The clergy had been
encouraged by Constantine to look to the emperor, not to local leaders of soci-
ety, for protection and for occasional, stunning donations. But it was an expen-
sive system. It assumed the ready availability of imperial funds and an infinite
willingness, on the part of the emperor, to micromanage the affairs of the church
in all regions of his empire.
   This could not last. After the disastrous defeat of the emperor Julian in Persia
in 363 there was less money to go around. Imperial grants to the churches were
cut back and their tax exemptions were more strictly delimited.
   The empire was weakened and divided.80 The western emperor, Valentinian I
(364–­75), was a parsimonious military man. His priorities in spending lay along
the frontiers of the empire on the Rhine and the Danube. He was sincerely com-
mitted to maintaining consensus within the churches. But he was unwilling to
go to great pains to enforce it and still less to lavish money on bishops.81 By so
doing, he left the field open to a class of persons who had previously been held in
check by the Constantinian system—­militant faction fighters who had come to
enjoy the support of rich patrons.
   The shift in the balance of power between rich patrons and hitherto low-­
profile Christian communities was a largely silent process we can follow only
in stray hints. But the results of this shift became plain in a series of sharp local
conflicts within the Christian communities. These conflicts were connected
with the victory of a theological faction in what we now call the “Arian Contro-
versy.” Put very briefly: the empire-­wide consensus of bishops around a single,
agreed creed that had been painstakingly negotiated by Constantius II was chal-
lenged. The creed supported by Constantius II was deemed, by its enemies, to be
tainted with the “Arian” heresy. The accusation was a travesty, but it was a rally-
ing cry that enabled a new guard of bishops to take over crucial sees as upholders
of orthodoxy and as vocal opponents of the “Arian” heresy.
   These men were ultras. They were known for their uncompromising loyalty
to the Nicene Creed—­to what they took to be the original statement of Chris-

                                        50
                   the social profile of the church


tian belief produced at the Council of Nicaea in 325. They were prepared to
dismiss the ecclesiastical establishment set in place by Constantine and his son
Constantius II as an antiquated and hubristic tyranny.82
    The ultra-­Nicene party could afford to dismiss the Constantinian system in
this high-­handed manner. Although they were few in number, they were notable
for their connections with persons of wealth and power. Three of them will hold
our attention, for varying reasons, in subsequent chapters. Martin had served in
the Imperial Guard. In 371 he was elected bishop of Tours against the wishes
of the provincial bishops and their distinctly mediocre urban clergy. Rather,
Martin enjoyed the support of a network of substantial landowners.83 In 374
Ambrose stepped straight from a governorship into the see of Milan with the
support of none other than Petronius Probus, the Roman magnate of legendary
wealth and tentacular influence whom we met in chapter 1.84 In 383, in distant
Spain, Priscillian became bishop of Avila, again through the support of wealthy
zealots.85
    As we shall see, the victory of these ultras was never total. Though they estab-
lished their own version of doctrinal orthodoxy with great effect, the other radi-
cal programs they advanced were less successful. Many regions of the Latin West
remained largely unaffected by the emergence of these few vivid figures in major
cities. Part of the drama of the generation that followed the installation of Mar-
tin, Ambrose, and Priscillian was that, despite the energy they deployed in push-
ing through programs of reform, the less articulate majority of Latin Christians
did not give way. They continued to make their views felt in the churches.
    Hence a situation that led to conflict and to vehement polemics. In the case of
Priscillian, the opposition to his promotion culminated in a series of denuncia-
tions by local bishops that concentrated on Priscillian’s relations with his upper-­
class supporters. These denunciations led to his execution as a sorcerer. Not every
new-­style bishop suffered so dramatic a fate, but they met with much silent op-
position. The monasticism that made Martin a hero to the villa-­owning aris­
tocracy of Gaul was long resented and resisted by the more middling clergy of
many Gallic cities. The ambitious image of a model clergyman, which Ambrose
propounded in his writings, remained a dead letter even in cities that lay in the
shadow of the see of Milan. But the emergence of such leaders showed that the
times had changed. The conflicts that were brought to the surface by figures such
as Martin, Ambrose, and Priscillian marked the beginning of the end of medio­
critas as the dominant feature of the Latin churches.
    There is a Chinese malediction that says: “May you live in interesting times.”
After the 370s, interesting times began to happen in the West. To persons who
had grown up in the bipolar society accepted by Constantine and his successors,
this came as a shock. The majority of persons in the Roman West—­pagans, Jews,
and, indeed, most Christians—­were not used to the novel trenchancy of leaders

                                        51
                                  chapter 2


such as Ambrose nor to the degree of social muscle he could summon up in sup-
port of his cause.
    But before we follow this change, decade by decade and region by region, we
must step back to take a wider view of the forms of giving to which the rich had
been accustomed in their lives outside the Christian churches. We will then ex-
amine the distinctive features of giving within the Christian churches. Last but
not least, we must attempt to characterize the challenging blend of novelty and
continuity that emerged in the course of the late fourth and early fifth centuries,
when rich persons found themselves expected to act as givers not only in their
cities but now also within the Christian churches.




                                        52
                           Chapter 3
                           •••••
                   Amor civicus: Love of the city
        Wealth and Its Uses in an Ancient World




                              A Debate on Giving

In this chapter and the next, I will attempt to juxtapose non-­Christian and
Christian attitudes toward wealth and giving. In doing this, I will seek to avoid
stark contrasts between the two groups, based on purely abstract considerations.
Rather, I shall begin by pointing to the large middle ground of attitudes shared
by Christians and non-­Christians alike. Both groups, as we will see, placed wealth,
as it were, on parole. Both insisted that the possession of wealth should be legiti-
mized (or at least be given a more gentle face) by acts of generosity.
    Yet when it came to how this generosity should be expressed, the attitudes of
the two groups appeared to diverge sharply. Each form of generosity condensed
a very different model of society. The Christian bishops constantly complained
that money lavished by the rich on great buildings and on flamboyant games
should have been spent on the poor. The one was driven by mere love of display,
while Christian generosity (so the bishops claimed) was driven by compassion.
    Yet we must remember that a conflict between two models of society implied
by two different styles of giving—­clear-­cut and dramatic though this conflict
might appear in retrospect—­does not necessarily translate into conflict on the
level of day-­to-­day behavior. Not all rich pagans funneled their money into giv-
ing great games. Not all Christians gave only to the poor.
    For this reason, our subsequent chapter (chapter 4) will fall into two parts. It
will begin by making clear the differences between traditional forms of generos-
ity to one’s city and Christian forms of giving to the poor and to the church. This
divergence amounted, in the long run, to an imaginative difference of momen-
tous proportions. Not only were the ideal recipients of the Christian gift—­the
poor—­different from the traditional recipients of urban benefactions—­the citi-
zens, many of whom were by no means poor—­but the imagined effects of giving

                                        53
                                    chapter 3


were also profoundly different. Behind the Christian notion of giving to the poor
lay the novel idea that giving to the poor (and to other pious causes) involved a
transfer of wealth from this world to the next, summed up in the notion of plac-
ing treasure in heaven.
   But chapter 4 will end firmly on earth. It will describe the manner in which
different styles of giving, taken from different traditions and from different so-
cial milieux, fueled the “takeoff ” of Latin Christianity in the crucial decades after
the 370s, when wealth and the wealthy came to enter the churches.


                           Common Sense on Wealth

First and foremost, however, we must be aware of what Christians and non-­
Christians saw in a similar fashion when they looked at the society around them.
Nothing makes this more clear than the utterances of major Christian preachers
of this time. We might expect them always to be saying something new, but this
was by no means the case. Those who attended Christian sermons would not
have been greatly surprised by much of what they heard. Indeed, their bishops
did not expect them to be surprised. On one occasion, Augustine of Hippo
made this plain when he began a long sermon on the theme of avarice. As we
know, Augustine was not a man short of original ideas. But, on the subject of
avarice, he insisted that he had nothing new to say:
   I do not know how it is, but avarice has such an effect on human hearts
   that all (or, to be more truthful and accurate, almost all) wish, in words,
   to hold it guilty, even if, in their actions, they show that they have a spe-
   cial soft spot for it. Many have uttered many opinions against avarice—­
   eminent opinions, opinions of great weight, all of them true. Poets, his­
   torians, orators, philosophers, every sort of writer and every professional
   person has had so much to say against avarice.1
    When they spoke about wealth, Augustine and preachers like him spoke
as the heirs of a very ancient world. The certitudes to which they appealed had
bobbed up and down for over a millennium in a veritable Saragossa Sea of idées
reçues. Thus, when Augustine propounded ideas about society that were taken
straight from the pagan classics, we should not think that he was doing this in a
self-­conscious effort to impress pagans with his culture or to woo them into the
church by citing their favorite authors. He did it as unthinkingly as we, today, say
that the earth is round and that the law of gravity is universal. It was true truth
about the social world in which he lived and which he shared with all other think-
ing persons of his age. He presented much of what he had to say on the topic of
avarice (as on many other aspects of wealth) as a matter of common sense.

                                         54
                            wealth and its uses


   Let us consider for a moment what this means. Over thirty years ago, the an-
thropologist Clifford Geertz showed that the common sense of a given society
always depended upon “a relatively organized body of considered thought.” But
this thought was presented in a distinctive manner. As Geertz wrote in his essay
“Common Sense as a Cultural System”:
   Common-­sense wisdom is shamelessly and unapologetically ad hoc. It
   comes in epigrams, proverbs, obiter dicta, jokes, anecdotes . . .—­a clatter of
   gnomic utterances—­not in formal doctrines, axiomized theories, or archi-
   tectonic dogmas.2
    Hence the mute certainty of commonsense judgments. They claim not to
represent only the fine-­spun and closely argued opinions of an intellectual elite.
Rather, they claim to speak with the heavy voice of an imagined majority of
right-­thinking persons. Commonsense judgments do not have the clear quality
of “axiomized theories, or architectonic dogmas.” Rather, they are characterized
by the inconsistencies and by the multiplicity of meanings we associate with
folklore and proverbial wisdom.
    If for “common sense” we read “discourse on wealth,” we will avoid many false
expectations when we sit down to read the pagan and Christian writers of late
antiquity. We need not expect from this literature a single, coherent classical or
Christian doctrine of wealth. What we get is, perhaps, of greater interest to the
historian. Attention to discourse on wealth as a form of common sense—­as a
heavy sediment of notions and not as a set of doctrines—­enables us to explore
the horizons of the social imagination of late Roman culture. We can delineate
both the resources of that culture and its blind spots—­what it was prepared to
think about and what it was content to ignore. Let us look first at the blind spots.
    In the first place, for late Roman persons (even for late Roman intellectuals
such as Augustine), wealth was not a topic to be analyzed in a systematic manner,
as we moderns have done since the seventeenth century and as a few outstanding
ancient Greeks—­such as Aristotle—­had done at the very beginning of the clas-
sical period. This reluctance to theorize needs to be explained. It did not mean
that late Roman persons were ignorant or indifferent to economic phenomena.3
But their thoughts were not directed toward free and consequential inquiry into
the nature of their society.
    There is a brutal reason for this lacuna. The Roman empire was not a free
world. Wealth and its inseparable shadow, power, were topics that had to be ap-
proached circumspectly. For many centuries, educated persons had been the sub-
jects of an authoritarian regime, which claimed to be the protector of the Roman
social order. In the wry words of a modern scholar, the emperor Augustus had
“made the world safe for oligarchy.”4 In this, the aristocracies of the fourth cen-
tury ad, both senatorial and local, were little different from their predecessors.

                                         55
                                    chapter 3


They had no intention of questioning an imperial system that was all of four
centuries old. There was only so much that they felt free to say.
    Even for the most courageous, many topics were taboo. Reading the stirring
sermons of a bishop such as Ambrose of Milan, for instance, one has the impres-
sion that denunciations of the rich in general were a substitute for criticisms of
the policies of the court in particular. In a court city such as Milan this was a real
issue. Ambrose once had to intercede for a man who was being led off to be exe-
cuted for treason simply because he had said that the present emperor (the young
Gratian) was unworthy of his father, Valentinian I.5 As a result, social criticism
tended to be general and studiously non-­specific. One suspects that the evil
rich—­invariably presented in tracts and sermons as generic monsters of avarice
and luxury—­acted as the whipping boys of public opinion in a world where
more precise grievances (such as resentment over high taxation and ill-­advised
political decisions) could not be expressed.
    Yet we should not be in too great a hurry to condemn this retreat from the
political as due only to fear or to intellectual inertia. Persons formed by a late
antique rhetorical education treated certain issues with deadly seriousness. But
these issues did not touch on the overall structure of society. Rather, a rhetorical
education brought its full weight to bear on issues of personal behavior. Put
bluntly: to the ancients, how individuals acted mattered far more than did the
structures within which they acted.6 In such a view of the world, rich and poor
did not meet as classes related to each other within a wider society. Instead, they
were seen as two distinct groups of persons from each of which a certain form of
behavior was expected. The rich were expected to be generous and good natured;
the poor were to be suppliant and grateful.7
    As a result, social relations were almost always seen, as it were, in close-­up—­in
terms of asymmetrical interactions between individuals. This is not surprising.
We are dealing with a steeply hierarchical society, held together by innumerable
chains of dependence. It was the behavior of the link in the chain on whose
good graces one’s own fate hung—­whether an emperor, an official, a patron, or a
landlord—­which mattered most.8 Hence an intense personalization of social re-
lations. Much talk on the relations of rich and poor assumed situations that seem
almost to follow the logic of the folktale. In the folktale, two protagonists alone
dominate each incident; neither is seen as part of a group. In the same manner,
discourse on wealth and poverty tended to focus on a single encounter and on a
single, primal act of giving that linked two persons, one rich and one poor.9 The
poor were those who “looked always to the fingers of the rich.”10 The rich were
those whose hands were expected to open in mighty gestures of beneficence or
amnesty. From the exquisitely minted coins that showed the emperor Nero reach-
ing out his hand to distribute rations to the people of Rome11 to the image of the
emperor Constantius II scattering gold coins as consul, in the Calendar of 354,12

                                          56
                            wealth and its uses


the cohesion of the entire Roman social order was condensed in the movements
of the hands of the great.
    In a social situation that was so sharply stylized in this manner (as a series of
encounters between givers and suppliants), persuasion was the most important—­
indeed, the most urgent—­tool of action. Speculation could wait. It was not the
business of bishops or of rhetors—­when they preached, when they framed peti-
tions to the emperors, when they praised and pleaded with governors—­to pro-
pound “formal doctrines, axiomized theories or architectonic dogmas.” Rather,
their task was to pick the heavy locks that held the hearts of the mighty. They
had to make sure that those locks slid open so as to allow acts of generosity and
mercy. In the art of persuasion, it was appeals to common sense (and no fine-­
spun theories) that did the job.


                 Sobria vetustas: The sobriety of ancient times

This did not mean that late Roman persons had surrendered the capacity to criti-
cize the society in which they lived—­far from it. Pagans and Christians alike
looked back on a rich tradition characterized, both in Greek and in Latin, by an
unrelenting suspicion of wealth and the wealthy.
    In the Latin world, in particular, one feature of Roman collective memory had
long stuck out as remarkable. This was the fact that the founders of the Roman
Republic were believed to have lived in a state of high-­minded, indeed heroic,
poverty. For those who looked back at classical accounts of the history of Rome,
the coming of wealth was held to have marked the beginning of the end of Roman
virtue. It had brought about the fall of the Roman Republic; it could bring about
the fall of the empire. Though highly stylized, this representation of the history
of Rome gave late Roman Latin writers a language with which to discuss the ills
of their own times.13
    Let us take the opinions of the non-­Christian historian Ammianus Marcel-
linus. Writing around 390 ad in the aftermath of the crushing defeat of the
Roman armies by the Visigoths at the battle of Adrianople in 378 ad, Ammia-
nus offered his own remedy for the crisis of his times. It was a call to the rich to
return to the sobria vetustas, to “the sobriety of ancient times.” He assured his
readers that Rome had suffered worse disasters and had survived them:
   But this was because the sobriety of ancient times had not been infected
   by the effeminacy of a laxer way of life, and there was no craving for osten-
   tatious banquets and ill-­gotten gains: high and low agreeing with one an-
   other and united in a single-­hearted enthusiasm hastened to face a glorious
   death on behalf of the state as if setting out to reach some calm and peace-
   ful harbor.14

                                        57
                                    chapter 3


    What gives unusual sharpness to the otherwise unexceptionable opinions of
Ammianus was the fact that this was no nostalgia trip on his part. He made plain
that he regarded the fateful loss of sobriety among the rich to have been of recent
origin. He traced the decline in civic virtue back remorselessly to the court of the
Christian emperor Constantine and of his Christian successors. It was the rich of
the new age of gold who had begun the rot. Ammianus identified these as the
great courtiers and senatorial landowners of his time. Hence his memorable por-
trait of the most exuberant example of all of the tainted rich—­the great Chris-
tian aristocrat Petronius Probus, whom we will continue to meet throughout
this book.15
    Ammianus’s opinions delineate clearly the sense of discomfort with which
Romans had always looked at any extraordinary accumulation of wealth in their
midst. But we must remember that this discourse on wealth took place among
peers. We are looking at the rich with the eyes of the rich. The issue was never
whether or not the rich should be rich; it was how the rich should relate to each
other. If the rich had victims, these victims were not thought to be the poor: they
were their fellow rich. The rich feared that they might at any time be made to feel
“poor”—­in the sense of helpless—­in the face of overmighty members of their
own class. Their eyes fixed on each other, the rich of the late Roman world ex-
pected that it would be they who would be the first to suffer from the immoder-
ate wealth of others. They gave little thought to the manner in which threatening
accumulations of wealth affected the distant, faceless poor.
    Thus, what the common sense of their age purveyed to persons such as Am-
mianus was not disquietude about riches in themselves. It was a set of stereotypes,
vicious as an album of caricatures, of the wrong sort of rich person. Thought on
wealth tended to settle down to denunciation of the luxury, pretentiousness, and
avarice of the evil rich. To this one should add that, for many writers, the evil rich
were usually the new rich (the upstart courtiers and overambitious senators
­castigated by Ammianus) whose rise to prominence in the fourth century was
 thought to threaten the more discreet ascendancy of old money.
    But it was precisely this stereotypical divide between the bad rich and the
 good rich that offered the wealthy the opportunity to reestablish themselves in
 the good graces of their peers. Denunciations of the rich usually ended by offer-
 ing the one remedy for suspect wealth on which everyone agreed: liberality—­
 opening the heart and the hand in grand gestures of giving.


             An Empire of Gifts: From Patronage to Humanitas

The Roman empire has been called an “empire of honor.”16 But it can equally well
be called an “empire of gifts.” In late Roman quite as much as in classical times,

                                         58
                            wealth and its uses


the Roman empire was held together by personal ties expressed and cemented
through massive giving. The legacies and gifts of one senator alone, the younger
Pliny, are an astonishing example of this flow of beneficence.17 This did not
change in the later empire. Constantine’s giving had been legendary and, in the
opinion of his critics, disastrous.18 The rich and powerful followed the example
of the emperors; they held their followers together by gifts. This is what Petro-
nius Probus had done in the 370s and 380s. As Ammianus Marcellinus wrote, he
“enjoyed enormous power . . . by bestowing gifts.”19 It was for his generosity that
Probus was praised after his death by a court poet:
   He did not hide his wealth in dark cellars nor condemn his riches to the
   nether gloom, but in showers more abundant than the rain he would ever
   enrich countless throngs of men. The thick cloud of his generosity was
   ever big with gifts. Waves of clients washed into his palace, coming in as
   poor to emerge made rich. His headlong hand outdid the [gold dust–­
   bearing] rivers of Spain in pouring out gifts of gold.20
    The memory of Probus’s open house and open hands was deemed sufficient
to launder the great senator’s vast and suspect wealth. In the dry words of Elias
Bickerman: “In Vergil’s Hell there are not robber barons but niggardly million-
aires.”21 That was as true in the fourth century as in any other century of the
history of Rome.
    The issue, of course, was how this generosity would be shown, which groups
in society (the poor among them) might be expected to benefit from it, and from
what motives this generosity arose. Here we should avoid stark contrasts be-
tween charitable attitudes toward the poor encouraged in Christianity and Juda-
ism and the apparent absence of such concern among pagans.
    It has become a commonplace for scholars to talk of the “harsh moral cli-
mate” of the Greco-­Roman world.22 This is because, as we will see, classical soci-
ety did not invest acts of generosity to the poor with the same, high ideological
charge as did Jews and Christians. But the contrast between pagan and Christian
times is somewhat forced. A society without a Christian sense of “charity” found
room, on many occasions, for what Greek contemporaries called “philanthropic”
actions.23 Provided that they fit into recognizable categories to which the rich
felt that they owed some obligation—­as clients, as dependents, as relatives, and
as fellow citizens—­there was no lack of outreach to the distressed.
    As Anneliese Parkin has put it, referring to gifts to the poor in the classical
Roman world, “We can fight too hard to argue away every possible reference to
almsgiving.”24 Beggars crowded around temples to receive coins and to eat their
share of the offerings of food and the meat of sacrifices. They were not totally
ignored.25 But what was lacking was a sense that humanity was most vividly
summed up through starkly asymmetrical relations, in the manner of Jewish and

                                        59
                                   chapter 3


Christian alms to the poor. Alms implied outreach to perceived inferiors. In-
deed, the very act of giving alms stressed the helplessness of those who received
them.
    But almsgiving was never the only form of giving favored among pagans—­or,
indeed, among Christians. The exchange of gifts and favors between equals was
just as important. “Philanthropic” giving offered a safety net to friends and
neighbors. To take one example: in a world with few banking institutions, small
personal loans to one’s peers often played the role of alms.26 Nor did all acts of
mercy take the form of gifts. This was particularly the case in the countryside.
Landowners showed generosity by granting rebates of rents and by holding over
the payment of debts, even if they usually did this less out of mercy than to main-
tain control of their tenants by prolonging their indebtedness.27
    Above all, generosity varied according to one’s position in society. The very
rich might be rendered impervious to the poor by the “protective bubble” of
clients and administrators who surrounded them.28 But, as we have seen, there
was room in late Roman society for a wide spectrum of relatively rich persons,
many of whom lived close to the misery around them.29 Not all hardened their
hearts. Doctors were expected to treat poor patients.30 Associations of trades-
men collected money for beggars (if only to keep them away from their shops).31
Children were taken in for fostering.32 A rich widow could be praised for her
“piety” in looking after impoverished women who were widows such as herself.33
Hospitality could be extended to strangers. A poor fisherman once encountered
the survivor of a shipwreck:
   Seeing that he was a man of distinguished appearance, he was moved by
   compassion . . . to comply yet more with his compassionate sensibilities, he
   took off his threadbare little cloak, cut it in half and gave half to the young
   man.34
This is not the famous scene where Saint Martin cut his cloak in half so as to
clothe a beggar at the gates of Amiens. It is a scene from a novel of the third cen-
tury ad. It serves as a reminder that dramas of mercy were by no means limited
only to the imagination of Christians.35
   Even the terrible institution of slavery was expected to soften occasionally.36
Under the empire, upper-­class society found room for countercultural situations
in which slaves and masters could be imagined to live happily together in a do-
mestic idyll that resembled the idealized relations between Russian landowners
and their serfs in the nineteenth century.37 Violence to slaves was frowned upon
by philosophers.38 But their advice did little to advance the spread of humane
feelings. What little “humanization” occurred in the treatment of slaves did so
for a chilling reason: the Roman state made plain that it had no intention of sur-
rendering to the masters and mistresses of slaves its monopoly of cruel and un-

                                         60
                            wealth and its uses


usual punishments. The emperors ruled that slaves should not be subjected to
the fearsome tortures associated with public justice. By this legislation, the em-
perors declared that they, and only they, intended to suppress with equal sav-
agery both slaves and the “humble” free persons who made up the majority of
their subjects.39 Despite these measures, violence between owners and their slaves
continued. Around 300 ad, the Christian bishops at the council of Elvira in
southern Spain had to deal with cases of slaves who had died as a result of beat-
ings ordered by their Christian mistress.40 Altogether, the grim logic of the slave
system lay like a vast icecap along the edge of late Roman society. It was calcu-
lated to keep humanitarian sentiments (among Christians and pagans alike) in
deep freeze.
    Slavery apart, however, we are dealing with a morally less frigid society than
Christian authors would lead us to believe. We should not dismiss as hypocriti-
cal the lists of social virtues which, in many regions, continued without a break
from pagan times up to the end of our period. Clemens, patiens, mancipiis be­
nigna, miranda voluntas, umanetas in eo sates laudanda—­“clement,” “patient,”
“benign to her slaves,” “of admirable good will,” “endowed with thoroughly praise­
worthy humanity”: crudely carved on gravestones from the Rhone valley of the
early seventh century ad and expressed in distinctly homespun Latin, the lauda-
tory phrases in these inscriptions reach back for centuries.41 They show a Roman
society which, up to the very end, had retained an ideal of humane sociability
that was one of the most widespread and most exigent aspects of the civilization
of Greece and Rome.42
    Christian apologists might make much of pagan heartlessness compared with
Christian charity. But experienced Christian preachers, such as Augustine, took
for granted that Jews and pagans also practiced works of mercy and that many
were more zealous in doing so than were Christians.43 In a newly discovered ser-
mon on Christian gifts, Augustine even made plain that humane acts of generos-
ity were frequently practiced outside the church. These sprang from humanitas,
from a virtue shared by Christians and non-­Christians alike: “They take the form
of the humane treatment which one person shows to another because of the
common bond of a shared human nature.”44


        Tot tantaque beneficia: So many and such great benefactions

                            Giving to the City

Human decency, alas, finds few historians. This is not only because it is often
taken for granted by contemporaries but also because it tends to be a fragmented
phenomenon. In the Roman world it followed the contours of a society which,

                                        61
                                   chapter 3


as we have seen, thought of social relations as broken up into innumerable face-­
to-­face encounters between suppliants and givers. Benefactors made their own
arrangements to relieve the distress that came their way—­whether these dis-
tressed persons were friends, relatives, clients, neighbors, or unknown victims of
misfortune. Broken up in this manner into innumerable small acts of kindness,
the non-­Christian practice of humanitas lacked a clear focus. A general ideal of
humanity was widespread, but the actions that sprang from that ideal were scat-
tered erratically throughout society. They never congealed into a single social
action that summed up everyone’s ideal of a signal act that combined generosity
and humanity in the way that almsgiving to the poor was consistently exalted in
Jewish and Christian circles as the pious act par excellence.
    For this reason, contemporaries looked elsewhere to find the perfect scenario
of generosity. They found it close at hand. For centuries, the most vivid and es-
teemed form of giving was held to have occurred on the occasion when a rich
person gave unstintingly—­and in the full blaze of public acclaim—­to his or her
city by providing new buildings, by repairing old ones, and by laying on splendid
games for its citizens.
    What we now call “civic euergetism” was the tradition of performing
euergesiai—­“good deeds”—­to one’s city. Such euergetism was seized upon as
a gesture of generosity that summed up an entire urban civilization. Individual
benevolence, even when practiced on a wide scale, was like a soft, fine rain. Civic
euergetism, by contrast, was a mighty flash of lightning that lit up the principal
features of the traditional social landscape, leaving lesser forms of giving (many
of which may well have been motivated by compassion) in darkness.
    Civic euergetism riveted the attention of contemporaries. It has also riveted
the attention of modern historians who rightly consider it to be one of the most
striking and idiosyncratic features of the Greco-­Roman world.45 Last but not
least, it riveted the attention of Christian bishops throughout the fourth and
fifth centuries. Their vocal disapproval of this practice (because it contained no
element of compassion for the poor) has served, if anything, to exaggerate the
extent of urban euergetism at this time.
    The bishops were right to devote so much attention to civic euergetism. They
knew a rival for the wealth of the rich when they saw one. For the rich who came
in increasing numbers to listen to the bishops had been conditioned since their
earliest years to see civic generosity as both a duty and a delight. We meet such
rich persons in the Christian catacomb of Santa Cristina at Volsinii (modern
Bolsena, about seventy miles north of Rome). Their gravestones date from the
last quarter of the fourth century. One (who buried his wife in 376) had been
curator (financial officer) of the city. The other, Maecius Paternus, had acted as
curator and had supervised the city’s supplies to the army. He had also restored the
public baths (called the baths of Tuscianus, in memory of a former benefactor)

                                        62
                            wealth and its uses


out of his own pocket. “Proved worthy by the judgment of all,” he had been
named “patron” of the city. He doubtless had offered games and banquets on
these occasions. These offices and honors were proudly listed on Christian grave
inscriptions, which ended with the phrase “Peace to you with the saints.”46 Chris-
tian or non-­Christian, persons of high status belonged to a giving class. They
could no more expect to avoid generosity to their city than a medieval knight
could avoid the rituals of chivalry without losing his honor.
   What was implied by this situation is made plain by an inscription from a
generation earlier. In 347 the citizens and town council of Paestum (a city 170
miles south of Rome, now known for the great Greek temples that stand on the
lonely seashore) gathered to confer on the young son of a local family the honor
of “patron of the city” formerly held by his father:
   for there come from the family of Aquilius Nestorius, that upright young
   man, such numerous, great and splendid benefactions, with which our city
   has been adorned, which are visible to the eyes and minds of every one of
   us citizens, especially when each citizen looks around and sees the public
   works which this family has erected. They have to such an extent rendered
   stately the aspect of our city, that the people of the city have resolved to
   give in return for such great services and other acts of munificence to the
   city . . . the honor of a priesthood of the imperial cult. . . .
      And as Aquilius Nestorius, in consideration of this return of honor to
   himself, always deigns to show to us citizens a unique degree of affection;
   and as his son, Aquilius Aper, is sure to show us similar affection . . . it
   pleased the citizens to offer him the title of “patron of the city.”47
    A characteristic product of the bipolar world ushered in by Constantine, the
XP (Chi Rho: Christogram) monogram of Christ was placed on the head of the
plaque presented to Aquilius Nestorius. We do not know if any of the Aquilii
were Christians. What is important is that this did not matter. The document
(which was discovered in 1990) reveals a little city that still breathed deeply the
air of a very ancient world to which Christianity was irrelevant.


                         Amor civicus: Love of the city

The phenomenon of civic euergetism was so widespread in the Greco-­Roman
world and its manifestations were so vivid—­indeed, so voluble—­that it is easy to
lose a sense of proportion when approaching its continued manifestations in the
fourth century. Let us be clear about what exactly was involved. We are not deal-
ing with an indiscriminate, one-­way flow of wealth from the rich to the city but
a studied duet between the city and the rich. This took the form of an exchange

                                        63
                                   chapter 3


of honors. The family of Aquilius Nestorius had shown honor to the city of Paes-
tum by rendering splendid its urban profile. The town council and citizens of
Paestum returned this honor with the counterhonor of a priesthood and the
honorific status of “patron of the city.”48
    This duet laid great emphasis on the wholehearted enthusiasm of both parties.
The family of the Aquilii had shown “a unique degree of affection” for Paestum.
It was in the hope that this affection would continue in the next generation that
the city offered marks of honor with equally spontaneous enthusiasm. Giving
was about a very special sort of love—­amor civicus, love for the city and its citi-
zens. A rich person who showed this love was acclaimed as an amator patriae—­a
lover of his or her hometown. It was the most honorable love that a wealthy
person could show.49
    Amor civicus was written all over the temples, the forums and public build-
ings, the arches, the colonnades, and the vast places of public entertainment—­
the theaters, the amphitheaters, and the stadium-­like circuses—­which still amaze
the tourist to any Roman site in almost any region of western Europe and north
Africa. In the eyes of the rich, everything that had made a Roman city what it
was sprang from this, the most acceptable of all enthusiasms: the love of a leading
citizen for his hometown.
    The statues in the forums and in front of the temples of so many towns proved
this. These statues were lifelike. Many were painted and would be carefully washed
on memorial occasions. They amounted to a waxworks of the generous dead.
Family by family, generation by generation, their serried ranks turned the forum
and other public places into open-­air galleries of civic love.50 They stood on bases
that were covered with easily legible inscriptions, from which we scholars now
derive the abundant evidence for civic euergetism in classical and late Roman
times. At Calama, for instance (modern Guelma in Algeria, which stood at the
head of the Seybouse valley on the edge of the plateau of Roman Numidia),
Annia Aelia Restituta received no less than five statues and one of her father, “so
as to render thanks for her exceptional liberality to her fellow citizens in adding
stateliness to her home town.”51
    Much of the evidence for civic benefaction in its heyday comes from the sec-
ond and early third centuries. But the phenomenon was not limited to that pe-
riod. One of the major advances in scholarship on the later Roman empire has
been our realization of the extent to which the ancient drive of civic love had
continued from its flowering in the high empire deep into the fourth and fifth
centuries. This has been shown especially for Africa by the monumental and
groundbreaking work of Claude Lepelley on the cities of late Roman Africa52
and by the more recent treatment, by Christophe Hugoniot, of the spectacles still
offered in these cities.53 But the extent of the phenomenon has also been revealed


                                        64
                            wealth and its uses


in central and southern Italy through the careful studies of scholars such as Gio­
vanni Cecconi.54
    These continuities occurred in a world where much else had changed. Things
were not as they had been. Scholars find it easy to draw up a gloomy picture of
civic euergetism in the fourth-­century West. They emphasize the loss of scale and
range compared with earlier times. They have pointed out that this loss of mo-
mentum was not due solely to economic recession. In Africa, an economic reces-
sion did not occur, but even there civic building withered. This was because, as
we saw in chapter 1, civic life itself had changed. Members of the inner circle of
provincial society now felt that they no longer needed to cut a figure by showing
love to their own city. The love of the emperor, gained at a distant court, meant
more to them than did the acclaim of their fellow citizens at home.55 If they
decorated cities at all, they did so from the top down. They restored their cities
as imperial governors, making use of imperial funds.56
    Furthermore, the regions where civic love continued to be expressed shrank
to a few privileged areas, placed around the heartlands of the Mediterranean.57
Africa stood out as a homeland of ancient civic values. In the fourth century,
there was no more clear sign of the position of Africa as the economic center of
gravity of the western empire than the remarkable tenacity with which tradi-
tional love of the city maintained its momentum. But, even in Africa, the pace
of building was drastically reduced. The high wave of euergetism associated with
the second and early third centuries had clearly passed its peak.58
    Yet it is the tenacity of the tradition of euergetism that is its most striking
feature in the later empire. The language of civic love and no other was the lan-
guage the rich of the most prosperous areas of the western empire continued to
use in relation to their cities. The template for euergetism as the model form of
generosity may have been reduced in size, but its distinctive shape was unchanged.
Civic love, though it was practiced on a smaller scale, was considerably more than
a mere ghost of its old self. It had a remarkable capacity to condense the distin-
guishing features of a given social order. Why was this so?


                      “That is what it is to have wealth!”

                       The People and the Games

We must never underestimate the sheer physical presence of the past in a late
Roman city. In a province such as Africa, the boom of public building had hap-
pened relatively recently, in the first part of the third century. The monuments
among which a city dweller such as Augustine moved as a boy and later as bishop


                                        65
                                   chapter 3


of Hippo were not romantic reminders of a golden past, only distantly connected
with the present. Many of these buildings were no older than the great opera
houses, the banks, and the flamboyant railway stations of nineteenth-­century
Europe now seem to us. They were old. But they had not yet been condemned to
history. Indeed—­like the Milan Opera House, Saint Pancras Station, or the Brit-
ish Museum—­they marked the beginning of a “modern age” that was thought
by persons of the fourth century to have continued without a break up to the
present.59
    Christian preachers such as Augustine wished that these great piles would
sink into the past. Augustine even hinted, with satisfaction, that they were fall-
ing down.60 They were doing no such thing. They had not fallen down, and many
were still being repaired—­often by the families of those who had first built them
over a century earlier. And they continued to be packed.61
    They were packed because the populus also counted for something in the cit-
ies. The role of the populus—­the citizen body—­in the late Roman city is difficult
for us to appreciate fully. The role of these citizens is less fully documented than
is the exuberant self-­promotion of their benefactors. But they were there. The
populus was an integral part of the constitution of each city. As we have seen, the
Roman cities of the West were res publicae. Each was a Rome in miniature. Each
had its ordo—­its legally defined class of town councillors and notables gathered
in the “temple” of the city hall. And each ordo faced its eternal doublet, the
populus.62
    The populus would gather in the theater, in the amphitheater, and in the cir-
cus.63 We tend to imagine that these great buildings were primarily places of en-
tertainment. But for Romans they remained charged with political significance.
Games were happy occasions, but they were more than that. Shared joys were
the privilege of a citizen body. Those who sat in the theater or around the circus
were as much a populus—­a gathering of fellow citizens—­as they had ever been in
the forum.
    In the theater and in the circus the citizen body made clear that they were
entitled to a voice in the affairs of their city. Far from being passive in the later
empire, the populus used the theater and the circus to perfect techniques with
which to put pressure on their superiors. The use of chanted acclamations by
theater crowds is documented all over the empire at this time. Acclamations took
the form of chanted slogans. The rhythmic chanting of such slogans protected the
anonymity of those who shouted them. Furthermore, such chanting conferred a
sense of frightening mass upon the wishes of the people. Rhythmic acclamations
seemed to carry with them an uncanny charge of inspired unanimity.64
    It was in this remorselessly well-­lit environment that civic notables learned
the art of generosity. We can follow their education in giving most clearly in the


                                         66
                            wealth and its uses


case of the spectacula (the shows) and the ludi (the games). These could include
anything that gripped the people’s attention, from relatively cheap produc-
tions, such as dramas, festivals of song, pantomime, striptease, and boxing shows,
to stunningly expensive and murderous displays, such as chariot races and the
slaughter of wild beasts. What matters is that they were the gift of a wealthy
person to the populus—­to the citizen body—­of his or her city.65
    Putting on shows and games gave a sharp personal profile to civic love. Hence
their unusual importance in the fourth and fifth centuries. Even at the height of
the prosperity of the empire, the erection of public buildings had been prohibi-
tively expensive. They had usually been built through a collective effort, in which
individual donations were supplemented by the use of civic funds administered
by the town council as a whole. In Africa and elsewhere, in both the classical and
in the late Roman periods, paying out of one’s own pocket for public buildings
had always been a gesture of exceptional generosity. To leave one’s name on an
entire public building was “the icing on the cake” for private benefactors. Only
the very rich hoped to do this.66
    By contrast, grand shows were well within the range of individual pockets.
They could be given by one person alone and had an immediate and vivid im-
pact. Furthermore, in the fourth century, they fit in very well with the general
drift toward stunning personal display which, as we have seen, characterized the
rich of the later empire.67 It was at the games that the hearts of the rich could be
seen most clearly to positively whir with “civic love.” And they whirred because
the populus made them whir.
    An inscription on a mosaic from the middle of the third century illustrates
this. Magerius, a notable of a little town to the southwest of Hadrumentum
(modern Sousse in Tunisia) gave a munus (a gift of games) to his fellow citizens.
It was not a big affair. Only four panthers were killed by members of a profes-
sional team of beast fighters—­venatores who were the Roman equivalents of
matadors. But Magerius went out of his way to celebrate the event and, above all,
to demonstrate his own generosity on a mosaic that was discovered in the village
of Smirat. The mosaic decorated the reception hall of Magerius’s town house.
The venatores are shown in action, braced on tiptoe, with their lances plunging
into the lithe beasts. Equally important, however, was the fact that Magerius re-
corded, on the mosaic, the acclamations of the people. Looking at the mosaic in
the museum of Sousse, we can almost hear, in a rare transcript of spoken Latin,
the heavy roar of the populus. They were engaged in a dialogue with Magerius
about generosity. The beast fighters first asked the assembled people for a suit-
ably generous reward. In reporting this request, the herald addressed the people
as “My lords.” As “lords” of the show, the people then turned to Magerius to give
the beast fighters lavish prizes:


                                        67
                                   chapter 3


   Let all who follow you learn from your example! Let all who have pre-
   ceded you hear of this! . . . You are the one who gives a game worthy of the
   quaestors of Rome [members of the senatorial super-­rich]. You are giving
   a game from your own wealth. What a day! Magerius gives! That is what it
   is to have wealth. That is how to be able to use it! That is it!68


               The Populus and the Poor: Citizen Entitlement

This brief summary of the continued importance of civic euergetism in the
wealthiest and most secure regions of the late Roman West should make one
thing clear. When the bishops preached to the rich in favor of giving to the poor
they were not faced by a neutral audience that only needed to be stirred out
of their inertia so as to give to a new, deserving cause. Rather, the advocates of
Christian charity had been preempted by a long-­established and highly esteemed
habit of giving that claimed to spring from a deep-­seated love. Many of the
Christian rich who came to listen to their bishops had been almost genetically
wired, by generations of family tradition, to be givers. But they had also been
wired to give in one way and in one way only. It was to tame and redirect the urge
to give in persons through whom the adrenalin of civic love still pounded that
bishops such as Ambrose and Augustine preached urgently. As we shall see, they
often did so in vain. Why was this the case?
    In order to understand the difficulties experienced by the bishops we have
to make a considerable leap of the social imagination. We have to enter a world
where the poor themselves lacked the sharp social profile they came to have in
later times. The primary division of society was not that between rich and poor
but between citizens and non-­citizens. The benefactors of cities gave to their
“fellow citizens” and never to the poor. Some of these citizens might well be
poor, but their poverty in itself entitled them to nothing. They received enter-
tainment, public comforts (such as great bathhouses), and (in many cities) con-
siderable doles of food. But they did not receive them on the basis of need. They
received them because they were members of a privileged group. They were the
populus or plebs of the city. This was the imagined, vigorous core of the urban
community. To love the city was also to love its citizens with “unique affection”—­
and to love no one else.
    The abiding sense of the entitlement of a privileged core of citizens was a de-
cisive legacy from the classical past to the cities of the later empire. It had lost
none of its power. It was not based on a vague sentiment of belonging but on a
jealously preserved sense of the rights of resident citizens. Whenever a major
benefaction (such as a corn dole) was given to a city, the inhabitants had to come


                                        68
                            wealth and its uses


forward to prove that they had been long-­term residents and the descendants of
citizens in order to benefit from the gift.69
    In changing times, this core of citizens struggled to maintain the entitlements
that went with their civic identity. It was not enough that they were citizens of
the Roman empire. They still wanted to be known as citizens of the miniature
Rome of their hometown. Bolstered by this privilege, they refused to merge into
the anonymous mass of the mere poor. They wished to stand out, if only a little,
from the gray poverty of the destitute in the cities and from the huge, faceless
world of the countryside around them. To receive food and entertainment not
only made them comfortable; it made them feel different from everybody else. A
lover of the city cared for them and for them only.
    Even in a small town, the citizen group did not coincide with all the inhabi­
tants of the city. Strangers and the non-­citizen poor (often immigrants from the
countryside) were always present. But they remained marginal. To visit a theater
in a city in Africa and elsewhere was to be taught to know one’s place in a tradi-
tional civic order that had not changed over the centuries. The citizens sat to-
gether. In some cities they were divided into professional associations, where
each association sat on its own row of marked benches. The right-­less poor and
strangers were not excluded, but they huddled in the back rows while the populus
sat down below, close to the show and adjacent to the benches of the town coun-
cil and the seat of the benefactor for the day.70
    We can see the working out of the harsh logic of citizen entitlement most
clearly in the gigantic city of Rome. In Rome, the populus Romanus (or the plebs
Romana) may have amounted to less than half of the overall population of the
city, perhaps two hundred thousand in a city of half a million.71 Their privileged
position would have been glaring. For what was at stake in Rome was the privi-
lege of access to the food provided by the famous annona civica—­that is, to a dole
of grain and of other foodstuffs that was reserved for the citizens of Rome.72
    In a world characterized by harvest shocks and fear of famine, citizen privi-
leges or their absence were a matter of life and death. Much of the population of
Rome was miserably poor. Excavated mass burials show the ravages of disease
and malnourishment from which they suffered. But only members of the populus
Romanus were entitled to free grain and other foodstuffs at reduced prices. The
rations made available by the annona at Rome could not support an entire family
throughout the year, but they could shield them from famine.73
    Poor though some may have been, even the most needy among the populus
Romanus did not receive their food as beggars but as citizens. Not surprisingly,
the people of Rome were fiercely attached to their privileges. During times of
famine, the plebs collaborated wholeheartedly with the Senate to drive strangers
out of the city. They did so to ensure that there was enough food to go around.


                                        69
                                   chapter 3


Rome was their city and no one else’s.74 They carried with them to the outlets
from which food was distributed a leaden or bronze tessera (the equivalent of an
ID card or a passport) to prove that they were members of the plebs frumentaria—­
citizens entitled to grain.75 To be inscribed on the register of recipients of the
annona was a title that could be placed with pride on one’s tombstone. For in
Rome and in many other cities of the later empire (if on a smaller scale), to re-
ceive a dole of food did not make one a beggar. It made one a citizen.76
    In sum, the populus was not the poor and did not wish to be treated as the
poor. For a civic benefactor to look past the populus by showing generosity to
the many thousands of beggars and immigrants who lingered on the margins of
the city was not an act of charity. It was a snub to the citizen body. Only the most
arrogant could threaten to do that. Ammianus Marcellinus noted one such in-
sufferable maverick. The senator Lampadius (who was urban prefect in 365)
emerges as very much the Roman aristocrat:
   His vanity was such that he took it very ill if even his manner of spitting
   was not extolled for its unique adroitness. When he gave a magnificent
   show as praetor [that is, as a young man, some time around 330] and dis-
   tributed largesse on a most generous scale, he could not bear the demands
   of the plebs that he should make gifts to undeserving favorites [as star per-
   formers]. So as to demonstrate both his generosity and his contempt for
   the crowd, he summoned beggars from the Vatican, and loaded them with
   rich gifts.77
    At that time, the Vatican was not yet associated with the great Christian
shrine of Saint Peter. It was a no-­man’s-­land, a cemetery area in which beggars
lived. But the whimsical gesture of Lampadius showed, without a hint of Chris-
tian meaning, that in Rome the plebs and the poor were thought of as starkly dif-
ferent groups.
    We should remember that this ancient view of the community was still very
much alive in many regions throughout the fourth century and beyond. It had
continued unchanged alongside the Christian churches. In retrospect, Christian
preaching in favor of extensive outreach to the poor might seem to represent a
novel surge of humane feeling. But it had its shadow side. It blurred traditional
boundaries. To present poverty as the sole requirement for generosity from the
rich devalued the status of thousands of persons who thought of themselves as
citizens first and only then as poor. It treated them as part of the same miasma of
misery as the beggars, the homeless, and the immigrants who crowded into every
city. So wide and so indiscriminate a vision undermined the delicate balance of
institutionalized groups—­benefactors, town councillors, and populus—­on which
the life of the cities of the Roman empire had depended for centuries. The world
would have to change considerably (as it did in just these centuries) before a clas-

                                        70
                            wealth and its uses


sical view of society as made up of a honeycomb of civic groups was replaced,
across Europe, by the gray and universal vision of a world divided only between
rich and poor.
    For many persons (and not only for the rich) around the year 370 ad, this
was a chilling prospect. As we shall see in the course of this book, to move from
one model of society to the other was to move from the age of the classical city
to what has recently been called a “post-­Roman late antiquity,” in which the clas-
sical model of the city finally relinquished its grip on the social imagination.78
Let us turn to the next chapter so as to see the beginnings of this great transition,
as it was prepared by Christian preaching on the poor, by the new role offered to
the poor within the Christian communities, and by the Christian emphasis on
the otherworldly efficacy of pious gifts both to the poor and to the church.




                                         71
                            Chapter 4
                            •••••
                         “Treasure in Heaven”
                Wealth in the Christian Church




       Quia non clamat populus ut pauper accipiat: Because the people
             do not roar that the poor should receive anything

               The Games, the Populus, and the Poor

In conjuring up Christian attitudes toward wealth and poverty in the Latin West
at the end of the fourth century we will often find ourselves in the world of the
Christian sermon. There is nothing strange about this. In her groundbreaking
study Christianity and the Rhetoric of Empire, Averil Cameron speaks of Chris-
tian sermons as “the hidden iceberg” in the life of the Christian communities.1
Regular preaching—­week in and week out, community by community—­was the
air the Christian churches breathed. The formal works of Christian authors, which
now fill so many shelves in our libraries, are mere islands that jut out here and
there from the immense and largely hidden oceanic shelf of oral discourse cre-
ated by the Christian sermon. As bishop of Hippo, Augustine emerged as one of
the most brilliant of these preachers. It has been calculated that in his thirty-­five
years as bishop of Hippo, he must have preached at least six thousand sermons.2
    As we will see later (in chapter 21), Augustine preached extensively on the
relations between the rich and the poor. Among these sermons, the juxtaposi-
tion between civic generosity (such as we have described) and Christian giving
to the poor was prominent. A series of sermons only recently discovered in the
cathedral library of Erfurt show that he planned entire campaigns of preaching
on the topic. The campaigns included teach-­ins to his own clergy as to how best
to preach against the games and in favor of Christian charity. Rich members of
the congregation who supported the games were to be “condemned, rebuked
and changed for the better.”3 The only use of these wild displays of generosity
was to provide Christians with examples of heroic giving,

                                         72
                   wealth in the christian church


   by which lazy members of our churches are to be challenged to action, see-
   ing that they barely break a single loaf of bread to feed the starving Christ
   [in the poor], while those who lavish wealth on the theater [spend so heavily
   that they] leave hardly a loaf of bread for their own sons.4

   These sermons were preached at Hippo, at Carthage, and in the little cities of
the Medjerda valley. Placed at the very center of the most urbanized region in the
Latin West, where the traditions of civic love had remained most vigorous, Au-
gustine challenged the phenomenon of civic euergetism head-­on.
   Augustine chose his target carefully. In his sermons, his criticisms never
touched the great annona system that kept the plebs of Rome in food, although
(as we have seen) this system revealed so brutally the difference between an old-­
world benefaction made to citizens and the new style of Christian charity to the
poor. For the annona was an imperial matter. The annona had been granted by
the emperor Augustus, acting as an urban benefactor on a grand scale, as his gift
to the people of Rome.5 Every year the collection and transport of the annona
for Rome filled the docks of Hippo and Carthage with ships laden with grain
and oil. The annona was the secret of much of the wealth of fourth-­century Af-
rica.6 For this reason alone, the annona of Rome was untouchable.
   But the local games were different. Still performed with gusto in Carthage
and elsewhere, they laid bare the mechanisms that caused so much money to flow
in what was for Augustine the wrong direction—­away from the poor and the
churches. The games made clear, every time they were offered, that the rich lis-
tened only to the ancient, civic voice of the populus and not to the voice of their
bishops: “They treat the poor with disgust because the people do not roar [in
acclamations] that the poor should receive anything.”7 As Augustine saw it, things
had not changed since the days of Magerius at Smirat, almost two centuries be-
fore. The people were the “lords” of the games. And the people had no use for the
poor.
   It is worthwhile to linger a little on what constituted the originality of Augus-
tine’s approach. Many of his criticisms of the games would have struck his hear-
ers as thoroughly conventional. The games had been denounced for centuries,
and not only by Christians. They had long been the butt of a high-­minded coun-
terculture. Philosophers had frequently criticized the games for their sensuality,
for their potential for violence, and for the crazy vanity they inspired in those
who gave them.8
   But only Augustine and his Christian contemporaries saw the games in terms
of a conflict of giving. This was new. They also saw them in terms of a conflict of
loves: “love of the city” was pitted against “love of the poor.” In this, Christian
preachers deliberately echoed the mystique of civic euergetism. Urban benefac-
tors had taken great care to project an image of themselves as persons driven to

                                        73
                                   chapter 4


dramatic acts of generosity by deep love—­love of their city. As a result, the givers
of the games could be presented as sinister doubles of the Christian almsgiver.
Amor civicus and charity were twins. Both were said to be driven by fierce love.
As for the theater itself, it was not only a place of cruelty and debauch, as many
philosophers had complained; it was also a place of social bonding. In that re-
spect it was a counterchurch. The wild enthusiasms and the glowing sense of
solidarity the theater conjured up on high occasions made it, in the words of an
eastern writer, nothing less than “the Church of Satan.”9


                      Church and Circus: A Tug of War?

In preaching in this way, Augustine deliberately engineered the imaginative col-
lision of two worlds. He juxtaposed the city and the church in terms of two dis-
tinctive and seemingly incompatible styles of giving. In doing this, he and his
Christian contemporaries (who preached in much the same vein in other parts
of the empire) created what can best be called a “representation” of the relation
between church and city in late Roman society, in which there was constant
competition between the one and the other.
    Scholars have often been misled by the vivid contrasts evoked by such preach-
ing. It has become a commonplace to write about the changes in the late Roman
city (and indeed, about changes in the empire as a whole) in terms of a straight-
forward tug of war between church and city for the control of wealth. In the
brisk words of Arnaldo Momigliano:
   Money which would have gone to the building of a theatre or an aqueduct
   now went to the building of churches and monasteries. The social equilib-
   rium changed—­to the advantage of the spiritual and physical conditions
   of monks and priests, but to the disadvantage of the ancient institutions of
   the empire.10
   But we must always remember that real life in the later Roman empire did not
move as quickly as Christian preachers hoped that it might. The idea that church
and city were locked in a relentless zero-­sum conflict for limited resources and
that the church eventually won because it emptied the pockets of the rich in its
favor does not bear close scrutiny for two reasons.
   First: So far we have studied only the self-­image of the games. But we must
be careful not to confuse this self-­image with their actual practice. Public repre-
sentations of civic life expected the games to be expensive. A benefactor was sup-
posed to court financial ruin on behalf of his city. But this rarely happened in
reality. Planned for long in advance and often presented with a canny sense of
economy, the games were seldom the “status bloodbaths” that they claimed to

                                         74
                    wealth in the christian church


be.11 Outlay on the civic games was a relatively small item in the overall budget of
the rich. The best comparison may be with the outlays of parliamentary candi-
dates in the conduct of elections in eighteenth-­century England. Apart from a
few instances, these rarely amounted to crippling sums. What mattered was
that in such elections (as in the games of the later empire), the candidate should
claim to have made a splash in wooing the voters. For a hotly contested election
(with all the rowdy junketing and outright bribery associated with it) was like
the Roman games. Both happenings condensed an entire image of society: an
England proud to be a land of “free suffrages” that needed to be canvassed; a late
Roman city proud to be the gathering place of a free populus that needed to be
entertained.12
    Second: The more we study in detail the behavior of the Christian rich
throughout the empire (such as those of whom we have a hint from their grave-
stones in the catacomb of Santa Cristina at Bolsena), the more we realize that
few of them maintained the stark opposition between almsgiving in church and
civic benefactions in the circus on which their clergy had come to insist. Many
rich persons doubtless did both. To take one revealing example: African councils
of the time of Augustine condemned the sons of bishops who had laid on games.
As members of the class of town councillors, they had plainly inherited from
their fathers both the obligations and the tastes of civic benefactors.13 They saw
no inconsistency between their public roles in the city and their Christian piety.
They were unimpressed by the either-­or choice presented to them by the clergy.
It bore little relation to the complexities of their real life as members de rigueur
of a class of givers.


                 “Men may have no use for them, but God has”

             The Poor and the Boundaries of Society

Altogether, the rise of Christianity in the cities of the late Roman West cannot
be explained simply in terms of the collapse of civic euergetism in favor of alms-
giving. We are dealing with a change more profound than a straightforward
switch in the beneficiaries of public giving, by which giving to citizens was re-
placed by giving to the poor. The emergence of the poor as highly charged ob-
jects of concern involved an imaginative revolution. Let us linger for a moment
on what this might involve.
    It is easy to forget that Christianity, though we like to study it with alert inter-
est in terms of its impact on late Roman society, was above all a religious move-
ment. Not unlike the Buddhism that entered so dramatically into the somewhat
stolid world of imperial China (between the fifth and seventh centuries ad),

                                          75
                                    chapter 4


Christianity was a religion “avid for the incommensurable.”14 Christians needed
to create their own image of society on a scale worthy of the vaulting spiritual
ambition of their faith. They tended to do this by placing in society itself a series
of unmistakable—­even shocking—­“markers.” These markers served, as it were,
as wakeup calls. They would challenge believers and outsiders alike to realize the
unimaginably wide horizons opened up to humanity by the Christian message.
    Because of this, the most vocal advocates of Christianity in the late fourth
and fifth centuries tended to focus attention on extreme states of the human con-
dition. It is no accident that the torrent of Christian preaching on outreach to the
poor coincided with a sharp elevation of forms of total sexual renunciation—­of
virginity, of monastic withdrawal, and even, in certain circles, of clerical celibacy.
The same authors often expatiated on both themes: one thinks of Jerome who
combined high-­strung vignettes of virgin girls sheltered in the depths of noble
palaces15 with praise of Christian senators as they made their way through crowds
of beggars, scattering alms as they proceeded to the Senate house, and swabbed
the sores of the poor in hospitals they had founded.16 Outreach to the poor and
the adoption of virginity and celibacy were both held to be actions that went
against the normal grain of human nature. Both were tinged with a sense of he-
roic démesure that demonstrated the supernatural superiority of the Christian
religion, which could inspire its adherents to do such extraordinary things as
abandon sex and love the poor.17
    For this reason, giving to the poor tended to be presented as an act of altruism
in its purest and most challenging form. We should not underestimate the imagi-
native impact of such altruism. Late Roman society (like any other ancient soci-
ety) was a world held together at every level by intense networks of reciprocal
gifts. These ranged from the friendly exchange of services in neighborhood asso-
ciations to the euphoric dialogue between civic benefactors and their “people,” by
which the gift of civic pleasures was instantly repaid by the countergift of honor
and acclaim. It was a world that appeared to be ruled by iron laws of reciprocity.
In such a world, it was considered bad luck to dream that one gave money to a
beggar. The dream foretold death: “For Death is like a beggar, who takes and
gives nothing in return.”18
    It is only against this background that we can understand the frisson attached
by Christian writers and preachers to the ultimate, non-­reciprocated gift—­the
gift to the poor. In the challenging words of Lactantius, writing at the beginning
of the reign of Constantine, such giving showed that “The only true and certain
obligation is to feed the needy and useless. . . . Hope of a return must be abso-
lutely missing. . . . Men may have no use for them, but God has.”19
    Charity to the poor in the fourth century was presented by many Christian
writers in much the same way as the “gratuitous act” was once presented by exis-
tentialist writers of the 1950s. It was an almost terrifying statement of potential

                                         76
                    wealth in the christian church


boundlessness. But it was also an act of imaginative conquest. To claim such use-
less persons as part of the body of the Christian community was to claim society
as a whole, in the name of Christ, up to its furthest, darkest margins.
    But this dramatic attitude toward the poor created an imaginative dilemma
among Christians. Christel Freu has drawn attention to this dilemma in an out-
standing study, Les figures du pauvre dans les sources italiennes de l’antiquité tar­
dive. As Freu has shown, the image of the poor in Christian preaching swayed
with dizzying zest between two poles: the poor were treated either as “others” or
as “brothers.” Were the poor “others”—­to be treated as creatures at the very edge
of society to which Christians were expected to reach out in defiance of common
sense, as writers such as Lactantius seemed to imply? Or were they “brothers”—­to
be treated as neighbors and fellow members of the church? Ideas of what a Chris-
tian society should be like differed greatly according to the imaginative pole at
which the image of the poor rested.20 Let us follow this tension in the Christian
preachers and authors of the fourth and fifth centuries.
    First of all, Christian preaching was responsible for a dramatic, if unintended,
diminution of the image of the poor in late Roman society. The poor were fre-
quently seen to represent an extreme of the human condition, persons teetering
on the brink of destruction and condemned to the outer margins of society. Con-
gregations all over the Roman world were urged by their preachers to concen-
trate their attention on such persons. To use the well-­chosen words of Gertrude
Himmelfarb (when speaking of representations of the poor in Victorian London),
the imaginative logic of such preaching had

   the conceptual effect of pauperizing the poor by first creating the most dis-
   tinctive, dramatic image of the lowest class, and then imposing that upon
   the lower classes as a whole.21

    Christian authors of this time contributed with zest to this tendency to “pau-
perize the poor.” When, around 404–­5, the poet Prudentius wrote about the
third-­century martyr Saint Lawrence, he used the occasion to paint an image of
the poor of Rome that was as violently bizarre as a baroque painting. Lawrence
(a deacon of the Roman church and thus responsible for its finances) was be-
lieved to have told his persecutor, the Prefect of Rome, that he would hand over
to him the fabled wealth of the Christian church. And sure enough he did: he
assembled the poor of Rome.

   He runs about the city gathering into one flock the companies of the in-
   firm and all the beggars who cry out for alms. . . . There a man showing two
   eyeless sockets directs his straying, faltering footsteps with a stick; a crip-
   ple with a broken knee; a one legged man. . . . Here is one whose limbs are
   covered with running sores. . . . Such people he seeks out through all the

                                         77
                                   chapter 4


   public squares, used as they were to being fed by Mother Church. . . . There
   stood the company of poor men in their swarms, a ragged sight. They greet
   the Prefect with a roar for alms.22

In this scene, Prudentius made plain what contemporary bishops asserted.23 The
wealth of the church existed only to take care of such miserable persons.
    It was a heady image of society. In my book Poverty and Leadership in the
Later Roman Empire, I drew attention to the working out of this dramatic rep-
resentation of the poor.24 Put bluntly: the “pauperizing” rhetoric of Christian
authors has contributed heavily to the “binary tunnel vision” that still bedevils
the writing of the social history of the later Roman empire.25 It is largely under
the influence of Christian preaching that we tend to think of late Roman society
as divided irrevocably between rich and poor and of the poor as living always in
a state of abject poverty. As we have already seen, our study of the intermediate
classes of the Roman world has suffered seriously from this crude image of the
structure of late Roman society.
    To this I would now add that the binary vision projected by Christian preach-
ing not only had the effect of pauperizing the poor. It also had the effect of “di-
vitizing” the rich. It tended to present all members of the rich as equally out­
rageously wealthy. The significant differences in wealth within the senatorial
class and within the elites of the cities are ignored.
    For the logic of Christian preaching was to encourage the rich to reach out to
the poor in such a way as to join the very top of society to the very bottom. In
this way, Christianity could be seen as vertically as well as horizontally all inclu-
sive. Not only did the churches reach out to the very edges of society—­to the
ominous crowds of beggars gathered in public places. Through the charitable
activities of the rich, Christianity was supposed to reach downward from mighty
palaces to beggars’ hovels. Top and bottom—­the very rich and the very poor—­
faced each other in a one-­to-­one relationship in which all the intermediate gra-
dations of society had been elided.
    This emphasis on the unmediated relationship between the imagined very
rich and the very poor changed the temper of a long tradition of Roman social
criticism; it began to take on a more radical tone. As we have seen, previous tra-
ditions of criticism of the rich had tended to be generated by the rich themselves
as they patrolled the behavior of their fellow rich. The division that had mattered
was that between the “good” and the “bad” rich—­effectively, between your rich
and the other rich. It was not the division between rich and poor. By contrast,
when Ambrose stood up to preach in Milan (between 374 and 397 but especially
in the 380s), he did not do so only to castigate the lifestyle of the bad rich. He
spoke as an advocate of the oppressed poor. For if the rich were to be urged, for


                                        78
                    wealth in the christian church


the first time, to be their brothers’ keepers, then they could also be held to ac-
count for being their brothers’ oppressors.26


                             “Not Justice, But a Cry”

                      The Model of Ancient Israel

The intervention of a preacher such as Ambrose, toward the end of the fourth
century, showed that the poor could no longer be spoken of only as “others”—­as
beggars to whom Christians should reach out across the notional chasm that
divided the rich and the poor. They were also “brothers,” members of the Chris-
tian community who could also claim justice and protection.
    Christians had been challenged to think of the poor in this way because they
had come to breathe the air of a non-­classical society that had slowly but surely
become part of their imaginative world. In the Hebrew Scriptures (read in the
West in Latin translations that varied from region to region) rich and poor were
presented as facing each other directly. They did so in the prayers of the Psalms,
in the denunciations of the Prophets, and in vivid incidents in the history of the
kingdom of Israel. But in the pages of the Old Testament the poor did not face
the rich as beggars asking for alms. Rather, in the manner of an ancient Near
Eastern society, the poor came before the powerful in search of justice. They
spoke of themselves as “poor” not because they were destitute but because they
had deliberately cast off their social advantages and presented themselves as
helpless and in need of justice and protection. They challenged the powerful to
give judgment in their favor. They came as plaintiffs, not as beggars.27
    The cry of the poor in the Old Testament was a cry for justice. It was a cry made
by free men and women, often of moderate—­some even of considerable—­means.
It was the cry of victims. But these were not the victims of poverty so much as
they were the victims of violence and oppression brought upon them by persons
more powerful than themselves.28 It was this relation of petition to justice that
gave weight to the Hebrew assonance by which zeaqah—­“the cry”—­was ex-
pected to be met by zedaqah—­“righteousness.” And “righteousness” was achieved
through an act of justice granted by the powerful to the weak. The word only
later came to mean alms given by the wealthy to the poor. This “elegant juxtapo-
sition of words” did not escape the alert eyes of Jerome, in 408–­10, as he com-
mented on the classic phrase of the prophet Isaiah: He looked for justice, but be­
hold, bloodshed; for righteousness (zedaqah) but, behold, a cry (zeaqah) (Isa. 5:7).29
    The absorption of the language and history of the Hebrew Scriptures in the
Christian communities between the fourth and sixth centuries slowly but surely


                                          79
                                   chapter 4


added a rougher and more assertive texture to the Christian discourse on pov-
erty. The poor were not simply others—­creatures who trembled on the margins
of society, asking to be saved by the wealthy. Like the poor of Israel, they were
also brothers. They had the right to “cry out” for justice in the face of oppressors
along with all other members of the “people of God.”


                     Auxilium civibus: Help to the citizens

                From “Poor of the Church” to Plebs

This was a distinctive Christian reading of the Old Testament. Its rise to promi-
nence was slow, but once it had been established, in the course of the fifth and
sixth centuries, it represented a decisive change in the role of Christianity in the
late Roman world. The preachers of the fourth and early fifth centuries still
strove for a victory over the circus. But it was the redefinition of the Christian
poor (derived from the Old Testament) that did the most to secure the eventual
triumph of Christianity in the cities in the course of the fifth century. The adop-
tion of a view that saw the poor not only as beggars but also as persons in search
of justice and protection reflected mounting pressure within the Christian com-
munities themselves to engage in forms of social action that had wider effects
than mere charity to the destitute.
    As we read the texts of the late fourth and fifth centuries, we must bear in
mind the double movement in the image of the poor to which Christel Freu has
drawn attention. The image of the poor sank dramatically due to the demands
of a Christian pathos that concentrated on the need to reach out to the “needy
and useless.” However, this downward focus on the destitute was countered by
an upward slippage of the notion of the poor, largely associated with the lan-
guage of the Old Testament. In ancient Israel, the “poor” had never been the
“needy and useless.” They had been much more like the plebs of Rome, as they
saw themselves—­vulnerable persons compared with the rich but by no means
beggars. They belonged to the traditional core of society, not to its margins. They
were persons with rights for which they might cry out.
    Very soon, the plebs of many cities realized that the poor of Israel were more
like themselves than were the wretched poor of Christian preaching. A language
taken from the Hebrew Scriptures gave to the average inhabitant of late Roman
cities a new purchase on the powerful. It also provided them with new advocates
in the persons of Christian bishops and clergymen. Christian bishops such as
Ambrose could bring the “cry of the poor” for justice to the attention of the great
by claiming to be modern avatars of the prophets of ancient Israel.


                                        80
                     wealth in the christian church


    This upward slippage (which became increasingly plain in the course of the
fifth century) had decisive consequences, which we will follow generation by
generation and region by region in this book. It reflected the social texture of the
Christian communities. As we have already seen, the resilience of Christianity
sprang from its firm base in the middling and lower classes of the cities. Through-
out the fourth and fifth centuries, this mediocritas remained the solid keel of the
Christian congregations. Many of the clergy also came from this stratum of urban
society. As a result, the success of the churches cannot be explained only by their
outreach to the very poor, as this was proposed by Christian preachers. But nor
can it be explained only by a switch in giving on the part of the class of rich urban
benefactors. It is best understood as a result of the zest with which the lesser
townsfolk rallied to the church by taking on themselves the role of the poor of
Israel. Like the poor of Israel, they felt entitled to raise a cry in the face of oppres-
sion and impoverishment and to turn to their religious leaders for protection.
    Ultimately, the Christian bishops rose to prominence neither through foster-
ing the very poor nor through persuading the very rich to switch their generos-
ity from the circus to the churches. It was through winning the middle. This
happened when members of the plebs came to see themselves as avatars of the
“poor of Israel.” They did not present themselves as “others”—­as beggars—­but
as “brothers.” In the course of the fifth century, they brought with them into the
Christian churches a sharp sense of entitlement. They claimed the care of the
bishop with the same insistence that they had formerly shown when they had
elicited generosity from urban benefactors as the populus of the city. This view of
the relation between the bishop and the urban community as a whole emerged
slowly. Ambrose, in Milan, was perhaps the first to state it clearly, in the 380s.
But by the first quarter of the sixth century, the results were plain. Around 530 a
bishop of Abellinum in Campania (modern Avellino) was praised on his sar-
cophagus for having performed a double duty. He was an almsgiver—­“a constant
source of comforts for the needy”—­but he was also an auxilium civibus—­“help
to the citizens.”30 Once bishops began to take on both roles, the cities would
soon be theirs.


              Christianity and the City: Continuity or Rupture?

Faced with this long-­term evolution, which we will follow throughout the en-
tire course of this book, it is tempting to think that for all the sharp antitheses
drawn by Christian preachers, little changed in the cities of the West in the course
of the fourth and fifth centuries. It is widely believed by historians of the period
that Christianity rose to prominence because the church emerged as a viable


                                           81
                                    chapter 4


substitute for civic life. It is said that the bishop and his clergy replaced the town
council; that the generosity of benefactors was diverted away from the circus to
the church; that the drama of the liturgy and of the festivals of the martyrs re-
placed the mystique of the forum and the theater; and that the sense of urban
privilege associated with membership of a populus was given a new lease on life
under the capacious label of the bishop’s care of the poor. One is tempted to say
plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose.
    It would not be entirely wrong to say this. Plus ça change, plus c’est la même
chose has proved to be a sound adage. A sober respect for the continuities of
Roman institutions and of Roman elite behavior within the Christian churches
of the fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries has inspired some of the very best studies
of the rise of Latin Christianity in modern times. But there is a danger that the
adage can cease to be an interpretive tool and become, instead, a mantra.
    This danger is to be resisted. For there is an implicit teleology in an approach
that emphasizes only continuity in the emergence of the Christian churches in
late Roman society. Behind this approach lies the assumption that traditions
and values inherited from the classical past were bound to survive in one form or
another and that the Christianization of the Roman world was an event that was
somehow external to the deeper continuities in worldview and social structure.
    Many skeptical scholars have said that Christianity added only a superficial
wash to this basic continuum. Bishops might rise to prominence, but business as
usual remained the order of the day. The clergy merely took over the duties and
the attitudes of the local magnates whose religion they claimed to have replaced
but whose social habits they continued with little break deep into the early
middle ages. Posed in this way, the answer to the question “What difference did
Christianity make?” should be, bluntly: “Very little.”31
    Other scholars are of more pious disposition. Whether this piety is directed
toward the Christian church or ancient Rome, they claim that Christianity did,
indeed, transform the Roman world. But they insist that this was a benign trans-
formation that took place without major fractures. Christianity identified itself
with the values of Roman civilization in such a way as to ensure that much of
the dignity of Rome would survive, if in a new “baptized” form, in the Catholic
church of the early middle ages. Christianity, as it were, “took the place” of Rome.
We are dealing with a “permanence of traditions and values inherited from the
past . . . in the midst of a society progressively conquered by the new faith.”32
    In either case, a view that emphasizes continuity alone insists that we are not
faced with the brutal end of a society.
    Altogether, this is a comfortable narrative. It is a narrative that relies on what
Kimberley Bowes, in her recent book, Private Worship, Public Values and Reli­
gious Change in Late Antiquity, has acutely characterized as a “swap sale” model
of change:

                                         82
                   wealth in the christian church


   Christianization narratives generally tend to formulate . . . social changes
   as a swap sale; they describe how the senator exchanged his consular robe
   for a bishop’s miter; how the civic bureaucracy was charged with building
   churches and hostels instead of amphitheaters and baths. . . . This unalloyed
   confidence that one practice, thing or social role was exchanged for an-
   other assumes a tacit teleology.33

Such teleology can be misleading. It makes the rise of Christianity in the West
seem to result from an almost foreordained convergence of Christian practices
with the habits of an earlier, non-­Christian world. As we will see, accounts of the
Christianization of Roman society that are framed in this manner fail to do jus-
tice to the elements of novelty that also accompanied the rise of Christianity in
the later empire. It is to them that we must now turn.



            Caelum donis terrestribus emit: He bought up Heaven
                              with earthly gifts

      “Treasure in Heaven” and the Working of the Gift

In the last few sections I summed up the views of those who argue for continu-
ities in outlook and practice between non-­Christian institutions (such as civic
euergetism) and the development of the Christian church. I do not do this so as
to reject them in their entirety; they contain a large measure of truth. But it is
important that we supplement them. This is because certain aspects of Christian
giving represented a novelty not only in the professed aim of this giving—­to
give to the poor—­but in the motivations ascribed to the giver. What differed
most of all was the emphasis on the supernatural efficacy of the Christian gift.
We are dealing with a system of religious giving within a religious community
that had a profile all its own. It could not be “swapped” unthinkingly for forms
of giving that had been dominant in the non-­Christian world. Something new
had emerged.
    In this respect, we must not underestimate the slow but sure development of
a Christian common sense of wealth that had already taken root. The bishops,
preachers, and donors of the post-­370 generation did not step into an imagina-
tive and ritual vacuum that their Roman habits—­and their Roman habits alone—­
sufficed to fill. Far from it. They came to take part in an inherited conglomerate
of Christian notions about pious giving, many of whose components were shared
with contemporary Judaism and whose outlines reached back for almost a mil-
lennium (through the writings of the Old Testament) to the days of the Achae-
menid empire and to the Wisdom Literature of the Hellenistic period.

                                        83
                                     chapter 4


    In this respect, the rich who entered the Christian communities came to
breathe a largely novel air. The notion of the working of the gift itself was differ-
ent. In some way or another, to give within the Christian churches was to open a
path to heaven. With vertiginous incongruity, any Christian gift, from the small-
est to the greatest, was thought to be instantly magnified out of all proportion
in an other world. It became “treasure in heaven.” This was the conclusion that
preachers drew insistently from the story of the Rich Young Man. In this story,
Christ had said to the Rich Young Man: Sell what you possess and give to the poor;
and you will have treasure in heaven (Matt. 19:21 with Mark 10:21 and Luke
18:22). He had repeated this command to his disciples: Sell your possessions, and
give to the poor; provide yourselves with . . . a treasure in the heavens which does not
fail (Luke 12:33, cf. Matt. 6:19–­20). Late Roman Christians of all classes and
levels of culture took these sayings of Jesus seriously. They seemed to imply a join-
ing of heaven and earth that a non-­Christian would have perceived as utterly
incongruous. A small example shows this. In the mid-­fifth century, an inscription
was placed above the reused classical sarcophagus in which the famous bishop,
Hilary of Arles, was buried. Part of the inscription was utterly traditional. Hilary
“had left the husk of his flesh to fly up to the stars.” This would have made sense
to any pagan. But the inscription went on to state that Hilary had also carried his
wealth with him to that high place. For the inscription continued:

   Caelum donis terrestribus emit.
   (He bought up Heaven with earthly gifts.)34

That wealth despised on earth should somehow follow the ethereal soul up to
the stars opened up a new horizon.
   We should linger on the novelty of this attitude to the joining of heaven with
earthly wealth. It is one that is in many ways strange to us. Indeed, it has caused
exquisite embarrassment to modern scholars. In no modern dictionary of the
Christian church does the word “treasure” appear! Yet, if we wish to understand
the economic upsurge of the Christian churches at this time, it is important that
we overcome a prudery no late Roman Christian would have shared.
   The reason for our modern hesitation lies deep in our own society. In the
words of John Parry, in his discussion of the relation between gift giving and
monetary exchange:

   As other transactions become increasingly differentiated from other types
   of social relationship, the transactions appropriate to each become ever
   more polarized in terms of symbolism and ideology.35

  We have now created two distinct spheres—­the world of buying and selling
and the world of religious actions. To join the language of one sphere—­that of

                                          84
                   wealth in the christian church


commerce and treasure—­with the sphere of religion now strikes us as a joining
of incompatibles so inappropriate as to seem almost an off-­color joke.
    Plainly Roman Christians did not share this modern inhibition. They did not
consider themselves to be dealing with two distinct spheres—­commerce and
religion—­in which the ethos of one sphere was considered deeply inappropriate
to that of the other. Rather, they thought in terms of two different orbits of
exchange.36 Purely earthly gifts moved, as it were, on a quick circuit. Money ex-
changed hands. Clients and patrons exchanged favors and support. The grand
gift of the urban benefactor was greeted, instantly, by the roar of the countergift
of praise. All of these exchanges happened in this world only. The urban bene-
factors whose statues crowded the forum sought posthumous fame only “in the
sweet air” of the living.37 They hoped that their glory might last on earth, but
there was no thought that their gifts might ever follow them to heaven.
    Gifts to the other world were different. They were thought of as having set off
on an orbit so far distant and so divorced from human time as to leave the imagi-
nation haunted by thoughts of incommensurability. What was the relation be-
tween the earthly gift and what it might bring in a world beyond the stars? We
should not look with modern primness at the fact that, for late Roman Chris-
tians, giving took place in the expectation of reward. Gifts to God or the gods
had always been made in the expectation of benefits. What interests the histo-
rian of the late Roman imagination is the buildup of a new pattern of religious
giving that was different from the sacrifices and ex-­voto dedications of tradi-
tional paganism.
    This new pattern was based on an imaginative tension that was generated by
the joining of two incommensurables. Earth and heaven were brought together
by the Christian gift. And this was done through the daring extension of the
earthly language of exchange, commerce, and treasure (the world of the short,
quick orbit, as it were) to the unimaginable world of heaven. It has been correctly
remarked that seldom in any literature have money and images borrowed from
commerce bulked so large as in the literature of late Roman Christianity.38
    There were many reasons for this. Some lay deep in the past appropriated by
Christianity from Judaism through sharing the same Scriptures. Ever since the
sixth century BC, the explosion of commerce associated with the invention of
money and with the creation of a vast common market in the Achaemenid Per-
sian empire had influenced Jewish notions of religious giving. Commercial met-
aphors conveyed a sense of infinite possibilities and a capacity for instant change.
Sins were seen as debts. And debts could be canceled overnight by the mercy of
God. Gifts to the poor could be seen as loans to God. God would repay them
with unimaginable interest. Altogether, what seems at first sight to modern per-
sons to be the most crude commercialization of the religious imagination was
favored precisely because, at the time, it infused relations with God with a sense

                                        85
                                   chapter 4


of the infinite that echoed the breathtaking expansion of the horizons of the
possible that accompanied the rise of a monetarized economy. The volatility,
the seemingly limitless opportunities for profit, and the sheer shimmer of such
an economy were adopted as apposite ideograms for the incalculable mercy of
God.39
   The language of the Hebrew Scriptures of the Persian period, along with the
Wisdom literature, was shared by Jews and Christians. To this a further dimen-
sion was added through the sayings and parables of Christ. These also empha-
sized the vertiginous hiatus between small human actions and their unimagin­
able repercussion in an other world. Christian preachers and writers derived an
entire aesthetic of inverted magnitudes from the words of Christ. They empha-
sized Christ’s praise of the widow who offered her small coin to the treasury of
the Temple:
   Truly I say to you, this poor widow has put in more than all those who are
   contributing to the treasury. For they [the others] all contributed of their
   abundance; but she out of her poverty. (Mark 12:43–­44; Luke 21:3–­4)
They constantly repeated Christ’s promise of heaven to those who gave “even a
cup of water” to the poor and to his wandering disciples (Matt. 10:42). A gift of
copper coins and of basic food and clothing to a beggar reverberated with a sense
of their exact opposite—­the off-­scale quality of the reward in heaven that awaited
these small acts.
    These were no fine-­spun metaphors. They infused the humdrum practices of
Christian giving with a sense of drama. In Augustine’s Hippo, the regular poor
box was called “the Quadriga.” It was seen as a four-­horse chariot that swung low
to sweep the alms of the faithful (as it had once swept the prophet Elijah him-
self ) far beyond the stars to heaven.40
    Such a notion of giving was not the only one that circulated in Christian
circles. But it soon became widespread. This may be because it was a notion that
was peculiarly well fitted to a socially diverse religious community. First and
foremost, it flattened the hierarchy of the givers. To place treasure in heaven em-
powered the average donor. For the reward of the gift was thought to be utterly
out of proportion to the gift itself. Heroic giving was no longer seen as the mo-
nopoly of the truly rich. Every gift, however small, brought about nothing less
than the joining of heaven and earth.
    Nor did the right to give become a cause for competition. Fierce interfamily
rivalries had goaded urban benefactors to compete in giving to their cities.41 We
can see this happening even more clearly on the higher level of the Roman Sen-
ate. In the fourth century, the financing of the major games of Rome had become
a sort of financial sumo wrestling. The nobiles of Rome—­the possessors of old
money—­brandished the sheer weight of their incomes and the stunning sums

                                        86
                   wealth in the christian church


they were prepared to pay for the games of their family in order to push upstart
senators—­usually of bureaucratic background—­out of the limelight.42
    This was not the case with Christian giving. As we saw, members of the rich
often came to the church so as to find there a social urban lung. They valued in
the churches a certain lowering of the sense of hierarchy and a slowing down of
the pace of competition. They found that, in the churches, they did not have to
give so much at any one time, provided that they gave frequently. The sense that
the glory of heaven stood behind their every gift enabled the Christian rich to
contribute regularly and with that much less strain. By giving in the Christian
churches, they took part in a communal religious venture tinged with expecta-
tions of limitless rewards. For in this common venture the value of individual
gifts was amplified. The weight of hundreds of pious offerings gave momentum
to one’s own generosity.43
    Hence the double aspect of the Christianity that had emerged in the Latin
West in the crucial period between 370 and 400 ad. A new institution had be-
come prominent in a society that knew what it was to give. Its upper classes had
always valued the exhilarating “rush” associated with giving to an esteemed pub-
lic cause, of which civic euergetism was the most spectacular and the most cer-
tain of acclaim. Great opportunities for giving now opened up in the relatively
new Christian churches. But how would these traditions of highly personalized
display impinge on a group that had hitherto been notable for its capacity for
collective action?
    This was a real dilemma. Ideally, giving was open to all Christians. But this
was a myth. It was no more true in the fourth century than was the nineteenth-­
century myth that the great Catholic Cathedral of Saint Patrick’s in Manhattan
was built “through the pennies of Irish chambermaids.” (In reality, the first
building of Saint Patrick’s was made possible through a campaign by which the
bishop approached a hundred leading figures for $1,000 each.)44 Furthermore,
what sociologists of modern religion call “skewness” appears to be an iron law in
religious giving: 20 percent of the congregation usually contribute 80 percent of
the funds of the religious community that they support.45
    Nevertheless, in late Roman conditions, a skewness in giving that mobilized
even 20 percent of all believers was a remarkable phenomenon. It would have
touched a large and diversified section of the community, drawn from beneath
the levels of the elite. We have seen this social diversity in action on the mosaic
floors of the fourth-­century churches of northern Italy. To hold together such a
socially differentiated group of givers was one of the great achievements of the
Christian churches of this time. It was based on a creative synergy between new
wealth (brought by rich Christians) and a low-­profile religious group that had
already been schooled to engage in collective ventures. Above all, it was a group
whose members were driven by a notion of the gift that dwarfed the size of indi-

                                       87
                                   chapter 4


vidual contributions. For each gift opened up a path that led directly from earth
to heaven.
   Yet we need only look at the church buildings of the fourth century to see
that the fingerprints of wealthy donors were already clearly visible all over them.
As far apart as Africa and northern Gaul, many Christian basilicas bore the name
of their builders, many of whom were rich laypersons.46 Names were carved
every­where. At the shrine of Saint Alexander on the Via Nomentana close to
Rome, the names of lay donors were carved on the rails around the tomb and on
the bases of the columns that supported the canopy above it. They jostled the
name of the local bishop.47 Looking at these names, we could be looking at the
products of yet another generation of benefactors driven by civic love. But these
benefactors had found a home in a different community. Their names lay on the
columns of altars and on the pavements of basilicas. They were not to be read on
inscriptions placed on the bases of statues in the forum. And these gifts were now
thought to have gained acclaim in a distant heaven and not only the cheers of a
populus on earth.


              Pseudomorphosis: Giving in an Age of Transition

The contrast between euergetism in the city and pious giving in the churches
seems clear to us now. But we must always remember that in the late fourth cen-
tury and the early decades of the fifth, it was not all that clear. This was because
the gifts themselves carried many meanings. Some could be seen as grand acts of
patronage in an ancient tradition. Others could be seen as made to expiate sin, to
thank God, or to open up the road to heaven. The notion of “treasure in heaven,”
though it later proved to be central, was not the only one that directed Christian
generosity. This uncertainty is not surprising. As a recent study of gift giving has
reminded us, gifts are “not given fixed entities, but contested constructions.”48
They do not always bear unambiguous labels. Much depends on how they are seen
by others and on the constructions placed upon them by the givers themselves.
   In a transitional age, such as the late fourth century, these “contested construc-
tions” could vary widely. Not every Christian gave for the same reasons. Indeed,
not every Christian knew for certain exactly why he or she was giving. For many,
almsgiving to the poor was simply a good habit. It merged easily into other, more
traditional forms of humane behavior such as had long been practiced by pagans,
Jews, and Christians alike. Religious giving was widespread, but we do not know
whether it invariably carried the heavy freight of meaning that preachers and
Christian apologists wished to place upon it.
   In this respect, we must always remember that we do not meet the average
Christian in the pages of books or in the texts of the sermons of Christian bish-

                                         88
                   wealth in the christian church


ops. We meet such persons, rather, on their tombstones. One such was Karissi-
mus, the Dearest One, who was buried at Tharros on the west coast of Sardinia
some time in the fourth century. We know him from the inscription that was
placed on the little table beside his tomb, at which his friends and the poor
would gather to dine in his honor. The inscription was content to merge many
worlds. It spoke of Karissimus as “a good provider for his friends, he [also] kept
the commandments concerning [care of ] the poor.” Beneath the inscription is
an image of a circus horse. Flanked by a palm of victory, it trots briskly with the
Chi Rho (XP) monogram branded on its rump. Those who set up Karissimus’s
monument evidently chose an image associated with the ancient mystique of the
hippodrome to emphasize their friend’s victory over death and the good cheer
that his modest foundation provided both to themselves and to the poor.49
    None of those gathered around the table of Karissimus could have realized
that, eventually, the ever clearer and more ambitious constructions placed by
leading Christians on the practice of religious giving might usher in the middle
ages. Yet the middle ages did come. A large part of this book will be concerned
with how practices as low profile and as open to multiple constructions as the
good-­natured piety of Karissimus and his friends came to be massaged over time.
They came to bear the stamp of ever clearer meanings as we move from the
fourth into the fifth and sixth centuries.
    As we shall see, chapter by chapter, these clear meanings did not emerge all at
once and only from the minds of the leaders of the churches. Like pebbles slowly
polished into smoother and more regular shapes in the swirling waters of a great
river, the constructions placed on Christian giving emerged as the result of the
constant (and frequently abrasive) interaction of differing constituencies within
the Christian churches—­clerical and lay, ascetic and married, aristocratic, mid-
dling, and popular. Behind the apparently unambiguous shape of a Christian
ideal of giving that was passed on to the Catholic middle ages, there lies nothing
less than an entire social history of Latin Christianity in the stormy years be-
tween 350 and 550 ad.
    For the time being, however, as we study the fourth century, we must resign
ourselves to not yet knowing the outcome of Christian habits of giving that still
seem to waver between many worlds, between the old and the new. In this,
we are in a situation resembling that of Chinese mandarins of strict Confucian
training when faced with the rise of Buddhism in their midst. They discovered to
their annoyance that the rise of Buddhist religious practices meant that things
were no longer quite what they seemed. An official of the Ming empire reported
that the Buddhists in his province had shown great zeal for building bridges.
This was a public venture of which any traditional Chinese gentleman was bound
to approve. But the official learned that the Buddhists were building bridges for
entirely the wrong reasons. They were acting on the belief that they would gain

                                        89
                                  chapter 4


personal karmic merit in another existence by contributing to the building of
such a bridge. A seemingly public-­spirited action that was totally intelligible in
terms of a long-­established Chinese tradition of public benefaction was being
driven by a private need for salvation. The mandarin was shocked: “Mixing this
up perversely, they care only for karmic reward and do good [public] works only
for this. . . . This is all contrary to the spirit of good works!”50
    Late Roman history is full of similar surprises. Writing about the quality of
late Roman civilization as a whole, the great historian of late antiquity Henri-­
Irénée Marrou once resorted to an image taken from the field of crystallography.
Some crystals undergo what has been called pseudomorphosis: their surface ap-
pearance remains the same, but the inner structures that support that surface
have changed entirely.51 In the next chapters we will look at the development
of Christianity in a world whose inner structures were rapidly changing despite
the appearance of so many features that gave the impression of an unchanged
surface continuous with traditions and with ways of acting rooted in a very an-
cient world.
    But in around 370 ad this story still lay in a future that was unknown to
every­one. A formerly low-­profile Christianity stood on the verge of an influx of
the rich. An economy and a social structure, whose boom and bust qualities
heightened the pace and drama of the rich in their relationship to the Christian
churches, seemed firmly in place—­only to be succeeded in the first half of the
fifth century by a chilling crash. Forms of urban spending that summed up the
aspirations of an ancient civic order still attracted wealthy donors. In order to
appreciate the variety of social landscapes and of the options that were still open
at this time, we should begin by visiting Rome and its environs as mirrored in the
life of a pagan senator who wished to be known above all as an ardent and old-­
style lover of his city: the nobleman Quintus Aurelius Symmachus.




                                       90
                           Chapter 5
                           •••••
                                Symmachus
          Being Noble in Fourth-­Century Rome




            Nobilissimi humani generis: The most noble persons
                            in the human race

It is usual to approach the Roman nobleman Quintus Aurelius Symmachus
(ca. 340–­ca. 402) as if he were a “contemporary ancestor” of the Christians of his
time. He is often presented as an isolated figure, cut off from the brave new world
of a triumphant Christianity by his traditional paganism, by his loyalty to the
Senate of Rome, and by his choice of Rome and old-­world Campania as his fa-
vored places of residence. Yet this is not so. Symmachus was never out of touch
with the world around him. He may well have been on personal terms with Am-
brose of Milan; he patronized the young Augustine; he would doubtless have
known of the youthful career of Paulinus of Nola and was a firm friend of Pauli-
nus’s teacher, the poet Ausonius of Bordeaux. Rather than standing as a lonely
relic of the past, Symmachus represented an ever-­present, living alternative to
Christian versions of what the Roman empire and its cities should be like. In
working through the abundant evidence presented by his letters, his speeches,
and his official memoranda, we can enter into the hopes and fears of a fourth-­
century nobleman and “lover of his city.” Symmachus provides us with what we
need—­a benchmark against which we can measure the changes in attitudes to-
ward wealth and its uses that had become ever more apparent in the lives and
writings of his Christian contemporaries. Let us first place Symmachus in his
world.
    Around 350, a traveler from the eastern provinces described Italy:

   Italy is a province abundant in everything, especially as it possesses this,
   the greatest of all goods: the most great, the most eminent, the imperial
   city . . . Rome. . . . It has a great Senate of rich men. If you would wish to

                                        93
                                    chapter 5


   look at them closely, you would find that everyone has either been a gover-
   nor or will soon be one; or there are those who are powerful but are un-
   willing [to hold offices for long periods], preferring to enjoy their wealth
   in security.1

To take the measure of such persons, it would be best to visit their palaces. These
lay in the depths of great gardens on top of the seven hills of Rome. The palace of
the greatest of them all—­that of the family of the Anicii—­lay on the Pincian Hill
in the northeast corner of Rome, looking out over the city toward the Capitol. It
was famous for the multicolored splendor of the marbles that paved its walk-
ways and sheathed its walls.2 At this time, it was the Roman residence of Sextus
Claudius Petronius Probus. We have already met Probus as a man of outstanding
and suspect wealth, gained and protected by frequent spells of high office.3
    Outside the Anician palace lay a courtyard like a miniature forum. It was
filled with statues bearing honorific inscriptions set up by grateful clients from
all over the Roman world. A loyal address offered to Probus by the inhabitants of
the north Italian provinces he had governed was discovered on this site. It was
carved on the base of a statue that had been erected to him. The delegation spoke
of themselves as the peculiares of Probus, his “very own” people. They praised
him in a string of adjectives that brought together (like the quarterings of a great
heraldic shield) the elements that exemplified “nobility” in fourth-­century Rome.
As a man of culture, Probus was “the light of letters and eloquence.” As a gover-
nor, he was a “master of [wise] provisions and regulations.” As a person, he was a
“model of good nature.” As a servant of the emperors, he was a veritable “high
priest of loyalty.” It was the combination of these qualities that made Probus “the
high peak of nobility.”4 Probus was not alone. Similar inscriptions have been
found, scattered all over Rome. They were written on the bases of statues that
stood in the halls and forecourts of the palaces of other noblemen.5
    For Romans of the fourth century (as of all previous ages), nobilitas was a
highly charged word. It meant, originally, to be well-­known, to stand out from
the crowd. To be a nobilis in this way involved the convergence of a triple claim
to excellence: birth, culture, and high office had to come together to make a true
nobleman.6 In the conditions of the fourth century, there was something chal-
lengingly indefinable about such claims. The Roman notion of nobility escaped
the definition of society associated with the reforms of Constantine. Constantine’s
extension of the senatorial title of vir clarissimus—­“most brilliant person”—­to
the leading members of the provincial elites had seemed to make the aristocra-
cies of the empire into a single legally defined class. But this regulation had little
effect in Rome. The “nobility” of the nobiles of Rome was not an exclusively legal
status. In the words of Christophe Badel, it was a “nobility conferred by nobil-
ity.”7 Nobility was not a rank laid down by others; it was a “social frontier.” And

                                         94
                 being noble in fourth-­c entury rome


it was the nobiles themselves who patrolled this frontier—­not the emperors.8
They decided who could join them as peers and who could not.
    The notion of nobility as a social frontier guided their marriage strategies.
Nobles could decide whether to keep non-­nobles out of the marriage market or
to let them in, to the advantage of their own family. They could marry down-
ward, so as to draw on the new wealth of up-­and-­coming provincial families. Or
they could marry upward, by marrying members of the imperial family of the
day.9 Usually they were careful to marry only among themselves. Unlike the aris-
tocracies of early modern and modern Europe, Romans did not consolidate their
wealth through primogeniture or entails. Instead, they maintained their wealth,
generation by generation, through carefully planned marriages. Intermarriage was
the secret of their vast fortunes. Wealth gained from the spoils of office played a
prominent role in contemporary perceptions of men such as Petronius Probus.
But these gains were incidental. What really mattered were the massive coagu­
lations of wealth that occurred as cousins married cousins within the charmed
circle of the nobility.10
    As a result, the wealth of the nobiles of Rome had a different flavor from the
wealth of other families. Their wealth was not that of parvenus, gained only re-
cently from collaboration with the new empire of Constantine. Rather, they were
the parvenus of an earlier age. Many of the families of fourth-­century Rome had
first come into wealth through supporting a leader who had been quite as ruth-
less as Constantine—­the emperor Septimius Severus (193–­211). Like Severus
himself, many came from Africa. They weathered the crisis of the third century,
and by 350 they were solidly established in Africa, Sicily, and southern Italy.11
They represented old money.
    But they could never be talked of only as wealthy. They were nobiles. To be
recognized as “noble” they had to shine in the proper, Roman style. To do so,
they needed public office. But unlike their wealth and their culture, public office
could not be summoned up, as it were, from within themselves. Office had to
come from the emperor. Ultimately, through the bestowal of governorships,
prefectures, and consulships, the court could reach into the very heart of the
nobility’s own definition of themselves. Put bluntly, a nobleman needed an offi-
cial post (even if he held it for only a short time) to make his nobility complete.
For this reason, the nobiles of Rome were less autonomous than they wished to
appear. They were as dependent on the imperial system as were the lesser nobility
of the provinces.12
    A nobleman would begin as a young man with a provincial governorship; the
most prestigious one was the Proconsulship of Africa. These junior posts would
be followed, in middle age, by the Prefecture of the City of Rome. But the ulti-
mate honor of a nobleman was the consulship. It is a commonplace to speak of
the consulship of the fourth century as if it were an office stripped of all authority.

                                          95
                                   chapter 5


It was usually held by the emperors and, at times, even by military men of barbar-
ian origin. But for a Roman nobleman, the prestige of the consulship ­remained
undimmed. It was a numinous office, heavy with archaic grandeur. A momen-
tary avatar of the kings of ancient Rome, swathed in stiff, gold embroidered
robes, the consul gave his name to the coming year—­with all the magic associa-
tions of prosperity the celebration of the Feast of the Kalends conjured up.13 To
take up the consulship was to become part of the deep past of Rome. Consuls
nominated in the 370s and 380s could think of themselves as holding an honor
that reached back for 870 years to the dawn of the republic.
    What is remarkable, when we consider the conditions of the fourth century,
is the extent to which the nobility of Rome took their honors for granted—­or,
at least, they claimed to be able to do so. In this they differed from the new aris-
tocracies that had been created in the provinces by imperial favor. We need only
look at the famous missorium traditionally associated with the emperor Theodo-
sius I (379–­95) to appreciate this difference. The huge silver dish makes plain how
the bestowal of high office was regarded outside Rome. Hovering, as it were,
against a sky of pure silver, the emperor was shown as larger than life. His head
was surrounded by a halo. Framed by the arches of his palace, he sat on a throne,
staring into the distance, far above a tiny figure into whose hands (reverently
veiled in the folds of an official cloak) he dropped a document of appointment.
The missorium may not have been produced by the court; it may have been made
by the recipient of the honor. Placed among the family’s silverware, it went out
of its way to remind the aristocracies of the region that nobility came from the
court alone.14 For a provincial, nobility was not a “nobility conferred by nobil-
ity.” It came from above. When Ausonius of Bordeaux, a mere provincial noble-
man from a family of town councillors in Aquitaine, received the consulship in
379, he spoke of it as nothing less than a miracle. Like the grace of God, it was
given to him by an act of “unspoken will”: “for what merit? I know of none.”15 It
could be the words of a later Christian bishop ruminating on predestination and
the grace of God. This was not how the nobles of Rome saw themselves. In the
words of Quintus Aurelius Symmachus (to whom we will turn for the remainder
of this chapter), they saw themselves as the nobilissimi humani generis—­“the
most noble persons in the human race.”16 High office was supposed to come to
them as their due.


        Landscapes of the Heart: Symmachus between Senate, City,
                            and Countryside

Most nobles of fourth-­century Rome remain two-­dimensional figures for us. We
see them only from the outside, through honorific inscriptions and occasional

                                        96
                 being noble in fourth-­c entury rome


mentions by contemporaries. But we do know one nobleman in greater detail.
This was Quintus Aurelius Symmachus, who was born around 340 and died some
time after 402. He preserved for posterity over nine hundred letters, a dossier of
Relationes (official memoranda from his time as Prefect of Rome), and some
speeches. Symmachus’s letters notoriously lack intimacy. They were public docu-
ments, written to innumerable friends and colleagues so as to get things done—
­to maintain friendships, to shore up alliances, to obtain favors, to advance the
 careers of protégés. Each one said next to nothing. Rather, their stilted and am-
 biguous phrases were like Chinese visiting cards—­ornate ideograms that were
 supposed to ring the right bell in those who received them.17
     But this is precisely their value to us. They were prepared for publication
partly by Symmachus himself and possibly by his son, Memmius.18 Filled with
creaking phrases endlessly repeated, they were, in a sense, Symmachus’s own hon-
orific inscription set up to himself. They show him not as an individual (as we
might hope of a modern letter writer) but as he would have wished to be seen by
his contemporaries. Here was a statue of a nobleman of Rome, made up of letters
and not of stone. The letters showed Symmachus doing what every other noble-
 man was doing, though their letters did not survive. They show him as standing
 at the center of a web of friendship and influence that stretched from one end of
 the Roman world to the other. But they also showed him on his home ground.
 He was an amator patriae, a “lover of his home town,” writ large. He was the lover
 of no ordinary patria, for his patria was Rome itself. It is on this aspect of his life
that this and the following chapter will concentrate. For Symmachus’s letters
give us the opportunity to explore the various levels on which “love of the home-
town” could be expressed by a Roman nobleman of the fourth century.
     Symmachus, indeed, stayed closer to his patria than did many of his more
ruthless colleagues. His career never took him away from the regions where
the wealth of his own family had lain for generations. In 365—­in his mid-­
twenties—­he was governor of Lucania and Bruttium (modern Basilicata and
Calabria). In 373 he became Proconsul of Africa. It was a term of service in an
area of great senatorial wealth. It ended with a personal visit to shore up his es-
tates in distant Mauretania. This was his only visit to the southern Mediterra-
nean. In 384 he became Prefect of Rome for five months; in 391, he became
consul. Altogether, Symmachus did no more than replicate the career of his
father.
     Symmachus was later known as a senator “of middling wealth.”19 This means
 “middling” for a nobleman of his status; he was, in fact, extremely rich. But he
 was a man of middling ambitions. He was known as Symmachus “the orator.”
 His principal successes were those of a diplomat (where he could shine as low
 key and eminently “representative”) rather than those of an administrator and a
 courtier.

                                          97
                                   chapter 5


   In recent years we have increasingly come to realize that Symmachus was far
from being a backwoods peer. Carefully studied by Cristiana Sogno, his letters
show him to have been an adroit senatorial politician. The learned and refresh-
ingly disabused study of the “last pagans of Rome” by Alan Cameron has con-
firmed this impression.20 But we must remember that we have discovered this by
not taking Symmachus at face value. Rather, we have done so through patient,
cumulative work which, as it were, takes a peek behind the lapidary self-­portrait
Symmachus has left us in the edition of his letters.
   Let us look at this self-­portrait for a moment. What is striking about it is the
skill with which Symmachus presented himself as a man set in a shimmering
landscape of the heart.
   The most prominent landmark in this landscape was the Senate House of
Rome. As a young man, in 376, he reported with delight that his speech before the
Senate had been well received. The pars melior generis humani—­“the elite of the
human race”—­had rallied to him.21 It was a memorable phrase. We should, how-
ever, remember that not many members of the human race were present when the
Senate met, in the narrow, high-­roofed hall at the head of the Forum, beneath the
Capitol. Symmachus would usually have addressed an audience of little more
than fifty persons. Yet he was sincere in his words. For him, the amplissimus ordo,
the “Grand Assembly” gathered in the Senate House of Rome, was the living
center of his life as a nobleman. In the well-­chosen words of a French scholar, he
went to the Senate regularly—­“as a practicing Catholic goes regularly to Mass.”22
   Symmachus regarded the Grand Assembly as an intimate college of noblemen.
The relation between the Senate of Rome and the senatorial order as a whole was
fragile in the extreme. As we have seen, the reforms of Constantine had expanded
the senatorial order to include two thousand persons. In the view of Symmachus
and his father, only around eighty of these nominal senators counted as true no-
blemen.23 The rest were “new” men. They were pale figures compared to the “blaz-
ing sun” of a nobilitas represented by a small group of families such as his own.24
He made perfectly plain (at least when speaking to his peers) what he thought
of these new colleagues: “The offspring of a family, the more they are distant
from being ‘new’ men, the more they have advanced towards the heights of true
nobility.”25 No matter how widely he might cast his net of patronage, Symmachus
made clear that he did so from a position of unchallenged superiority. He and a
small, self-­chosen group of fellow nobles occupied “the heights of true nobility.”
   In the same way, Symmachus presented himself as living in a narrow world
bounded by Rome and its neighboring regions. He settled back among the fa-
miliar hills of Rome itself. What may have been his palace has been discovered
on Caelian Hill. It was a vast complex with a suitably old-­fashioned peristyle
courtyard, dating from the last days of Marcus Aurelius.26 He moved from villa
to villa in the immediate neighborhood of the City, along the Tiber and as far

                                        98
                 being noble in fourth-­c entury rome


south as the Bay of Naples in Campania. He looked on this entire region as his
own, beloved patria, whose heart was Rome.
    Symmachus claimed that he was nowhere happier than when he was in Cam-
pania in the early fall. The fertile land positively “glistened” with abundance.
Rich fruit did honor to the orchards. At the ancient seaside resort of Baiae, the
air was washed clean by the occasional shower. Nature piled its wealth onto the
tables to meet the needs of regiments of guests. Earth and sea combined to pro-
vide menus worthy of the gods. As an old, sick man, he felt that to return to the
bright sunlight of the Bay of Naples lifted his spirits.27
    He lovingly described his Campanian villas. They were not mere pleasure pal-
aces for him. Each was attached to a carefully managed estate.28 Above all, each
was redolent with a long Roman past. The villa of Symmachus’s father-­in-­law,
Memmius Vitrasius Orfitus, had once been owned by the fabulously wealthy
Hortensius, with whom Cicero had crossed swords in the trial of Verres, the in-
famous governor of Sicily. But, unlike the wealth of Verres, Orfitus’s wealth (so
Symmachus insisted—­at a time when we know from other sources that Orfitus
had recently been charged with the embezzlement of state funds) was innocent
wealth. For it was family wealth—­wealth that came from the past. Orfitus’s pos-
session of the ancient villa site showed that “Fortune has run from Heaven itself
to take up residence with powerful lords, for the fame of the location does not
allow drab owners to take over.”29
    Traveling through the cities of Campania and neighboring regions, Symma-
chus surveyed with pleasure evidence of how the old civic values had survived.
Euergetism was alive and well. He once passed Beneventum just as the city was
being restored by its local notables after an earthquake. He was pleased to see
“lovers of the homeland” at work as they should be:
   While the city itself is great, its individual notables are greater still. They
   are passionate lovers of literature. Their good behavior is outstanding. . . .
   They compete to exhaust their private fortunes for the adornment of their
   city. . . . Broken stones are met by undefeated hearts.30
But we must always remember that this was Symmachus’s Campania. It was a
carefully constructed landscape of the heart. As Michele Salzman has observed
acutely, Campania provided Symmachus with the “image of a world unchanged
in time or space.” Symmachus had traveled elsewhere. He had once visited Trier
and frequently made his way across the Apennines to Milan. But those journeys
did not inspire him and were not expected to inspire his future readers. His let-
ters betray “an unwillingness to celebrate or even to describe at length untradi-
tional locales.”31
    It is even far from certain that all of Campania “glistened” with natural abun-
dance. Archaeological surveys of northern Campania show that to reach the Bay

                                         99
                                   chapter 5


of Naples, Symmachus and his entourage would have had to pass through an
emptied landscape, an agrarian slum, with scattered cottages perched in the ruins
of what had once been centers of thriving agro-­business in the late republic. Sym-
machus and those like him could not treat Campania as a secure breadbasket.
They remained dependent for their wealth on the income of more distant estates
across the sea, in Sicily and Africa, with all the anxieties and administrative prob-
lems that absentee landownership brought with it.32
   No example of the Campanian villas that Symmachus describes—­sheathed
with smoothly fitting marbles, rendered exciting by curved porticoes and by stair-
cases that seemed to float in midair33—­has yet been discovered. His villas may not
have been as spectacular as those set up by provincial noblemen and courtiers in
other parts of the empire, such as we will meet in the Gaul and Spain of Ausonius
and Paulinus of Nola. In reality, Symmachus did not live an encapsulated existence
in a privileged zone. Like any other amator patriae of the fourth century, his fate
was determined by his involvement in a vast and complex imperial system.


                        Forma vetustatis: The old model

Symmachus adjusted to this wider world by writing incessantly. Letters poured
from him. For up-­and-­coming young men or for provincials in difficulty, they
were the great nobleman’s most precious gift.34 For Symmachus himself, the let-
ters were his lifeline. They kept him in contact with the highest powers and en-
sured that his name was always present to top bureaucrats, to courtiers, to gen-
erals—­to anyone who had access to the inner counsels of the emperor. It was
through his letters that Symmachus played the master politician. Seemingly as
thin as spiders’ webs, they wove a safety net around him. They ensured that this
proud nobleman of Rome would never fall (as so many did, in the hard-­driving
world of fourth-­century politics) or, if he did, he would soon bounce back.35
Symmachus was a survivor. For those who read his letters with hindsight, after
402, Symmachus’s letters would have served as a pattern book on the art of sur-
vival, which other noblemen were well-­advised to read and imitate.
    This, of course, was not how they were presented. To use the phrase of
John Matthews, Symmachus presented his letters as “a museum of late Roman
amicitia”—­they were models of the Roman art of friendship.36 Friendship, for a
Roman, meant maintaining constant contact with others through the exchange
of favors. It was through friendship of this kind that Symmachus attempted to
bridge the many fissures that divided the upper classes of the later empire. Fellow
senators and Praetorian prefects, court eunuchs, barbarian generals, even a lead-
ing Christian bishop (Ambrose of Milan)—­Symmachus approached them all as
if he could take for granted that they all lived in a single, undivided world. They

                                        100
                 being noble in fourth-­c entury rome


met as friends, bound together by the ancient religio amicitiae—­the binding pro-
tocols of friendship. Nothing, therefore, could be more natural, he would hint
to the recipient of his letter, than that they, as friends, should instantly recognize
the justice of Symmachus’s requests and grant what he demanded. A religiosus
animus—­a “soul attuned to the duties of friendship”—­hardly needed to be re-
minded of what was the right thing to do: he must, of course, oblige Symmachus
in this or that matter.37
    This accounts for the cloying, old-­fashioned collegiality with which Sym­
machus approached his correspondents in high places. But it was precisely this
strategy that marked him as a nobilis. A nobleman of Rome, he was friend to all
but subject to no one but the emperor. He was proud of the fact that in his letters
he always maintained the forma vetustatis—­“the Old Model.” He addressed each
correspondent by his name only and never mentioned his official rank. “May it
help others to be raised high by elevated titles”: but this was not for a friend of
Symmachus.38 Seen against the background of fourth-­century society, it was a
decisive political move. The stark asymmetry of power relations, conferred by
imperial office on the persons whom Symmachus approached, was quietly cen-
sored. We need only compare Symmachus’s deliberately low-­key style of address,
on the old model, with other letters of the period to realize what this meant.
When, as a bishop, Augustine wrote to the powers that be and to noblemen of
the same background as Symmachus, the manner in which he framed the greet-
ings in his letters was punctilious in the extreme. We have the impression of a
provincial, always looking upward, careful to do justice to every nuance of status
and official rank among the great.39 Not so Symmachus. One was a friend or
nothing. Symmachus’s nine hundred letters might seem tedious to us. But he had
written them in such a way that he would never be seen, by his peers or his de-
scendants, to have groveled.


                  Religio amicitiae: The religion of friendship

      Pagans and Christians in the World of Symmachus

There was, however, one fissure that had begun to develop across the smooth
surface of a world held together by the old-­time religion of friendship: the pres-
ence of Christianity. Symmachus was what we now call a “pagan.” He has even
been acclaimed by modern scholars as one of the “last pagans” of Rome. It might
be more accurate to call him the “first pagan.” He was the first member of the
Roman nobility whom we can see adjusting to an unprecedented situation. He
was being labeled by others in confessional terms as a “pagan”; this was not a label
he would have chosen for himself.

                                         101
                                   chapter 5


    The word “pagan” itself only began to circulate widely in the 370s. It was a
word used in a religious sense only by Latin Christians. (“Hellenes,” followers of
the religion of the ancient Greeks, was the term used by Greek Christians.) Orig-
inally the term had nothing to do with religion. Paganus originally meant a mere
civilian—­a person who did not enjoy the honors and prestige attached to service
of the emperor. Christians used the term to brand those who did not serve the
true emperor, Christ. Such persons were outsiders; they were not fully enrolled
members of the empire of God.40
    “Pagan” was not necessarily a hate word. It was often used in a relatively neu-
tral manner as a convenient, idiomatic term for non-­Christians. But the term did
a profound injustice to Symmachus. He was not a “pagan.” He “worshiped the
gods” as he had always done, and that was all there was to it. He simply did not
see his fellow Romans (Christians or non-­Christians) as divided between insid-
ers and outsiders in this sectarian manner. Whatever their beliefs, he wished to
treat members of his class as peers held together by the old-­fashioned “religion of
friendship.”
    In thinking this way Symmachus was neither inert nor oblivious to the world
in which he lived. He simply had better things to do than to apply religious la-
bels to his friends and colleagues. We modern persons are the heirs of the novel
Christian attitudes, which only became fully public in the 370s and 380s, at a
time when Symmachus was already in his thirties. We take religious differences
seriously. Even in a secular age, we tend to give priority to religious belief—­
should it occur in a given society—­as the most profound and most genuine of
all emotions. It takes a real leap of the modern imagination to grasp that, in the
world of Symmachus, this was by no means the case.
    Christianity itself, though rendered prominent, even troublesome, by Con-
stantine, was still, in the Rome of the 370s as in almost every other region of
the West, a church of “mediocre” persons whose opinions barely scratched the
granite surface of the high nobility of Rome. Symmachus stood far above the
Christian church; his tolerance of Christians was based on great distance. For
instance, he could cheerfully extend his patronage to Christian bishops. He
wrote to his brother about bishop Clemens from Caesarea in Mauretania (mod-
ern Cherchell in Algeria)—­a city where Symmachus happened to have property:
“You may be astonished to find me recommending a bishop. But it is his case,
not his sect, that has persuaded me.” Bishop Clemens had not appealed on be-
half of his church but on behalf of his city, so as to obtain a tax relief for the
community of Caesarea as a whole. Symmachus expected his brother to approve
of that: “He has rendered the service of a good man on behalf of Caesarea, which
is his patria—­his home town.”41 In Symmachus’s world, a Christian bishop was
a “lover of his homeland” first and the leader of a religious “sect” very much
second.

                                       102
                 being noble in fourth-­c entury rome


    Lest we consider this attitude to be out of touch with the times, we should re-
member the atmospheric weight of reverence that pressed down upon late Romans
of the upper classes (whatever their religious persuasion) as they approached the
institutions and rituals that they had inherited from a past untouched by Christi-
anity. It was not that pagans were lukewarm and Christians were zealous. Between
the two groups lay a massive middle ground that could hold the hearts of pagans
and Christians alike. State and city were still bathed in a majesty all their own.
    This situation was by no means limited to Symmachus’s Rome. As Christophe
Goddard has shown in a subtle and convincing study of the imperial cult in
fourth-­century central Italy, the ceremonies by which loyalty to the emperor was
expressed retained almost every aspect of their former ritual. Only blood sacri-
fice was avoided, out of respect for the personal prejudices of a Christian em-
peror. But to agree to avoid sacrifice did not amount to committing religious
suicide. Sacrifice was not central to all pagan rituals. Solemn processions, public
banquets, and great games continued to carry a heavy religious charge. High cer-
emonies of this kind evoked an awe that rivaled the newfangled tingle associated
with the activities of religious “sects.” In a late Roman city—­and especially in
Rome—­the venerable town hall, the Forum, the circus, and the triumphal ave-
nues that passed beneath ancient arches could be the scene of ceremonial occa-
sions quite as heavy with the thrill of worship as was any Christian basilica.42
    Nothing shows this more clearly than the fact that, in the 370s, not all sena-
tors of Rome were pagans. The great Petronius Probus, to cite only one instance,
came from a Christian family pushed forward by Constantine.43 Yet the public
life of Rome had continued unchanged. For the Christianity of Probus and his
fellow believers paled in the sunlight of a nobleman’s duty to his city. A study of
the bronze tokens (the contorniati) issued on the occasion of the Roman games
has shown that representatives of Christian noble families presided at the Circus
Maximus and the Colosseum over spectacles that were as thrilling, as cruel, and
as calculated to cause the raw, pre-­Christian adrenalin of worship for the city
and the empire to flow in their veins as were those laid on by any pagan family.44
And we know about many of these Christians through Symmachus’s letters. He
had corresponded with them all—­pagans and Christians alike—­as “friends.”


                  Non uno itinere: Not by one avenue alone

         Symmachus, the Vestal Virgins, and the Altar
                       of Victory, 384

This was the situation Symmachus wished to maintain when, in May 384, he
took over the office of Prefect of the City. One of his first acts was an attempt to

                                        103
                                   chapter 5


reverse a governmental decision handed down from the court of Trier two years
before. In 382 the emperor Gratian (367–­83) had decided to cut back on the
privileges of the college of the Vestal Virgins in Rome. The college, which con-
sisted of seven virgins drawn from noble families, was not abolished, but its tax
exemptions were removed. The virgins were forbidden to receive legacies in land
(though not forbidden to receive cash gifts). Furthermore, the virgins were de-
nied a free share of the annona—­the imperial grain supply of the city. And that
was all. Far from signaling a general disestablishment of paganism, it was a mean-­
minded budgetary cut, framed by bureaucrats in a distant city. It merely applied
to a Roman pagan priesthood the same pruning of exemptions that had been
imposed on the Christian clergy when Gratian’s father, the parsimonious em-
peror Valentinian I, had cut back on the lavish privileges that had been granted
to the church in the glory days of Constantine and Constantius II.45
    But, of course (like many measures imposed by gray men in the name of fiscal
restraint), there was more to it than that. It was seen in Rome as a calculated act
of dishonor to an age-­old public institution. The removal of the privileges of
the virgins (especially their share of the annona) called into question the relation
between Roman religion and the Roman state. For the virgins received public
money and privileges because they prayed for the public good. Like a challenge
to the charitable status of a modern institution, such as a university or a church,
the measures drafted by Gratian’s advisers were explosive. The issues they raised
were bound to escalate, especially after the death of Gratian at the hands of
usurper in 383 left the matter unresolved.
    There were those who wished this particular issue to escalate. By the time
Symmachus (in his capacity as Prefect of the City) wrote his official memoran-
dum in support of restoring funding to the Vestal Virgins—­his famous Third
Relatio—­Ambrose had already become bishop of Milan. He posed as the keeper
of the Christian conscience of Gratian’s younger half brother, Valentinian II.
He virtually threatened Valentinian II with excommunication if he gave way to
Symmachus.
    In intervening in this manner, Ambrose blew up the issue out of all propor-
tion. He insisted that the disestablishment of the virgins was only a beginning.
He claimed that Gratian had intended to uproot paganism in Rome in its en-
tirety and to go back on Gratian’s measures was to bring back paganism as a
whole: “to set up an altar and to grant money for impious sacrifices.”46 Seldom
have the implications of a bureaucratic half measure been distorted in so melo-
dramatic a manner and with such lasting consequences, as in the confrontation
between Symmachus and Ambrose in the year 384.
    Ambrose’s intervention made his own reputation, both in his own time and
in all later centuries, as a militant Christian bishop. But in doing so Ambrose also
made Symmachus’s reputation. Symmachus was placed at center stage. He was

                                       104
                 being noble in fourth-­c entury rome


presented by Ambrose as the defender of paganism as a whole. Ambrose wrote as
if paganism was about to receive its coup de grâce. The more impressive a figure
Symmachus cut as the defender of a doomed religion, the more spectacular
would be Ambrose’s victory over him. In this scenario of Christian triumph,
Symmachus had to be presented as the positively last pagan. For there were to
be no pagans after him. Ambrose went out his way to include a copy of Sym­
machus’s Third Relatio (so-­called because it was the third memorandum he had
written to the emperors on the diverse issues he had handled as Prefect of the
City) among his letters. It served as an introduction to the bishop’s demolition
of Symmachus’s case. This studied juxtaposition of Symmachus and the bishop of
Milan ensured that Symmachus would be remembered, in all later centuries, as
the quintessential “last pagan” and his Third Relatio as the swan song of the reli-
gion of ancient Rome.
    But Symmachus, as we have seen, had no intention of being a “last pagan.” He
saw himself, rather, as the first pagan. He was the first prefect to find himself
dealing with an unprecedented and unwelcome situation. The majestic consen-
sus of the Senate had been shaken by a hitherto unheard-­of religious issue.
    Symmachus’s response was “both cautious and acute.”47 He brought to bear
the weight of long-­established arguments, which many Christians may have shared
with their pagan colleagues. Symmachus’s Third Relatio should not be read as the
work of a die-­hard pagan. Rather, it was a carefully planned attempt to regain the
old consensus between pagan and Christian members of the Senate. He argued
with great force that all responsible and public-­spirited persons could be expected
to agree that, whatever their own beliefs, the cults of Rome should continue as
they had always done.48
    What Symmachus presented as shocking, in Gratian’s measure, was the im-
plicit abandonment of an ancient maxim. In Rome, public wealth—­revenues pro-
vided originally by the state—­should be devoted to public worship of the gods
for the protection of the city and people of Rome. The safety of the empire as a
whole, and of Rome in particular, hung on the prayers of the Vestals. In the words
placed on the base of a statue set up to a Vestal Virgin in the third century:
   Through her moral discipline and skillful performance of the rites, the
   Respublica [the commonwealth of Rome] has experienced from day to day
   a felicity due to her merit.49
   Symmachus sincerely believed that invisible beings hovered above Rome.
They had been entrusted with the “care and protection” of the city. They de-
manded punctilious worship: “for the benevolence of a superior power, if not
maintained by worship, is lost.”50 In cutting off the support of the virgins through
denying them a share in the annona, Gratian had interrupted the millennial
exchange of wealth for blessing that had bound the gods to Rome. Only wealth

                                        105
                                    chapter 5


that came directly from the ancient soil of Italy and its provinces, as a gift from
the state, could be offered to the gods. The portion of the annona of Rome allot-
ted to the Vestal Virgins did not represent a large sum. But this offering was
heavy with symbolic significance. Fruits of the earth, the Vestals’ share in the
annona represented the perpetual sacred exchange between the earth and the
gods, which ensured the protection of the empire and of the stupendous human
settlement of Rome.
    In the manner of a sacred tithe, the grain given to the Vestal Virgins out of the
annona was believed to keep alive the fertility of the provinces that had provided
it. In a world which, as we have seen, always teetered on the brink of shortages
due to harvest shocks, to neglect the gods in this way was a serious matter. In
383–­84 Symmachus was proved right. The cessation of the exchange of gifts be-
tween the earth of the empire and the gods was followed by a widespread drought.
He warned the emperor: “Sacrilege has made the year go dry.”51
    But Symmachus did not appeal only to religious fears. The climax of his Rela­
tio was a speech he placed in the mouth of Rome herself. It gave cosmic weight
to the arguments of an amator patriae of the old school. The diversity of cities
and their cults was no accident. God had allotted to each city its own guardian
spirit, which hovered over its charge. These spirits gave each city its individuality
and presided over its collective destiny. For this reason, religious diversity was
written into the very fabric of the universe. It was the will of God that each re-
gion should be subject to its own, distinctive forms of divine care:
   Everyone has his own customs, his own religious practices. The Divine In-
   tellect has assigned to different cities different religions to be their guard-
   ians. Each man was given at birth an individual soul. In the same way each
   people is given its own special genius [its guardian spirit] to take care of its
   destiny. . . .
       For this reason we [of the Senate] ask for peace for the gods of our fa-
   thers, for the gods of our native land. . . . We look up at the same stars, the
   same sky covers us all, the same universe compasses us all. . . . Not by one
   avenue only can we arrive at so tremendous a secret.52
This was no vague plea for tolerance. It was a statement that religious diversity—­
and not religious uniformity—­was part of the fabric of the universe. Christian
emperors might adhere to their own sect; they did not trouble Symmachus. Like
cities, they could have their own divine guides. For all we know, Symmachus, like
many others in his time, may have believed that a faceless High God, unknown
to the traditional pantheon, had, indeed, intervened to act as the protector of
Constantine and his successors. But this God had no right to push aside his
better-­established divine peers—­the gods of Rome.53


                                         106
                being noble in fourth-­c entury rome


   Of course, we can list Emperors of either faith and either conviction: the
   earlier Emperors venerated our ancestral religious rites, the later did not
   abolish them.54

What troubled Symmachus was the thought that a religious establishment as
complex, massive, and deeply soaked in time as was the universe itself should be
made subject to the personal whim of a single ruler, acting under pressure from a
single religious faction.
    On this issue, Symmachus misjudged the mood of the emperors. It was not
that Gratian and Valentinian II were bigoted Christians. First and foremost,
they were autocrats. The “institutionalized egotism” that was part of the late
Roman imperial system left little room for delegated cults in distant cities.55 The
issue was who could claim to be closest to the beneficent power of Victory: the
Senate in faraway Rome or the emperor in his palace? Hence the shrewdness of
Ambrose’s decision to present his battle with Symmachus as if the Altar of Vic-
tory in the Senate House (and not the privileges of the Vestal Virgins) were the
central issue. It was Ambrose and not Symmachus who ensured that the debate
between the bishop and the prefect has gone down to history under the mislead-
ing name of the “Altar of Victory Controversy.”
    Up to 382, the Senate House had contained an altar that stood before a beau-
tiful statue of a winged Victory, first taken as loot from the city of Tarentum.
This statue had been placed there by the emperor Augustus. Every session of the
Senate was supposed to begin with an offering of incense at the altar, on behalf
of the emperor.
    For Gratian and Valentinian II, the statue of Victory and even its attendant
altar were not in themselves repugnant. But they were unnecessary. A fourth-­
century emperor did not need to be catechized by Christian bishops, such as
Ambrose, to come to this conclusion. The emperor had always been encouraged
to view himself as the darling of Victory. This view was widely accepted. In 365
Symmachus’s own father dedicated a bridge in honor of Gratian’s father, the em-
peror Valentinian I. The bridge spanned the Tiber, joining Trastevere to the
Campus Martius. Statues of the emperor were faced by great winged Victories in
bronze. The inscription written on the parapets of the bridge hailed Victory as
the Comes, the peculiar, divine “Companion” of the emperor.56 In late Roman
terms, Victory was the guardian angel of the emperor. She was linked to him by
a bond created in heaven itself.57 Statues of Victory appeared all over the empire
at this time. But they referred to the emperor alone; no one mentioned the Sen-
ate. For Victory was the emperor’s companion, wherever he found himself and
in whatever city his statues were erected.58 The emperor’s Victory was placeless.
It did not need to be tied down to a single building in a faraway city, where a


                                       107
                                   chapter 5


coterie of proud nobles gathered beneath a classical work of art, as suspect, pagan
smoke rose from the altar.
    Symmachus’s memorandum was turned down, and Ambrose’s reputation rose
yet further in Christian circles. But the real winner was the emperor. An autocrat
in a distant court, Valentinian II made clear, in his rejection of Symmachus’s
memorandum, that he did not need to depend either on the Senate or on the
ancient rituals performed in Rome to be sure of the unique and still numinous
protection of Victory.
    Yet Symmachus’s defeat in 384 did not mean in any way that paganism as a
whole was suppressed in Rome. Ambrose had deliberately exaggerated the ex-
tent of Gratian’s measures. The Vestal Virgins were disendowed, but they con-
tinued to meet and to pray. The other pagan cults were not disestablished. The
priestly colleges continued to receive donations.59 Individual pagan worship was
maintained by generous givers. As late as the end of the century, Tamesius Olym-
pius Augentius repaired a shrine of Mithra in the area near the modern church
of San Silvestro, off the Corso. It was a modest affair. But the inscription, written
in small and elegant script on the back of a used block of marble, made plain that
the withdrawal of imperial support had not in any way affected his piety:
   Once my ancestor Victor, devout worshipper of Heaven and the Stars,
   founded a temple of the Sun through royal gifts. Now his grandchild sur-
   passes him in piety. He builds the sacred caves. Nor, Rome, does he require
   your funds. For the pious, loss is preferable to gain. Who can be richer
   than he, who, as a provident heir, shares his estate with the heavenly gods?60
This was not the language of Christian renunciation. Augentius did not sell all.
Rather, it was the language of an amator patriae, proud to accept financial loss
for the sake of his hometown, transferred, with new intensity, to his love of the
gods.
   Nor did the old gods vanish from Symmachus’s own landscape of the heart.
There was a good reason for this, built into the structures of late Roman govern-
ment. Senators were encouraged to act as governors of provinces in central and
southern Italy. They added their prestige as noblemen to the routine business of
government. They were encouraged, in their locality, to act as viceroys of the
emperor himself. They could say L’État c’est moi.61 But the state represented by
an old-­world grandee such as Symmachus was not the new Christian empire of
an Ambrose. For many senatorial governors the empire remained a largely pagan
thing, and the cities they visited also remained largely pagan places.62
   Only three years after Ambrose claimed to have defeated Symmachus, an im-
perial rescript was solemnly recorded on an inscription erected in the theater of
Capua. The rescript declared that, in Campania at least, nothing had changed.
The emperors permitted the amphitheater to be filled with roses on May 25 for

                                        108
                being noble in fourth-­c entury rome


the pagan festival of the Rosalia, held in memory of the dead. Sacred “washings”
were to continue to take place in the local rivers. The accustomed procession was
expected to make its way up from the city to the temple of Diana on Mons Ti-
fata. At that temple, the pious could still view hunting trophies offered as ex-­
votos to the goddess—­antlers recently presented by a sportsman-­poet and the
awesome skull of an elephant, a triumphal votive gift offered by none other than
the great Sulla.63
   Nonetheless, Symmachus’s landscape of the heart proved progressively less
comfortable than the studiously unruffled tone of his letters implied. By the
time Symmachus entered middle age, Rome had found itself robbed by imperial
egotism of parts of an ancient, imaginative system that had upheld among upper-­
class Romans a sense of the collective majesty of their city. The more religious
among the senators (Symmachus among them) felt that they faced a dangerous
and fractured world, shorn of the protection of the gods. If the gods withdrew,
anything might happen.
   But this was not their only anxiety. As outstanding residents of Rome, Sym-
machus and his fellow nobiles found themselves caught between a populus, a
People of Rome, whom they were supposed to love—­to entertain and to feed (if
only so as to sleep safely in their beds)—­and a distant court, which provided, in
the chillingly spasmodic fashion of any overextended bureaucracy, the material
means by which this love of the people was to be shown. In our next chapter, we
will see how Symmachus faced this dilemma by means of a constant (and far from
happy) dialogue between himself and the People of Rome.




                                      109
                             Chapter 6
                             •••••
    Avidus civicae gratiae: Greedy for the good favor
                        of the City
            Symmachus and the People of Rome




               Securitas Romani populi: The safety from hunger
                            of the Roman People

In 370 ad the city of Rome was probably the largest human agglomeration on
earth. Its population has been variously estimated at half a million to a million.1
What can be deduced with greater certainty from official documents is that, out
of this shadowy mass, 120,000 to 200,000 members of the populus Romanus de-
pended (in the manner described in chapter 3) on the arrival of over 175,000
tons of grain, gathered principally from the hinterland of Africa and shipped
from its coastal cities to the port of Ostia. This great levy of grain was the heart
of the annona civica—­the food supply provided for the citizens of Rome.2
    Rome depended on this supply of food. Every year, the Prefect of Rome and
the Senate could be thought of as waiting on the quays of Ostia, as the great ar-
mada of ships bearing the annona edged its way, all too slowly, up the coast of
Italy from Africa. Ancient religiosity was real on such occasions, as they looked
out anxiously over the heaving sea. This had happened in 359 ad:

   The prefect (Tertullus), who had been harassed by riots, was now faced
   with the threat of imminent destruction from the increasing fury of the
   mob . . . had he not had the wit to take his small sons and show them to the
   populace. . . . “These,” he said with tears, “are your fellow-­citizens, who will
   share your fate (which heaven forbid) unless our affairs take a happier
   turn. . . .” This pathetic speech soothed the mob . . . it fell silent, and calmly
   awaited its fate. Soon afterwards, through divine providence . . . while Ter-
   tullus was sacrificing in the temple of Castor and Pollux . . . . the sea became
   smooth and the wind changed to a light southerly breeze. The ships en-
   tered harbor under full sail and replenished the storehouses with grain.3

                                         110
                  symmachus and the people of rome


    The historian Ammianus Marcellinus told this story, some forty years later,
because it had a happy ending. It was an ending he could believe to have been
brought about by the worship of the ancient gods. Such beliefs died slowly. Up
to the sixth century, the People of Rome, led by the Prefect of Rome, would
gather at the temple of Castor and Pollux at the mouth of the Tiber to celebrate
“a merry festival.”4 The yearly gathering was a reminder of the fragility of a gi-
gantic city whose principal supply of food came to it from across the sea.
    The Rome of Symmachus remained overshadowed by this stupendous legacy
inherited from the classical past. Ever since the time of Augustus, it was the em-
peror who showed that he was the greatest amator patriae of all. As the leading
citizen of Rome, he expressed his overwhelming love for the People of Rome by
making available to the citizens of Rome an annual supply of grain. The grain had
originally been shipped both from Africa and Egypt; but in the fourth century,
Constantinople received the grain of Egypt, leaving Rome to make do largely
with that from Africa and southern Italy.5
    Though it might appear headlong in its generosity, we must always remem-
ber that the annona civica was never given to the population of Rome as a
whole. As its name made plain, it was a bluntly “civic” affair; it had nothing to do
with poor relief. The only recipients of the emperor’s bounty were the registered
citizens of Rome. They carried passports—­leaden tesserae—­to prove their en­
titlement.6 Lists of their names and the amounts of their rations were set up at
all points of distribution. To the annona of grain, later emperors had added sub-
stantial rations of pork and wine. These were not distributed free but were sold
at reduced prices. No citizen could live off the rations provided by the annona
alone.7 But the distributions of bread and other foodstuffs to the registered citi-
zens of Rome through the annona conveyed an enviable privilege. In a Mediter-
ranean haunted by the fear of famine and by perpetual shortages of food, they
alone enjoyed the time-­honored securitas Romani populi: guaranteed safety from
hunger.8
    The annona had originally been set in place when the emperors resided in
Rome. But by the fourth century things had changed. The emperors lived hun-
dreds of miles from Rome in cities such as Trier, Milan, Constantinople, and
Antioch. Rome was like a gigantic nuclear power plant inherited from earlier,
more heedless generations. It was now entrusted to a skeleton staff and could
explode at any moment. The Prefect of the City and the Senate were left alone
(as Tertullus had been left in 359) to face the demands and recriminations of the
Roman people. And now that the emperor’s Praetorian Guard had been abol-
ished, they found themselves confronted by a city of at least half a million inhab-
itants with a greatly diminished police force.9 Fourth-­century Rome has often
been spoken of as no more than a “museum city,” a “theme park” of the Roman
past. It was no such thing. It was a perilous laboratory of aristocratic rule to

                                        111
                                  chapter 6


which urban elites all over the Roman world looked for both encouragement
and warnings of what could go wrong in their own city.
    In later chapters we will follow the working out of this dilemma. It is suffi-
cient for the moment to concentrate on Symmachus. For, from his earliest years,
the life of Symmachus was deeply implicated in the vicissitudes of the food sup-
ply of Rome. The many incidents revealed to us by Symmachus’s letters summed
up the dilemma of an entire group of nobles. Intensely aware of their privileges,
the People of Rome could not be suppressed. They could only be controlled by
appearing to be loved. The nobles were encouraged to shine as “lovers of the
homeland” if only so as to patrol their city. They used every device of patronage
and largesse to hold in check the population of a murmurous mega-­city. And yet,
no matter how much they were encouraged to cut a fine figure in Rome, they
were also all too frequently reminded that their love of their fellow citizens de-
pended, ultimately, on the emperors. For it was the emperors who provided the
food for the city and the funds for most of its games.10
    The yearly collection and transport of the annona was both costly and easily
mismanaged. It took constant effort to ensure that the gigantic spasm of organi-
zation that took place every year to feed the privileged People of Rome worked
as it should. Only by putting constant pressure on top politicians and bureau-
crats could the senators of Rome be certain that enough food would arrive. In
this situation, Symmachus’ gifts as a lobbyist came into their own. His friends
in high places were constantly mobilized to ensure that the “Sacred Ears” of the
emperor always heard about the needs of Rome.11
    In a letter written in 389, Symmachus reported in euphoric terms on the safe
arrival of the annona at the wharves of Rome. Looking down “on our dear Tiber”
from a villa near Ostia, he wrote that he could watch the grain barges as they
made their way up the river, bearing the precious grain on the last stage of its
journey from distant regions:
   I see with pleasure what grain arrives day by day, and what supplies from
   Macedonia [from northern Greece and the Vardar valley of the southern
   Balkans] have been brought into the warehouses of Rome. For, as you re-
   member, because of delays in Africa, famine was almost at our doorstep,
   when our most clement emperor, born for the salvation of all, prevented it,
   through mobilizing levies from this other area.12
    The arrival of the emergency consignment was presented by Symmachus as
a triumph of persistent lobbying on his part. In this way, the spider’s web that
Symmachus had woven over the years was set to work not for himself and his
protégés but on behalf of the city of Rome as a whole. To secure food for Rome
Symmachus reached out to persons in very high places. The recipient of this par-
ticular letter was the Frankish career general Ricomer. Ricomer belonged to the

                                       112
                  symmachus and the people of rome


distant world of the court and of the frontiers. But Symmachus went out of his
way to share with the great barbarian news of the pleasant view from the banks
of the Tiber. Symmachus invited Ricomer (as a good friend and colleague, of
course) to share with him “in the joy of us all.” He also reminded Ricomer to be
sure to tell “the Lord of the World” of the safe arrival of the grain.13 What the
letters of Symmachus make plain is that the annual arrival of supplies at Rome
involved a yearly miracle—­a miracle of organization spurred on by a miracle of
lobbying. And this lobbying assumed that it was the emperor (and not the gods
Castor and Pollux) who was the true “god” who stilled the waves and brought
food to Rome.14


               Vilis plebeius: A low-­down creature of the plebs

Symmachus was proud to record his interventions on behalf of the People of
Rome. Indeed, the record of his relations with the populus Romanus (which was
also referred to as the plebs Romana) was the theme that called for the most
strenuous celebration of all in his collected letters. If, however, we look at the
situation in which Symmachus found himself, we realize that this was no easy
task; it was fraught with real danger. We first meet Symmachus after his family
had suffered a major mishap. In one of his earliest letters, written in 376, he re-
ported that his father had withdrawn from Rome to the countryside “so as to
simmer down after the loss of his palace.”15 Ammianus Marcellinus tells us what
had happened. Sometime in 374–­5, the Roman people, with whom Symmachus’s
father had once been popular, turned on the family:
   They set fire to his beautiful palace across the Tiber [in what is now Traste-
   vere] enraged by a story invented without a shred of evidence by some low
   down creature of the plebs (a vilis plebeius), that Symmachus [the elder]
   had said that he would rather use all his wine to pour on his lime-­kilns
   than sell it at the reduced prices that the people hoped for.16
   The incident was a violent reminder of what a nobleman’s traditional
constituency—­the People of Rome—­could do. As we have seen, the People of
Rome were not a faceless body. They were by no means the poorest of the poor:
they had been pulled out from the mass of the inhabitants of Rome so as to re-
ceive the privilege of the annona. But neither were the People of Rome a body
of entirely “free” citizens, obliged to no one. They were linked by overwhelming
economic bonds to the upper-­class residents of the city. These bonds were stren-
uously maintained through patronage and through the nobility’s control of rental
properties in the city. Those who were not clients of the nobility were very often
dependent on them as tenants. Extensive patronage exercised by the great families

                                        113
                                   chapter 6


of Rome (which reached right down the social scale through noble patronage of
the trade associations of the city) was what kept the city quiet on a day-­to-­day
basis. But it was precisely their “civic” status that ensured that large numbers of
the people of Rome were far from being subservient clients. They were members
of the ancient plebs Romana. Somewhat like the Westminster Mob in eighteenth-­
century London, this membership gave them a formidable privilege. They en-
joyed the “right to riot.” When they burned the palace of the Symmachi, they
used this right to riot in no uncertain manner on a crucial issue—­their entitle-
ment to food.17
    The plebs felt justified in burning noble mansions. The emphasis Symmachus
placed on his abiding concern for the successful arrival of the annona only told
half the story. For he and his peers faced a conflict of interests. The wealth of the
great landowners in southern Italy, Sicily, and Africa was due largely to the fact
that Rome still provided them with a market of unparalleled size for the sale of
the agrarian produce of their own estates. It was sale to the cities (especially to
the city of Rome) of huge quantities of grain, wine, and pork that helped men
such as Symmachus generate, every year, stunning sums of gold.18 As landowners,
they could make large profits from selling the produce of their estates on the
open market. Yet as “lovers of the city” and as administrators of the imperial an­
nona, they were forced to flood the city with food at cheap rates that had been
fixed by the imperial bureaucracy in the interests of the Roman people.
    Hence the rage with which the Roman people had rounded on the elder Sym-
machus. His proud remark had challenged the ancient mystique on which the
relationship between a lover of the city and his people depended. The plebs ar-
gued that if the old man had truly regarded the Roman people as “his” people,
he would have seen them as fellow citizens. He would have helped ensure that
they received the benefit of cheap wine (sold, probably, at a discount of around
25 percent). He should have sold the produce of his vineyards at low prices sub-
ject to imperial price-­fixing. Instead, he treated them as mere customers. He
forced them to buy his wine at high prices set by him alone.19


         Avidus civicae gratiae: Greedy for the good favor of the city

The burning of his father’s palace when he was a young man was, perhaps, the
most significant tremor known to us in the world of Symmachus. It revealed the
tensions that underlay the seemingly placid surface of a nobleman’s existence. It
put the rest of Symmachus’s life in perspective. We know Symmachus best as
the author of the defense of the privileges of the Vestal Virgins. But his defense
of traditional paganism was only a side issue, connected with his short tenure as


                                        114
                  symmachus and the people of rome


urban prefect. By contrast, a tense dialogue with the people of Rome was the
very stuff of life for him and his peers.
    The dialogue reached its climax in the last years of his life. Twenty years after
the burning of his father’s palace, Symmachus had a chance to engage in a dis-
tinctly more euphoric interchange with the people of Rome. In 393, his son,
Memmius, made his debut as a senator by taking on the ancient office of quaestor.
The young Memmius solemnly presided at the age of ten over the quaestura—­
the quaestor’s games. The organization of the games on behalf of his son gave
Symmachus the opportunity to shine before “his” people. Eight years later, in
401, Memmius went on to celebrate the yet more spectacular praetura—­the
praetor’s games. These last were deliberately postponed so that Symmachus (who
had to attend a court function in Milan) should be seen sitting beside his son, in
full view of the Roman people when the games were given.20
    The sums Symmachus spent on the praetor’s games of Memmius in 401 made
his reputation. A whole generation later he was remembered as having spent
2,000 pounds of gold on them.21 This amounted to one-­third again of Symma-
chus’s entire revenue for one year—­which was 1,500 pounds of gold. It was 400
pounds of gold more than the Senate as a whole had once given as a New Year’s
gift to the emperor Valentinian I. It was also the equivalent of a year’s rations for
130,000 recipients of the annona.22
    The giving of the games involved the sudden release of an avalanche of wealth
devoted to nothing other than the joy of the Roman people. Or so Symmachus
said. In reality, the games were the tip of an iceberg. They not only displayed the
financial muscle of those who gave them. For someone such as Symmachus, this
in itself was no great matter. Saved for in advance, with ten years’ notice, the prae-
tor’s games did not ruin those who paid for them.23 But the games were the test-
ing point of a nobleman’s influence. They were the crowning demonstration of
his potentia—­his ability to get things done.24 Only the truly great could give truly
great games. This was why Symmachus wished to be known as avidus civicae gra­
tiae: “greedy for the good favor of the city.” He could display his wealth and in-
fluence by ensuring that the plebs of Rome got nothing but the best.25
    To this end, he petitioned insistently for the right to exceed the financial lim-
its usually placed on a praetor’s games. As Prefect of the City, in 384, he had
written a memorandum that condemned the “ugly ostentatiousness” of rich
senators, whose costly displays had made lesser senators (often “new” men) un-
willing to put on games of their own. On that occasion, he spoke as a bureau-
crat.26 He did not apply this maxim to himself. His edgy relationship with the
“new men” of the Senate came out only too clearly in his letters on the games
of his son. He wanted to show such people who was a true noble of Rome and
who was not. He asked the court for permission to hold a theatrical display in a


                                        115
                                   chapter 6


flooded amphitheater. He also asked for permission to reward the performers
with silk robes. He wanted to use the mighty Colosseum itself.27 Altogether, Sym-
machus was determined that his lesser colleagues—­the newly minted members
of the Senate—­would feel the weight of his fortune.


     Romani animi speciosum calorem: The fine ardor of a Roman soul

Technically, it was the Roman emperors who were the lords of the games at
Rome. Of the 177 days a year set aside for games and festivals, 98 were devoted
to the history of the emperors and to the triumphs of the reigning dynasty.28 All
these games were paid for by the absent emperors. Each year, however, the em-
perors yielded a space for men like Symmachus to win glory for their sons. The
time allotted to the games of the praetor was short—­a little over a week. But
while the imperial games tended to lose pace as they dragged on throughout the
year, the young praetor could bring in a magic week of games, which coincided
with the summer season of the year.29
    We must remember what these games meant to the “Roman people” who
witnessed them. They consolidated the ancient bond between plebs and Senate.
The nobility turned out in force to attend these games. They sat, family by family,
arranged in hierarchical ranks on the benches of the Colosseum and the Circus
Maximus. But the games themselves were more than a grand parade of the nobil-
ity. They were a time of wonder for all. Huge stocks of gold evaporated in a week
so that the amphitheater could be turned into a place of miracles. For a blessed
moment, the rules of normal life were held in suspense. Tightrope walkers and
ballet dancers defied gravity in vertiginous leaps. Land and sea were joined, as spe-
cially constructed amphitheaters filled up with water for naval spectacles. Great
organs played as the hot crowd was drenched in fountains of perfumed water.30
    Above all, the animal world poured into the midst of the city. And what an
animal world! Symmachus went out of his way to bring them all to Rome. Croc-
odiles from the Nile31 and bears from the Balkans;32 great Irish wolfhounds
brought all the way from Britain in iron cages;33 lions from the southern moun-
tains of north Africa;34 antelopes and gazelles trapped along the edges of the
Sahara.35 There was no frontier of the Roman empire not represented by this
parade of exotic beasts. Their sheer diversity amounted to a celebration of the
immensity of the Roman world.36 Like the empire itself, their capture and even-
tual slaughter represented a triumph of human order over a savage world.37
    Most beasts were lethal. They were destined to be slaughtered by skilled
venatores—­fearless huntsmen, armed with pikes, who were (as we have seen) the
matadors of the classical world. And this was done in a solemn mood. What hap-
pened in the circus and the amphitheater was more than a blood sport. It was a

                                        116
                  symmachus and the people of rome


fortifying lesson in the triumph of civilization. It celebrated the victory of human
energy, human skill, and human courage over the wild. For this reason human
animals also made their appearance. Like the animals, they were also destined for
slaughter. As quaestor, little Memmius received imperial permission to use the
Colosseum for a show more ancient and more deadly than was usual for the aver-
age quaestor. Saxon prisoners of war were sent to Rome to serve as gladiators,
condemned to fight to the death in front of the Roman people. The deaths of vile
pirates who had been rounded up along the coasts of the English Channel were
intended to make plain, in the middle of Rome, the most magical of all energies—­
the eternal victory of empire along the frontiers of the North.38
   We know of all of this from Symmachus’s letters concerning the two games of
his son, Memmius—­those he put on as quaestor, in 393, and the yet more mag-
nificent shows of the praetor in 401. It is one of the few times that we are able to
look behind the façade of ancient euergetism. Symmachus’s letters on this topic
do not always do him credit. His largesse was less exuberant than he claimed. In
the same letter in which he declared himself to be “greedy for the good favor of
the city,” he wrote that he had promised twenty slaves in all to the stables of the
rival circus teams of Rome. Could his daughter’s father-­in-­law (in the midst of
preparing to fight a civil war) please look out for slaves on the frontier? Slaves
were cheaper there. “Choose them for their age and good health, not for their
looks.”39
   What we see above all is unceasing anxiety. Nothing seemed to go right. Bears
promised from the Balkans were delayed; only a few starved cubs reached Italy.
The emperor had to be petitioned for a grant of lions to save the day.40 Of a con-
signment of crocodiles, hurried up from Egypt along the coast of Sicily, all but
two died of starvation.41 Worst of all, a disaster took place such as only the teach-
ings of Socrates had allowed him to weather with an unshaken mind: the twenty-­
nine Saxons committed suicide, strangling each other with their own hands in
their prison cells! So much for that rebellious “band of slaves worse than any
Spartacus.” He would have to petition the emperor, once again, for yet more
lions.42
   At second glance, however, these letters represent (as they must have done to
those who read them at a later time) the triumph of the world Symmachus had
wrapped around himself with such care over the course of so many decades.
There was hardly a single correspondent, high or low, who was not given the op-
portunity, by Symmachus, to put the seal upon their friendship through granting
him some favor—­some industria, some personal burst of energy in high or distant
places on behalf of his preparations—­that would make the great event shine.43
Symmachus’s circle of correspondents were offered the chance to put their “hand-
print,” as a class, upon the glory of one of their members. Symmachus implied
that he would do the same for them when their turn came. From negotiations

                                        117
                                  chapter 6


that led to the waiving of customs duties on Dalmatian bears44 to the little silver
baskets and exquisite ivory tablets distributed as gestures of thanks and celebra-
tion to senatorial friends and to high dignitaries of the court (the emperor, of
course, received his tablet framed in gold),45 these letters document the heady
torrent of gifts and mutual favors that bound together the rich and powerful of
his age.46
    Symmachus reached out in all directions. He called in favors, he prodded
clients, he browbeat administrators. But it was not simply a matter of power.
Throughout the western Mediterranean, the games of Rome had remained ex-
emplary. They were the model on which innumerable civic notables still based
their own appearances before the people of their own cities. These men were less
wealthy than Symmachus. They might substitute local bears for exotic croco-
diles and boxing matches for the deadly clash of gladiators.47 But the spirit was
the same. Everywhere might be a little Rome and every giver of games a little
Symmachus.
    This happened all over the West. Fourth-­century mosaics show the Circus
Maximus on the floors of villas as far apart as Piazza Armerina, in the middle of
Sicily, and in Gerona, on the northeastern coast of Spain. At Gerona, a figure sits
at the head of the circus, in a special box, extending his right hand in a trium-
phant gesture.48 The charioteers, the venatores, and the spectacular racing horses
associated both with local games and with the games at Rome appear both in
Carthage and in distant Mérida.49 In Spain and Africa, one suspects that the
games of the great senators of Rome led to an annual flow of gold to inland prov-
inces in order to buy horses and wild beasts.50 The imaginative range of the games
was even wider. Far to the north, in distant northern Britain, on the mosaic of
the villa of Rudston in the East Riding of Yorkshire, a panel shows a toro bravo
of the amphitheater—­a clumsily drawn circus bull labeled “Homicide.”51
    Through his son, Symmachus stood at the peak of a pyramid of admiration.
For a moment, the entire western world had become part of the glory of his fam-
ily. And it was an ancient glory, which suited the possessor of ancient wealth. In
399 he wrote to a rancher in distant Spain, from whom he hoped to buy pedigree
horses for the chariot races associated with the games:

   I do not think that I need to fear that you will take me for someone inter-
   ested only in the praise of persons of the plebs. You are wise enough to
   know that tight-­fisted attitudes do not suit the magistracies of a great
   city. You know your Cicero: even he laid down that, in private life, high-­
   spending luxury was to be condemned, but not magnificence in public
   matters. For this reason, help to the full extent of your resources the fine
   ardor of a Roman soul.52


                                       118
                  symmachus and the people of rome


    Within a little over three years, Symmachus was dead. He died after his return
from one last embassy from the Senate of Rome to the court at Milan in 402. The
embassy had been a rushed affair, undertaken in the middle of winter. For the
Gothic troops of Alaric had crossed the Alps and had begun to probe the de-
fenses of Italy. The Senate wanted to make sure, once again, that the emperor
would not forget them in a time of crisis.
    By 402 much had happened in the world outside Rome. Ambrose of Milan
was the same age as Symmachus. He had become bishop of Milan in 374, when
Symmachus was in his thirties. Symmachus outlived Ambrose by six years.
Younger men had also begun to come to the fore. Augustine had been chosen by
Symmachus in 384 (when he was acting as Prefect of the City) to be a teacher of
rhetoric in Milan. Augustine returned to Africa a changed man. As bishop of
Hippo, he wrote his Confessions only a few years before Symmachus died.
    The world had begun to change. Wealth, abandoned by high aristocrats,
slipped into the church. By 402 a man whose social position was closer to that of
Symmachus than was that of any other Christian—­the nobleman Paulinus—­had
begun to rebuild, at Nola, in the heart of Symmachus’s beloved Campania, a
Christian shrine, whose inlaid marbles (quite as sumptuous as those of the Ani-
cian palace) have recently caused amazement to the archaeologist. In Ambrose,
Augustine, and Paulinus of Nola, governmental know-­how, high culture, and
great wealth entered the upper reaches of the Christian churches in such a way
as to usher in a new epoch in the history of Latin Christianity.
    But it is to Symmachus’s letters that we still turn to measure the density of
a way of life that only Christians such as Ambrose, Augustine, and Paulinus
claimed (somewhat unconvincingly) to be out-­of-­date. Symmachus was by no
means out-­of-­date. He was not the “last” of anything. Rather, he was a reminder
of the resilience of a social order that had only recently found a place for ambi-
tious Christians. It was these newcomers who were strange. Symmachus, by con-
trast, was as familiar and as solid as the warm stones on which we can still read
the ancient phrases of honorific addresses. Symmachus was the way the world
worked. In cities and villas all over the West, the majority of the rich still wished
to be like Symmachus, a man of his city, still endowed with “the fine ardor of a
Roman soul.” But not everyone thought that way. Let us now turn to Ambrose,
Augustine, and Paulinus to trace the new images of society and the new views on
the proper use of wealth with which each one of them grappled—­each in a dif-
ferent manner—­as a result of their commitment to the Christian church.




                                        119
                            Chapter 7
                            •••••
                     Ambrose and His People




              Pro vestro speciali fastu: Typical of your noble airs

                        From Governor to Bishop

With hindsight, it is difficult to realize the extent to which the election of Am-
brose as bishop of Milan in 374 and his subsequent activities as a public figure,
up to his death in 397, came as a surprise. His election was an unforeseen event
whose impact on the Christian churches of the West was both a symptom and a
cause of changes in the texture of Christianity that were more decisive, in the
long run, than had been the conversion of Constantine in 312 ad. This chapter
and the next will concentrate on the nature of Ambrose’s impact. They will trace
the manner in which Ambrose created a novel power base for himself among the
people of Milan. They will also sketch the image of society Ambrose proposed
(in intimate dialogue with the works of Cicero) as the basis of this daring alli-
ance between bishop and people. Last but not least, chapter 8 will examine the
relation between Ambrose’s general stance toward society and his vivid denun-
ciations of the rich of northern Italy.
   Little of this could have been foreseen in the late 370s. What was certain was
that the empire itself had entered into a new phase of crisis. On August 9, 378,
the emperor Valens, along with the major part of the eastern army of the Roman
empire, vanished into a heavy cloud of red dust thickened by bush fires and was
trampled to death by the Visigoths on the plains outside Adrianople. The effects
of a military catastrophe at the farthest end of the Balkans (outside modern
­Edirne, in European Turkey) were immediately felt in Italy. It seemed for a mo-
ment as if only the Alps, their passes hurriedly blocked with felled trees, stood be-
tween Milan and the barbarians. Prudent and collegial as ever, Quintus Aurelius
Symmachus approached an acquaintance in Rome. He advised Uranius Satyrus

                                        120
                          ambrose and his people


(a man roughly his own age and, like himself, a former provincial governor) not
to go north. Northern Italy, he said, “was aflame with war.” Satyrus, however, did
not take Symmachus’s advice. He was hurrying to Milan with news of the family
estates to report to his younger brother, Aurelius Ambrosius.1
   Ambrosius (whom we know as Saint Ambrose) had become bishop of Milan
in 374. Of all the leading figures of the Latin church, Ambrose is the most dif­
ficult to see in true perspective. Hindsight has made him seem, at one and the
same time, both larger than life and strangely unremarkable.
   He is principally known to us as the bishop who brought to heel a succession
of emperors. It was Ambrose who (as we have seen) blocked the petition of Sym-
machus on behalf of the Vestal Virgins in 384 by a direct appeal to the boy prince
Valentinian II. Between 385 and 386 he shamed the court by refusing to yield a
church in Milan for the use of the “Arian” members of Valentinian’s entourage.
In 391 he imposed on the emperor Theodosius a memorable penance for the
massacre of civilians at Thessalonica in 390. As a result of these dramatic con-
frontations, an air of baroque drama has come to surround his person. When visit-
ing the Duomo—­the cathedral—­of Milan in 1764, Edward Gibbon noticed the
wooden bas-­reliefs in the choir that portrayed the actions of Saint Ambrose:
   The work is of great beauty, and I imagine that every ecclesiastic must
   consider with pleasure the scene where the great emperor Theodosius is
   humbled at the feet of a proud prelate.2
   Yet we have come to take Ambrose’s successes for granted. We expect him to
be a “proud prelate” and we expect him to be successful in this role. The language
he used in humbling the emperors entered the mainstream of western Catholi-
cism, and his sonorous certainties were echoed by all later Catholic prelates. As a
result, they have ceased to be surprising. We forget that this was the very first
time that a Latin bishop had raised his voice in such a tone when dealing directly
with an emperor and that these certainties were first enunciated in situations
where Ambrose was far from certain of success.
   The image of Ambrose is further blurred by his association in the popular
mind with Saint Augustine. Ambrose is often treated as little more than the
bishop who “converted” Augustine to Catholicism in 386–­7. He becomes a
vague authority figure, overshadowed by the brilliant young Augustine. Yet, as
we shall see, the two men barely overlapped. When he was in Milan, Augustine
saw Ambrose only from the outside: “Ambrose himself I thought a happy man as
the world judges things, for he was held in honor by the great and powerful.”3
   It is the aim of this chapter to trace the manner in which Ambrose built up for
himself a position in Milan so that, though a mere Christian bishop, he came to
be “held in honor by the great and powerful.” It will concentrate on only that
aspect of his life as a bishop and leave to one side Ambrose’s role in high politics.

                                        121
                                   chapter 7


It will also deal selectively with the baffling richness of Ambrose’s preaching.
Instead, it will try to gain a clearer sense of what it meant for a bishop of upper-­
class background to link up with a Christianity hitherto characterized (espe-
cially in northern Italy) by a low social profile. For it was precisely through his
acceptance and elaboration of the links that held him to a large and predomi-
nantly “middling” congregation that Ambrose was able to create a power base for
himself in Milan. In the words of Wolfgang Liebeschuetz:
   It is fashionable to belittle the seemingly astonishing political feats of
   Ambrose, but there can surely be no doubt that he gained a remarkable
   hold over a large part of the population of Milan. Without that his defi-
   ance of the court [on the occasions we have mentioned] would have been
   impossible.4
    The career of Ambrose shows that the entry of members of the upper classes
into the affairs of the churches was not a mere “takeover” of Christianity by the
rich. It was a novel alliance that joined different layers of late Roman society to
form a hitherto unprecedented grouping. We need only compare Ambrose with
Symmachus in these crucial decades. While the great Symmachus teetered, as if
on high stilts, far above the turbulent People of Rome, Ambrose bonded directly
with his “people.” He could claim that, as bishop of Milan, he had gathered
around himself an entire populus—­an entire “Christian people.” Led by a bishop
such as Ambrose, a new force had entered the cities of the Roman world.
    In the early 370s, however, this development lay in the future. Ambrose had
come to Milan (in around 370) as consularis—­as governor of “consular” rank of
the joint province of Aemilia and Liguria. His ordination as bishop of Milan
three years later, in 374, came as a complete surprise. It was a sociological anom-
aly. It could only have happened at a time when the church system created by the
“Arian” policies of Constantius II (and largely continued by the emperor Valen-
tinian I) had begun to break down. Ambrose was not only the first aristocratic
bishop in the Latin West. He was the first great faction fighter to find himself at
the head of a major see close to the center of power. His ordination represented
the victory of an ultra-­Nicene group. Alienated and fierce for power, this group
presented themselves (as we have seen) as the true upholders of the Trinitarian
doctrine declared at the Council of Nicaea in 325. They were prepared to brand
all opponents as “Arians.” But the ordination of Ambrose did not represent a
straightforward victory of Catholicism over Arianism. It opened the way to a
more decisive long-­term development. It marked the beginning of the end of the
low-­profile Christianity of the previous generations, to which we were intro-
duced in chapter 2.5
    Not all of this was apparent at the time. Until challenged by the direct pres-
ence of the imperial court, which did not settle in Milan until 383, Ambrose

                                        122
                          ambrose and his people


handled the “Arian” legacy in his own city with tact. But what was immediately
apparent to contemporaries was that Ambrose was not an ordinary bishop. He
was still bathed in the aura of a senatorial governorship.6 It is even possible that
the robes Ambrose wore on festive occasions have been preserved. Known as the
“Dalmatics of Saint Ambrose,” they are the robes of a nobleman. They are made
of precious silk. One of them is a damask cloak woven with scenes from a lion
hunt, such as was fashionable at the time among the senators of Rome.7
    Furthermore, Ambrose was rich. He brought to Milan the wealth of an entire
family. Ambrose’s elder sister, Marcellina, had been consecrated as a nun in 357.
She was content with an annuity from the family estates. Ambrose was celibate.
Though a layman, his brother Satyrus also refused to marry. No heir could claim
a share of the family lands. With this wealth, Ambrose endowed the church of
Milan, though he may well have kept some of it back for his private use. In the
tradition of a civic benefactor, he used this private wealth to leave a personal
mark on the church through almsgiving and ambitious building projects.8 The
poor of the church were said to have received their alms in gold coins (at a time
when the scattering of gold coins to the crowd was a privilege usually reserved
for emperors alone).9 By 385 Ambrose had already built one large basilica on the
outskirts of Milan. It was the burial place of Satyrus and was intended to be the
burial place of Ambrose himself. It came to be known, simply, as the Ambrosiana—­
Ambrose’s church.10
    Ambrose’s ecclesiastical enemies were the first to realize what they were up
against. When the “Arian” Palladius was summoned by Ambrose to Aquileia
to give an account of his faith, in 381, he claimed that he had expected a debate
among equals, conducted in an assembly room open to the general public. In-
stead, he was ushered into a narrow, closed hall—­the secretarium (audience hall)
of the local bishop. Built with an apse at one end, it resembled a governor’s court-
room. Stenographers stood ready to record every word. Ambrose sat on a raised
throne in the apse. From this throne, set up pro vestro speciali fastu—­“typical of
your noble airs”—­Ambrose proceeded to browbeat Palladius as if he were a
Roman governor interrogating a criminal. This was Ambrose in action—­a man
determined to bring to an end the compromises of an earlier, less demanding age.11
    But exactly what sort of nobleman was Ambrose? It is important to be pre-
cise. As we have already seen, the late Roman nobility was made up of many lay-
ers. Symmachus had approached Satyrus as a parens. But this does not mean that
their families were related. Parens was a term of courtesy, used of each other by
members of the upper classes, much as cher cousin was used in modern times
among entirely unrelated European monarchs. The two families did not meet as
equals. Unlike Symmachus, Ambrose did not represent old money. He had been
born in Trier in 339, the son of an acting Praetorian Prefect. His father was one
of those many persons who had sought “nobility” through government service

                                       123
                                   chapter 7


under the sons of Constantine. He vanished with the fall of his emperor—­
executed as a traitor in a time of civil war. Ambrose grew up in Rome with his
widowed mother. He was a member of a Christian family come down in the
world in interesting circumstances.12
   The later empire was filled with recently ennobled families whose offspring
trembled on the edge of downward mobility. The fact that the imperial bureau-
cracy provided careers for persons of non-­noble status is well-­known and has
been much studied. But the governmental machine also drew on young nobles
anxious to avoid slipping back into genteel poverty. And government service was
not for amateurs. Ambrose went for the “hard” sciences. Unlike Symmachus,
“the orator” who was content to shine only in Latin, Ambrose mastered Greek.
He also mastered Roman law and probably dabbled in theology and philosophy.
Like many laypersons, he may have taken sides in the theological conflicts of his
time with greater zeal than did any clergyman. Altogether, drawn from a less se-
cure and hence more strenuous layer of the aristocracy, Ambrose had the mak-
ings of a faction fighter. Once he became bishop of Milan, the issue was whether
he would carry the city with him in a new mood of intransigence.


               Libertatis laetitia: The rejoicing of a free people

                 Ambrose and the Church of Milan

We should not be misled by the confident tone of Ambrose’s own letters and
preaching. The Christian congregation of Milan was never a creation of Am-
brose’s will alone; nor was it held together only from the top down, by his own
forceful style of leadership. It was a community waiting to happen. In the condi-
tions of a city such as late fourth-­century Milan, a Christian church met a real
need. As we have seen, a Christian church might have appealed to many as a sort
of sociological urban lung. In a society where the elites and the subelites were
more than usually fragmented and set in competition one with each other, a
church provided a space where groups of different background could come to-
gether. The hard outlines of status (which cut so sharply in the outside world)
were softened within its walls. Not only were potentially conflicting segments
of the privileged classes brought together in a benign environment. The for­
mation of vertical links between the great, the not so great, and the “middling”
plebeians—­not to mention the poor—­was actively encouraged.
   These vertical links had always meant much to Romans. The great faction
leaders of the republic had known how to be close to the plebs. But times had
changed. The discomfiture of Symmachus’s family at Rome showed that noble-
men may have lost their touch. They were less skilled at establishing vertical links

                                        124
                         ambrose and his people


with the plebs Romana. But the nobles of Rome lived in a real city. Their relation
to the plebs was soured by conflicts related to the supply of basic foodstuffs. A
Christian church was different. What happened in it was not quite real and, for
just that reason, doubly precious to those who had to face a tension-­ridden
world. Vertical links with all classes could be thought to exist (if only for a few
hours each week) in the weight-­free space of an assembly of the “people of God.”
    We must remember that Milan offered Ambrose more than usually malleable
human material for the creation of such a community. As Neil McLynn has
pointed out (in what are some of the most perceptive pages in a brilliant book),
Milan was a city more than usually full of well-­to-­do strangers and of persons
without a secure niche in society.13 Milan was a somewhat faceless town. It did
not boast a firmly rooted class of town councillors, drawn from a circle of long-­
established local landowners, as was the case in many cities in Roman Africa,
central and southern Italy, and southwestern Gaul. Nor was there a strong aris­
tocratic presence. Real noblemen, such as Symmachus, came and went; they did
not reside in Milan. With the arrival of the court, in 383, Milan became a city of
minor bureaucrats and of provision merchants.14 Ambitious provincials lingered
impatiently on the edge of the court. Beneath this fragile crust lay a solid class
of “middling” persons—­such as the maker of textiles whose clumsy sarcophagus
stands at the entrance of the museum of the Castello Sforzesco. On this sar-
cophagus, wool tunics are shown, hung out for display outside the owner’s shop.
Beneath these plebeians were the “poor.” They were probably present in manage-
able quantities in Milan—­unlike the heartrending masses of great cities, such as
Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria. All these were, to use McLynn’s phrase, “Am-
brose’s People.”
    Between the summer of 385 and Easter Sunday (April 5) of 386, this “people”
received its baptism of fire. The issue was whether the emperor had the right to
assign a church to be used for public worship by non-­Catholic members of his
court—­in this case, by Gothic soldiers and by the entourage of the empress
mother, Justina, who were known “Arians.” By the standards of the old Constan-
tinian establishment, Valentinian II and his advisers were entirely within their
rights. The church of Milan was a more than usually imperial church. The grand
cathedral of Milan had been built by Constantius II. It has been argued that the
so-­called Basilica Portiana was what is now the splendid circular church of San
Lorenzo. No certainty exists on this identification, but, wherever the Basilica
Portiana may have been, by refusing to allow any church in Milan to be used by
non-­Catholics, despite the fact that some of the grandest of these churches had
been built by “Arian” emperors, Ambrose showed “nerve” in both senses of the
word.15
    Asked for a church, Ambrose first appealed to a sense of sacrality that was
worthy of Symmachus. He replied that churches were “temples.” They were holy

                                       125
                                    chapter 7


things and could not be allotted at the whim of an emperor as if they were neu-
tral public spaces.16 But Ambrose did what Symmachus could not have done: he
brought out the crowd. A demonstration in which military force had to be used
followed Ambrose’s first visit to the palace.17 Within the crowded basilica, the
decisions connected with the bishop’s campaign were made by acclamation. In
this way, Ambrose’s congregation acted as if it was a fully constituted populus,
assembled in the theater. The proposals of imperial messengers were greeted by
the roar of a well-­organized crowd.18 According to Ambrose’s enemies, the poor
were mobilized, through lavish distributions of gold coin, to act as a militia for
the bishop.19
    For weeks on end, the basilicas were filled with the sounds of war. The tradi-
tional readings of the Psalms were replaced by antiphonal chanting, where one
group answered the other, as if in the rhythmic slogans used by the people in the
theater.20 Then Ambrose introduced the singing of hymns that he himself had
composed. These made complex theological issues widely accessible in the form
of memorable verses that could be sung by all. The bishop told his congregation
that through chanting such hymns, everyone could be a “teacher”—­an instant
theologian, like himself.21 In the course of this confrontation, Ambrose had cre-
ated “an intellectual community with a wide public to a degree unusual in the
ancient world.”22
    The court withdrew its claims, but the sound continued in the Christian ba-
silicas of Milan. Looking back, around 390, Ambrose conjured up the heady sense
of community generated by the chanting of the Psalms.
   [A Psalm expresses] the praises of a plebs, the applause of all . . . the rejoic-
   ing of a free people—­libertatis laetitia—­. . . It is indeed a great bond of
   unity, by which the plebs gathers together with one voice.23
Sitting in the Colosseum with little Memmius (at almost this time), Sym­machus
could not have expected better from the plebs Romana, which he had brought
together for a passing moment and at such ruinous expense. Ambrose did it
every week, through chanting and theology in the miniature but magic theater
of a Christian church.


                                 “A Call to Duty”

              Cicero, Ambrose, and the De officiis, 388

In around 388, Ambrose summed up the previous fifteen years of his life as
a bishop. He wrote the De officiis—­“On Duties.”24 The book might better be


                                         126
                          ambrose and his people


called “A Call to Duty.” In it, Ambrose set himself up to rival and to replace the
De officiis of the great Cicero. It amounted to a statement of the role of the Chris-
tian bishop in Roman society.
    In writing his own De officiis, Ambrose deliberately echoed Cicero point by
point. Cicero had written the De officiis for his son, Laelius. Ambrose wrote for
his “spiritual sons”—­primarily for the clergy of Milan and for the circle of like-­
minded bishops whom he had gathered around him. Like Cicero’s Laelius, they
must learn to be public men. Like Laelius, Ambrose’s “sons”—­the clergy—­were
expected to usher in “a renaissance of sound leadership.”25 This meant, in effect,
that Ambrose went out of his way to ensure that his bishops and clergy would
not be like the clergy of an earlier, more relaxed generation. He made clear that
they were not to involve themselves in trade or business. He declared that it was
best for a priest to gain his living either from the church alone or from “his own
little bit of land.” It is a coy phrase. When a late Roman writer wrote “little bit”
he or she usually meant “quite a lot.” Ambrose expected that some bishops and
clergymen, at least, would be independently wealthy persons drawn from the
upper ranks of the town councils.26
    He also expected them to be celibate. Married bishops and clergymen were
normal. But even they were expected to abstain from sex with their wives once
they had been ordained. Ambrose implied (in the face of all the evidence, which
points to widespread clerical marriage) that only “backwoods” communities ac-
cepted married men as their bishops and priests.27
    We should not make too much of Ambrose’s program for the “gentrification”
of the clergy, as he sketched it out in the De officiis. The patient work of Claire
Sotinel has shown that the bishops and clergy of Italy remained as a whole es-
sentially “middling” men. They did not become little Ambroses overnight.28 But
the social history of the region around Milan in these decades may have worked
in favor of Ambrose’s ambitious program. The court began to reside frequently
in Milan. In a characteristically late Roman manner, the presence of the Roman
state, as the most powerful consumer of all, stimulated the economy of the re-
gion.29 Towns that up until then had only harbored low-­profile Christian com-
munities found themselves on the annona routes that brought supplies to the
court and to the army. These routes crossed the Po valley, westward toward Ver-
celli and Turin and north, over the Alpine passes, through Brescia, Verona, and
Trent. The redecoration of villas around these towns show a modest boom in the
late fourth century.30 It was in communities that had been touched with new
wealth, brought about by the presence of the court, that Ambrose placed many
of his most successful “model” bishops. As a result, the social and imaginative
gap between the Forum and the church, which (in a city such as Aquileia) had
seemed so considerable a generation before, came to be closed. Led by dignified


                                        127
                                   chapter 7


bishops, known to be close to the great Ambrose, the Christian communities
edged closer in the 380s and 390s to the social and cultural high ground in
northern Italy.31


      Magnus itaque iustitiae splendor . . . aliis potius nata quam sibi:
      What a splendid thing justice is . . . [to be] born for others rather
                             than for oneself

                             Ambrose in Action

Ambrose’s De officiis was his own Apologia pro Vita Sua. He wrote it at the age of
fifty. He had lived a very busy life as a bishop for almost fifteen years. And he was
proud of it. It is hard not to recognize in Ambrose’s portrait of the man of per-
fect “justice” a portrait of Ambrose himself in action as bishop of Milan:
   What a splendid thing, then, justice is. Born for others rather than for
   itself, justice aids the community and strengthens the fellowship that ex-
   ists between us. It occupies the moral heights. . . . [The man of justice]
   brings help to others. He will give them money. He will never refuse to
   fulfill his duties towards them. He will assume other people’s dangers as
   his own.32
   The De officiis contain autobiographical passages that highlighted the mo-
ments when Ambrose had fulfilled his public duties as a “man of justice.” Early in
his episcopate, he wrote, he had melted down church plate to ransom the victims
of Gothic invasion in the Balkans before and after the battle of Adrianople in
378. This was aurum utile—“useful gold.” It had once been given to the church;
Ambrose made it flow again abundantly to help the victims of calamity.33 Gold
must flow from the church. But, once entrusted to the church, it was to remain
inviolable. Ambrose recounted how only recently he had steeled the resolve of
the bishop of Pavia to resist attempts by the highest fiscal authorities of the em-
pire to confiscate money deposited by a well-­to-­do widow in the vaults of the
church. Without Ambrose’s intervention the little man would have crumpled in
the face of imperial officials.34
   So much for spectacular narratives of wealth given away and of wealth pre-
served. But Ambrose was careful to point out that misericordia, mercy to the
needy, was the officium that made every Christian soul acceptable to God.35
What forms did this misericordia take? It is typical of Ambrose that we do not
know. He went out of his way to view the poor, first and foremost, as fellow
members of the Christian populus. Because of this he avoided emphasizing the


                                        128
                         ambrose and his people


chasm between rich and poor, which fueled the anger of preachers in the cities
of the Greek East—­such as Basil of Caesarea and John Chrysostom.36 In any case,
many of the “poor” with whom Ambrose had dealings were not the long-­term,
systemic poor who formed the underclass of the great eastern cities. Many were
refugees from the war zones of the Danube. They were only recently impover-
ished and more than usually dependent on the hospitality offered to them by
Christian churches in order to make a new start.37 Whatever the composition
of the poor in Milan may have been, Ambrose was not the man to tell us. His
main preoccupation was that the poor should be absorbed almost unnoticed
into the Christian community. The Christians of Milan were urged to see them
as brothers, not as charged “others.”
    It was typical of Ambrose that he used the church’s care of the poor in argu-
ments on public policy in order to disparage his religious rivals. When, in 384,
he blocked the appeal of Symmachus on behalf of the ancient cults, he went out
of his way to contrast the “worldly” privileges attached to pagan priesthoods
with the social mission of the Christian church.

   For her own benefit the Church owns nothing. . . . These rents and these
   revenues . . . the Church gives away. The possessions of the church are ex-
   penditure on the poor. Let them [the pagans] count up how many captives
   the temples have ransomed, what nourishment they have offered to the
   poor, to how many exiles they have given resources for a livelihood.38



                    Devincire: To cement yet more closely

Despite his proud answer to Symmachus, outreach to the poor was not a cen-
tral issue for Ambrose. What weighed more heavily with him was a very Roman
issue: cohesion, based on a primal sense of solidarity, was central to his notion
both of society and of the church.
    In this, Ambrose resembled Cicero on a deep level. He sensed across the
centuries a real convergence between his own concerns for the Church and the
concerns of the great orator of the Roman Republic in its last days. Cicero wrote
his De officiis in a time of mounting crisis, between late 46 and December 44 bc.
He wrote to mobilize support for a system of aristocratic government that was
rapidly falling apart. The book was “a manual of civic virtue, a theoretical treat-
ment of the obligations which a citizen still owed to the Republic.”39
    Cicero’s De officiis carried an urgent message. It was a book about loyalty to
the community. Only through wholehearted acceptance of their obligations to
society and to each other could human beings hope to maintain a civilized exis-


                                       129
                                  chapter 7


tence, which could never be taken for granted. Cicero’s res publica was an oasis of
sanity and order in a relentless world, swept by warfare and murderous civil
strife. Devincire, “to cement”—­and to cement ever more tightly—­was a word
crucial to Cicero in the De officiis.
    But to whom did this drive to cement the bonds of society apply, and how
widely did these bonds extend? Cicero had no doubts on that issue. Bonding was
at its most intense among fellow Romans:
   For when with a rational spirit you have surveyed the whole field, there is
   no social relation among them all more close, none more dear than that
   which links each one of us to our country—­our res publica. For this,
   our native land—­our patria—­weaves together fast around itself all our
   loves.40
   But Cicero was also a philosopher. He wished to root the highly particular
system of the Roman res publica in human nature itself. The Roman citizen who
met his obligations to the res publica in particular did so because he was guided
by all that was best in humanity in general. Nature itself led him
   to contribute to the general good by an interchange of acts of kindness,
   of giving and receiving; and thus, by our skill, our industry and our tal-
   ents to cement human society ever more closely together, binding man to
   man.41
   Ambrose fastened on this pair of concentric circles in the thought of Cicero.
He strove to re-­create in his own times the link between the intensely particular
loyalty to the res publica of Cicero the politician and the studiously universal
concern of Cicero the Stoic philosopher. He rewrote Cicero’s De officiis in such a
way as to bring to the fore the two aspects of Christianity. As bishop of Milan, he
knew what his res publica was. He stressed the peculiarly intense cohesion and
militancy of the Catholic Church. But he was also a religious thinker, haunted
by the immensity of God. Christianity reached out to the limitless circle of hu-
manity as a whole. Only through a universal benevolence that radiated beyond
the tight community of the local congregation could a universal Catholic Church
come to embrace and reunite a fractured world.
   Everyone knew Cicero in the circles in which Ambrose moved. But they had
known Cicero, above all, as a writer on friendship. They turned to him as a pat-
tern book for the ponderously collegial phrases that ornamented their letters to
each other. This was what Symmachus had learned from Cicero, as he wove his
adhesive web across the governing classes of the Roman world. Ambrose, how-
ever, had learned something else. He concentrated on Cicero the politician and
the theorist of cohesion. He did so in order to create within the church a new
republic for modern times.

                                       130
                          ambrose and his people


     “The force of virtue . . . weakened and warped by primeval greed”:

                Ambrose on Property and Solidarity

In canvassing the possibility of a new, more cohesive social order, Ambrose was
committed to a view of society that was rooted in a distinctive view of human
history. He was the heir of a long tradition of what has been called “ancient prim-
itivism.” It was widely believed that there had been a Golden Age somewhere in
the past of the human race. It was against the effortless harmony of that age that
contemporaries measured the present state of society and found it wanting.42 All
that was bad in society came from the slow decline of humanity from a state of
social innocence into its present state of social vice. In this, Ambrose looked back
not to Cicero but to the more uncompromising Seneca, the Stoic philosopher:
   There was once a fortune-­favored period when the boundaries of nature
   lay open to all, for men’s indiscriminate use, before avarice and luxury had
   broken the bonds that held mortals together.
[In the words of Vergil’s Georgics I.125–­28:]
      No ploughman tilled the soil, nor was it right
      To portion off the boundaries of property.
      Men shared their gain, and earth more freely gave
      Her riches to her sons who sought them not.43
   Ambrose took Seneca’s words seriously. They were in the back of his mind
when, in the De officiis, he challenged Cicero’s definition of “justice.” For Cicero,
private property was sacrosanct. Justice consisted in preserving the private rights
of individuals provided that the public interest was not weakened.44 But Am-
brose wanted to go beyond Cicero. Christians should embrace a more heroic and
expansive definition of justice. To hold onto one’s private property was not
enough. Property was not there to be owned; it was there to be shared. In order to
foster this view, Ambrose followed Seneca. He invoked a time of social innocence,
before the balance of nature had been upset by private acts of appropriation.
   For nature generously supplies everything for everyone in common. God
   ordained everything to be produced to provide food for everyone in com-
   mon; his plan was that the earth should be, as it were, the common posses-
   sion of us all. Nature produced common rights, then, it is usurping greed
   [usurpatio, in a negative sense] that has established private rights.45
   Ivor Davidson, the most recent commentator on the De officiis, has written
somewhat impatiently that “an enormous amount of scholarly ink has been
spilt over these words.”46 But Ambrose’s words should not be dismissed as mere

                                        131
                                   chapter 7


theorizing. To appreciate the power of Ambrose’s account of the violent imposi-
tion of private property upon an abundant earth we have to recover something
of the meaning of nature itself to Ambrose and his contemporaries.
    What Ambrose had in mind was no cold carving up of a dead and abstract
“nature.” Behind his views on the common rights of nature lay an ancient per-
son’s sense of the numinous fecundity of the earth, a view shared by Christians
and pagans. Mother Earth had barely ceased to be divine; she can still be seen on
a great fourth-­century silver dish—­the Parabiagio Plate—­that was discovered in
a grave outside Milan. It may have been connected with the suburban villa of a
wealthy courtier or landowner. Propped up on one arm beside a full cornucopia,
her naked torso lying wide open, Mother Earth gazes placidly at four cherubs
who gather the fruits of the four seasons. A similar figure also appears at the
bottom of the great silver missorium of Theodosius I, beneath the hieratic scene
in which the emperor conferred high office on a courtier.47 This was how nature
should be. For human beings to have divided up among themselves so luxuriant
a source of common wealth, so teeming with life, was an act of hubris as absurd
as attempting to measure out properties on the face of the heaving ocean. Human
avarice had done the one and was quite capable of trying to do the other.48 Am-
brose wrote so as to remind his readers that their own cramped rights to the land
were dwarfed by the abundance of nature.
    The issue was how much Ambrose was prepared to turn back the clock of soci-
ety in an attempt to recapture that “natural” first community of goods. Classical
Romans had tended to view mankind’s first age of innocence with nostalgia. It
was the world they had lost—­and lost forever. The ineluctable sequence of the
ages had condemned it to prehistory. Ambrose did not wish them to be so sure.
He did not advance the idea of an original community of property as the basis
for a specific social program in the here and now. But he did embrace the idea
as one of those “deep humane dreams”49 that encouraged Christians to resist the
present. They should at least imagine a society that might yet be as open to all as
was the undivided earth.
    The notion of humanity’s slow decline from an original perfection set Am-
brose’s efforts as a preacher of benevolence against the background of world his-
tory. In the De officiis and in his other works, Ambrose was not greatly preoccupied
with the original Fall of Adam and Eve.50 He did not interpret humanity’s fall in
Paradise as Augustine would later do—­as a single, abrupt act, which was the only
truly catastrophic event in the history of the human race. Rather, Ambrose
thought along more classical lines. The fall that interested him was less dramatic
but no less tragic in the long run. It was the gradual corruption of society over
the ages. Like Cicero, Ambrose thought that he lived at the end of a long decline.
The world was going to pieces. But, like Cicero again, a sense of decline acted as a
spur to action. As bishop, his officia, and the officia—­the good deeds—he elicited

                                        132
                          ambrose and his people


from others, did something to halt this decline. He strove to roll back a little the
creeping injustice that had numbed human society for so many centuries.
   Who would not want to occupy this citadel of virtue [the state of total
   justice among men] had not the force of virtue in all its glory been left
   weakened and warped by primeval greed?51
   In this, Ambrose was an optimist. What had been weakened and warped in
society could in some measure be restored. Human “benevolence”—­the warm
goodwill of human beings for each other—­had begun with Adam and Eve.
Adam and Eve had been united in one flesh and (Ambrose adds significantly) “in
one spirit.” The human race had issued from a moment of deep harmony. Its
members had been created to help each other.
   Having set out from Paradise, good will has filled the whole world. . . . This
   good will is now enhanced by the communal nature of the church, by our
   partnership in faith, by our kinship as recipients of the grace of baptism,
   and by our sharing in the Mysteries [of the Eucharist]. . . . By these means
   the congregation of the holy church grows ever upwards [adsurgit] into
   one body, joined and bound together in the unity of faith and love.52
   Hence Ambrose’s insistence that giving to the poor should be based upon a
strong sense of human solidarity. As Christel Freu has seen so clearly, Ambrose
worked hard to reverse the imaginative effects of standard Christian rhetoric on
the poor. He did not wish the poor to be seen only as charged outsiders, sent by
God to haunt the conscience of the rich. Hence a decisive upward slippage of the
image of the poor in Ambrose’s sermons and writings. On many occasions, Am-
brose spoke of the poor as interchangeable with “the plebeians” and “the people.”
To call them plebeians in this way made them members of the same Christian
community as the prosperous. The poor were part of the “people” who rallied in
a solid mass behind their bishop.53
   For this reason, Ambrose went out of his way to make sure that Christians did
not see almsgiving as a de haut en bas gesture. Rather, they were encouraged to
see it as the gracious repayment to their fellow humans of an ancient debt.
   It is not anything of yours that you are bestowing on the poor; rather, you
   are giving back something of theirs. For you alone are usurping what was
   given in common for the use of all. The earth belongs to everyone, not to
   the rich. . . . Hence Scripture says to you: Incline your soul to the poor, give
   back what is owed, and answer him with peaceable words in gentleness. (Sirach/
   Ecclesiasticus 4:8)54
    Generosity to the poor was more than a reaching out to the pathetic fringes
of society. Rather, it was supposed to awaken memories of human community in

                                         133
                                   chapter 7


a happier world lost in the depths of time. In the words of Mikhail Bakhtin,
speaking of the theater and its relation to the early modern carnival, it triggered,
if only for a moment, “the mighty aspiration to abundance and to a universal
spirit.”55
    The miracle of joys shared by all citizens, which Symmachus had laid on, for
one week only in the circus and amphitheaters of Rome, had become, with Am-
brose, a permanent aspiration, tinged with classical memories of the Golden Age
and with a Christian hope for Paradise Regained. It also gave the bishop of Milan
an imaginative platform from which to launch a series of famous attacks upon
the avarice of the rich.




                                        134
                           Chapter 8
                           •••••
                 “Avarice, the Root of All Evil”
                  Ambrose and Northern Italy




                             Avarice or Sacrilege?

                             The Ills of Italy

By the time Ambrose came to write the De officiis, at the end of the 380s, the
mood of terror sparked by the disaster of Adrianople in 378 had passed. North-
ern Italy settled down to a period of prosperity, linked to the presence of an im-
perial court. From 383 to 388, under Valentinian II and then on occasions under
Theodosius I, Milan was an imperial capital. The court brought to the upper
classes of the region the benefits of the late Roman age of gold. Fortunes were to
be made in Milan, either through government service or through exploiting the
new capital’s need for foodstuffs.1 Two of the great warehouses of Milan have
been excavated. Each was twice as large as the Ambrosiana, the church Ambrose
had built from his own money. These warehouses would be filled with grain pro-
vided by the local landowners.2 It is not altogether surprising that, in a boom or
bust economy based on the unremitting turning of agrarian produce into gold,
some of Ambrose’s most famous sermons should have touched on the theme
of wealth. Indeed, in the words of Richard Newhauser, they marked the begin-
ning of a “concentrated and sustained emphasis on avaritia [the sin of avarice] in
Western Christian literature.”3
   We tend to take Ambrose’s preaching against the rich for granted. It is an
aspect of his career that has long appealed to modern persons. From the time of
the Counter-­Reformation onward, Milan has been the center of a long tradition
of Catholic engagement with social issues. It was the city of Saint Carlo Borro-
meo (1538–­84), the noble archbishop of Milan who was remembered in the city
for his love of the poor. In the nineteenth century, the famous historical novel I
Promessi Sposi (The Betrothed) by the Romantic Catholic Alessandro Manzoni

                                       135
                                   chapter 8


took its readers back to the time of Saint Carlo’s cousin, archbishop Federico
(1564–­1631), who was famous for having fed the poor during the great famine
of 1629. Manzoni’s novel was a moving story of the vicissitudes of a poor couple,
placed at the mercy of the pride and violence of the rich and protected only by
representatives of the Catholic Church. In more modern times, Milan witnessed
the first Catholic reactions to the labor movements that emerged as a result of the
industrialization of northern Italy. Thus a tradition of Catholic social concern
was firmly rooted in Milan. It looked back to an Ambrose who was very different
from the “proud prelate” of Edward Gibbon—­to Ambrose as the preacher of
social justice in an age of avarice.4
   This view of Ambrose has tended to overlook the original context of his
preaching. Ambrose is assumed to have breathed the same charged air of Chris-
tian engagement with the poor as do humane modern persons. For many schol-
ars, Ambrose seems to be no more than “a simple keen observer of his times.” He
did not like what he saw.
   His observant eye discerned the details of society’s moral degradation. . . .
   He visited patrician homes, noted walls inlaid with gold and ivory, saw
   their thorough-­bred horses . . . calculated from how far the gourmet food
   had been brought. He witnessed the concentration of riches in the hands
   of a few and knew that the race of Achab [the land grabber] never dies.
We are not surprised that the bishop of Milan “lashed out at the spectacle.”5
    Furthermore, we go on to assume that when he described the social ills of his
time, Ambrose has provided us with an unvarnished picture of the social and
economic state of late fourth-­century Italy. His statements have been taken as
conclusive evidence that the Roman empire in the West was a doomed society.
The greed of the great landowners (as Ambrose described them in his sermons)
is assumed by many scholars to have brought Roman society to the verge of
collapse.6
    In fact, Ambrose was a lot less like us than we think. His decision to preach
on social issues was not inevitable; it represented a new departure. To many con-
temporaries it might even have seemed to represent a diversion of attention from
more urgent issues. In the late fourth century, not everyone worried about the
social ills of Italy. They worried about a more basic issue—­the flight of the gods.
It is we who link the decline of the Roman empire to the avarice of the rich. Pa-
gans, however, linked it to the loss of supernatural protection caused by Chris-
tian blasphemy.
    We must remember that paganism was widespread in northern Italy.7 As we
have seen, it still held the high ground in Rome and in much of southern Italy.
Many of Ambrose’s contemporaries were quietly convinced that the ills of Roman
society had a supernatural origin. Many of the sharpest critics of their age were

                                        136
                       ambrose and northern italy


not Christians; they were pagans. For them, bad times had begun with the “na-
tional apostasy” of Constantine. The rampant avarice denounced by pagan au-
thors was thought to go hand in hand with the spoliation of the temples and the
abandonment of the old religion.8
    Ambrose had to answer such views. He did so by subtly secularizing the con-
temporary discourse on decline. He turned what many thinking persons consid-
ered a religious crisis into a crisis of social relations. We moderns tend to applaud
Ambrose for the perspicacity of his diagnosis of the weaknesses of Roman soci-
ety. But pagans such as Symmachus would have regarded Ambrose’s criticisms
of society as mere whistling in the dark. Symmachus knew why things had gone
wrong. The moment that the first fruits of the fields of Italy that had fed the
Vestal Virgins for 1,200 years were withdrawn (in 382), the link between the land
and the gods was broken. The earth lost its abundance. Ambrose would have re-
membered what Symmachus had written in 384 in his famous Third Relation in
defense of the Vestal Virgins: “Sacrilege has made the year go dry.”9
    And, indeed, Symmachus’s worst fears were confirmed on that occasion.
Rome was threatened by famine. As Prefect of the City, Symmachus was forced
to initiate a drastic measure. In the late summer of 384 he expelled all foreigners
from the city so as to ensure that registered citizens only—­the plebs, the People
of Rome—­received the food to which they were entitled. He could only pray:
“Oh gods of my country! Forgive us our neglect of the rites! Drive away the
misery of this famine.”10 It was a shameful moment for him. In Symmachus’s
edition of his Relationes—­of his official reports to the emperor as prefect—­
the document in which he would have reported the expulsion of foreigners is
missing.11
    Ambrose always had men such as Symmachus in view. Bonds of class and inter-
est kept them together. Symmachus did not drop out of Ambrose’s world after his
clash with the bishop over the issue of the Vestal Virgins. The two men maintained
a somewhat frigid correspondence throughout their lives on matters of business.
Symmachus wrote to Ambrose about the protection of shared clients.12 He also
rebuked Ambrose for showing ignorance of the law (and even bad manners) by
attempting to claim certain lawsuits for the jurisdiction of the new bishops’ court.13
    Ambrose also continued to seek out opportunities to criticize the great pagan.
Barely four years after the famine of 384, he went out of his way to comment
on Symmachus’s handling of the crisis. When discussing love of one’s neighbor
in the De officiis, Ambrose denounced the heartlessness of an unnamed pagan
prefect. He branded the decision to expel immigrants who had long resided in
the city of Rome as an inhumane act. Ambrose’s criticism of the measure was a
transparent attack on Symmachus.14
    Ambrose’s treatment of the Roman famine of 384 in his De officiis was
highly tendentious.15 But he ensured that the whole incident would be seen as a

                                        137
                                   chapter 8


purely economic crisis. He presented it as a crisis in which purely human vested
interests—­those of the Roman Senate, of the people of Rome, and even, perhaps,
of grain dealers from Ambrose’s northern Italy—­clashed in a situation created by
a purely natural disaster. In his account of the famine, Ambrose excluded what
for Symmachus was the main cause of the crisis: the anger of neglected gods.
    Symmachus himself had few illusions as to the avarice of his peers who had
failed to contribute to the common stores of grain.16 But behind his complaints
of avarice and lack of public spirit, there lay the deeper fear of a great city laid
open to disaster because deprived of its ancestral rites. Ambrose’s preaching
against the rich, as if they alone were responsible for the miseries of the times,
would have struck pagans as a demagogic maneuver. In their opinion, Ambrose’s
attack on the rich was designed to distract attention from the real issue—­which
was that Christian sacrilege had exposed Italy to disaster.


        Vidi ego miserabile spectaculum: I have seen with my own eyes
                             a heartrending scene

                        Ambrose as Social Critic

It is with this imaginative displacement of anxiety in mind that we should ap-
proach a work Ambrose wrote in the late 380s—­that is, in the same years as he
wrote the De officiis. This was De Nabuthae, On Naboth. It was based on the story
of King Ahab and Naboth’s Vineyard. A brutal tale of the greed of a king who
brought about the death of a poor farmer in order to take over his estate, the On
Naboth was preached against the rich landowners of Milan. It began with a ring-
ing challenge: “The story of Naboth is an ancient tale. But today it is an everyday
occurrence.”17
    The On Naboth is among the most vivid of Ambrose’s works. It was composed
from sermons he had recently delivered. Even when rewritten for publication,
the abuses it denounced seemed grippingly real. In fact, such directness was
unusual for Ambrose. Unlike his great contemporary, John Chrysostom, who
preached incessantly on the poor, Ambrose did not preach with the “sense of a
[single] concrete message needing to be driven home.”18 Rather, he usually pre-
ferred to take his hearers on a mystery tour of the Scriptures. To expound the
Bible was to peer into a deep, dark well of spiritual truths with one’s back turned
on material things.19 As in the nighttime vigils of his cathedral, filled with flick-
ering light and the sound of chanting, Ambrose’s sermons were supposed to take
his hearers into a world beyond this world. It was not a style from which great
rhetoric on social issues might be expected to grow.


                                        138
                      ambrose and northern italy


   Yet this was not the case in the On Naboth. Ambrose’s sermons on the
wealthy were aimed with precise words at a clear target. When he preached, Am-
brose wished “to sound like the Bible.”20 And on this occasion he sounded like a
prophet of Israel.
   Between Ahab, the grasping landowner, and Naboth the small farmer, Am-
brose stepped in as the prophet Elijah. It was he, Ambrose, who delivered the
prophet’s curse:
   You have slain, and you have taken possession of the inheritance. Therefore, in
   the place where dogs licked up the blood of Naboth, dogs shall lick up your
   blood (1 Kings 21:19).21
Speaking that passage, Ambrose did not even mention the name of Elijah. For
at that moment everyone in the church would have known that it was Ambrose
who was the prophet. Had he raised his voice at this moment in the original
sermon, the effect would have been stunning.
    Hence the vivid vignettes of social life that are artfully scattered throughout
the On Naboth. Coming after the gray wisdom of Ecclesiastes and the book of
Proverbs—­which merely stressed the vanity of riches, not the evils of the rich—­
these are sudden lightning flashes that seem to reveal an entire social landscape.
   I myself know of a rich man who, in setting out for the country, was in the
   habit of counting out the rather small loaves that he had brought from the
   city, so that from the number of loaves one could estimate how many days
   he was going to be in the country. He did not want to open his granary,
   which was sealed up, lest his stores be diminished. . . . I also found out from
   trustworthy evidence that, if an egg was added to this, he would complain
   that a chicken had been killed. I write this so that you may know that
   God’s justice, which avenges the tears of the poor, is poised to strike.22
He added accounts of tragic accidents at work and of random acts of cruelty.
   One man tumbled from your roof when he was readying large storerooms
   for your grain. Another fell from the top of a tree while searching for the
   sort of grapes to bring down for the proper wines to be served at your
   banqueting. . . . Another was beaten to death before your eyes if he hap-
   pened to do something displeasing, and he spattered your banquet with
   the blood he had shed. . . .
      I myself have seen a poor man led away because he was obliged to pay
   what he could not.23
These descriptions were skillful inversions of the pastoral vignettes of servants
tending their lord’s estate with sprightly innocence, which feature so regularly on


                                        139
                                   chapter 8


the silverware and on the great villa mosaics of the time. As we have seen, happy
peasants even appeared on the floor of Theodorus’s basilica at Aquileia, gather-
ing the first fruits of rich Christians. Ambrose’s countryside, by contrast, was a
brutal place.24
   Last of all, we meet the rich themselves immured in palatial villas in the
depths of a countryside drained of human life to make way for vast hunting re-
serves: “Or are you uplifted by spacious halls? . . . They might hold a crowd, but
they exclude the voice of the poor.”25
   Yet the scholar has to pause and look again at just these passages. In them,
Ambrose strove to create a “reality effect.” But it is not the reality known to mod-
ern students of late fourth-­century Italy. The social ills Ambrose described are
palpably out-­of-­date. There is no evidence for the growth of latifundia in fourth-­
century northern Italy. Nor do modern surveys support the image of a land emp-
tied of its inhabitants. The late Roman villas of Desenzano (on Lake Garda) and
of Palazzo Pignano (close to Milan, near the Aemilian Way and close to a river
system that would have provided easy transport for its harvests) were splendid
buildings.26 But there is no evidence that they stood in the middle of a man-­
made wilderness. If anything, the evidence points to the development of tighter
human units—­of dispersed settlements gathering into villages and of farmhouses
being upgraded by the laying of mosaics and the installation of workshops. What
the archaeologist has found is not desolation but “a massive increase in rural
activity.”27
   This does not mean that the countryside around Milan was a comfortable
world. It was a hard-­driven land. The landowners depended on the constant,
brutal mobilization of labor. This was where the real hardship lay. And Ambrose
knew it. When he wrote a practical letter of advice to the bishop of Claterna—­a
vulnerable area, where grazing land in the foothills of the Apennines met the
plain along the Via Aemilia—­what concerned him most was that the gangs of
seasonal laborers mobilized to bring in the harvest should receive their wages
on time.28
   By contrast, Ambrose’s evocation of the spread of latifundia at the expense of
small farmers was a traditional grievance, well-­known to Roman readers since
the days of Pliny the Elder. It was irrelevant to the conditions of the fourth cen-
tury. To denounce the growth of great estates was as anachronistic as to denounce
contemporary industrial society by an appeal to the miseries of chimney sweeps
in Victorian London, as these were recounted in the Water Babies of Charles
Kingsley. Why did this hiatus between rhetoric and reality occur?
   We must remember that when Ambrose seemed to strive for reality what he
actually strove for was drama. And he found his drama already condensed in the
works of other writers and preachers. Once he spoke of a particularly heartrend-


                                        140
                       ambrose and northern italy


ing case of oppression, Vidi ego miserabile spectaculum, “I have seen with my own
eyes a heartrending scene.” Yet both the phrase and the vivid scene that followed
appear to have been lifted straight from the pages of Basil, bishop of Caesarea in
distant Cappadocia!29
    However, we should not be too quick to dismiss Ambrose’s picture of upper-­
class Milanese society as platitudinous rather than perceptive. For to do this
would be to overlook the role of platitudes in ancient rhetoric. Appeal to well-­
tried stereotypes gave the weight of a diffuse but potent common sense of wealth
to Ambrose’s arguments. In this common sense, greed and misery were thought
of as timeless. To repeat the criticisms of an ancient author merely gave added
density and drama to similar ills that were present in one’s own society. As the
great scholar Henri Irénée Marrou once reminded us (when speaking of literary
descriptions of ancient dining habits), “a description can be borrowed from a
book without ceasing to be historically true.”30 When studying a similar genre—­
poems on the sufferings of the poor written in medieval China—­Mark Elvin has
arrived at the same conclusion. He warns us that “a cliché is not necessarily less
true for being familiar.” Indeed, he goes on to say that “the point is not that
the story this poem tells is heartbreaking, but that it is commonplace.”31 And it
is precisely the commonplace quality of the greed of the rich and the misery of
the poor Ambrose wished to conjure up.
    Ultimately, the issue is not what Ambrose said. Still less is it whether what he
said can be used in any way by historians who wish to reconstruct the social pro-
file of the northern Italy of his times. It is why he said it. And he said it for a good
reason. The On Naboth and similar sermons formed part of Ambrose’s contin-
ued drive to build up a sense of a Christian community in Milan. As we have seen,
this community had already stood the test of fire (in 385–­86) in the incident of
the basilicas. Now their sense of cohesion would be further sharpened by a chal-
lenge to the evil rich.
    This can be seen from the tone and timing of Ambrose’s sermons against ava-
rice. They appear to have coincided with moments of tension between himself
and the court. The confrontational quality that marked Ambrose’s sermons dur-
ing the siege of his basilica in 385–­86 still lingered dangerously in his sermons on
avarice. There was a thinly veiled streak of populism in them. By identifying with
the prophets of Israel Ambrose reminded his hearers that they were the heirs of
an ancient populus—­the people of Israel. As we have seen, the cry of the people of
Israel was spoken of as the “cry of the poor.” The imagined granaries and the vast
villas of the rich were locked against this cry. But the cry of the poor was never
that of mere beggars. In Milan, as once in Israel, the cry of the poor was the “con-
sensual cry” of the entire populus of a Roman city raised against their oppressors.
And Ambrose was the prophet who brought this cry to the ears of the great.32


                                         141
                                  chapter 8


                  “God has not made you rich out of ill will”

                  The Duties of the Christian Rich

Even though Ambrose’s sermons dealt in commonplaces, we should not auto-
matically assume that preaching against the rich was an altogether anodyne mat-
ter. The cities of the later empire could be dangerous places. Milan was doubly
dangerous because it was a court city. It harbored rich courtiers who were often
strangers to the region. Such persons could never be certain when the tide of
public opinion in the city might turn against them. One sermon might be enough
to destroy a politician’s reputation. This sermon did not have to be an outright
attack. For instance: reading the moralizing diatribes on wealth by John Chrysos­
tom, one could never guess that such sermons made him unpopular with the
wealthy political establishment at Constantinople. As we now read them, John’s
sermons seem to amount to no more than a series of platitudes on the subject of
the transience of riches. They seem totally safe. Yet rich courtiers claimed that
John “had closed the churches to them.” For when he preached “the eyes of all
would turn upon them.”33
    Even if it was couched in studiously stereotypical terms, a sermon could be
decoded by its hearers. It could be perceived as an attack on known individuals,
it might undermine their public reputation, or it could make them seem dispens-
able to the imperial court. Thus, when the court eunuch Calligonus was exe-
cuted, in 388, Ambrose reminded his hearers of the eunuch’s fall:
   from whose end I shy away, at whose death I shudder. . . . It does not please
   me to recall that sermon of mine in which I vented my sorrow [in a seem-
   ingly jejune statement on eunuchs in government] forced by the outrage
   he had done to the church.34
An apparently banal sermon preached by Ambrose on the story of Joseph and
Pharaoh had played a role in the great courtier’s ignominious death.
    Altogether, in churches increasingly saturated with a heady rhetoric on wealth
and poverty it was not always comfortable to be rich. When they entered a Chris-
tian basilica, the rich were exposed to the gaze of a crowd of hundreds drawn
from all classes, many of whom might have had good reason to resent them.35
It was a venue more claustrophobic than was the amphitheater in which the no-
tables of the city had long faced their “people.” In this situation, a bishop not
only spoke out to defend the poor. He also had it in his power either to shame or
to shield the rich.
    It is difficult to trace this charged relationship in the works of Ambrose him-
self. But it can be clearly shown in the case of a known “Ambrosian” bishop.
Gaudentius of Brescia was one of the new men put in place by Ambrose.36 He

                                       142
                       ambrose and northern italy


became bishop of Brescia in 396 at the latest. He had close relations with the lead-
ing layman of his city, Benivolus. It was the sort of relationship with the local elites
that Ambrose had encouraged. Benivolus was a rich man. He had served in the
imperial chancery at Milan. Gaudentius could address him both as the “head of
the local nobility” and as the “head of the people—­the plebs—­of the Lord.” When
Benivolus failed to attend church for many weeks because of illness, his absence
was noticed. Benivolus himself thought that his prosperity had brought upon him
the curse of God. Others may well have thought the same. Benivolus had been a
top bureaucrat and had lived close to the prime source of unclean gold. His wealth
could be imagined to be suspect wealth derived from bribery and extortion.
   Gaudentius responded to Benivolus’s anxiety by giving him a copy of the
sermons he had missed. In the preface, he went out of his way to comfort
Benivolus:
   God has not made you rich out of ill-­will but providentially, so that you
   should find a medicine to heal your sins through works of mercy.37
This was a reassuringly banal solution to Benivolus’s anxieties. But the incident
as a whole showed that black thoughts lay close to the surface when the Brescians
considered Benivolus’s fortune.
    In ancient Rome, a notable who did not spend his money on public benefi-
cence might find that the plebs would turn against him with nasty consequences.
As we saw, this had happened in the case of the riot in which the palace of Sym-
machus’s father was burned in 373–­74. Now “the plebs of the Lord” had its own
spokesman, in the form of an eloquent bishop of Ambrosian style. The bishop
was expected to monitor the behavior of the rich. Indeed, as bishop of Brescia,
Gaudentius acted as the parole officer of the wealthy. He put them on their best
behavior. He shielded the sick and demoralized Benivolus from his own guilt at
the possession of wealth. In so doing, he also shielded him from the criticism of
others. But there was a quid pro quo for this protection. Gaudentius told Beni­
volus in no uncertain terms where he should put his money. In a Christian popu­
lus the well-­tried remedy of generosity, which had disarmed criticism of the rich
in ancient times, now took the form of “works of mercy” to the poor and of do-
nations to the church.


            “This avarice was what first brought every evil to Italy”

              Ambrose and the Limits of the Possible

Ambrose’s sermons on the wealthy should not be read as a reportage on the ac-
tual state of Milanese society. Nor were they intended in themselves to bring

                                         143
                                   chapter 8


about a program of social reform. What they did do was open up for Ambrose
and for similar Christian bishops a space for intervention in society. The sermons
were no more than the preliminary bombardment that preceded the action of
the bishop as intercessor with the great.
   Here again, as so often with Ambrose, it is important to see his activities in
perspective. He did not act alone. Rather, he took advantage of a major develop-
ment in the political culture of his time. He exploited what has been called the
“advocacy revolution” of the later Roman empire.38 This advocacy revolution
was by no means limited to the Christian church. It had not come about because
of a heightened sense of concern for the oppressed but had been fostered by the
imperial government for brutally practical reasons. Perched at the top of an im-
mense and slow-­moving bureaucracy, the emperor and his court went out of
their way to encourage appeals and denunciations from below. As in the Soviet
Union, the emperors realized that “the real power of a totalitarian state results
from its being at the disposal of every inhabitant.”39 Lethal denunciations could
come from anywhere.
   As a result, what Jill Harries has aptly called a “culture of criticism” came into
being. For it was by allowing the occasional dramatic petition to come through
that the central government monitored what was happening in distant prov-
inces.40 Many of these petitions were sermons in miniature. They were “groans.”41
In denouncing governmental abuses, the petitions used exactly the same dis-
course of avarice as did Ambrose.
   Petitions to the emperor were answered in equally high-­pitched tones. Am-
brose lived in an age of sermons from the throne. In 301, for instance, the Price
Edict of the pagan emperor Diocletian had inveighed against the avarice of mer-
chants and dealers in foodstuffs in language that was quite as strong as any used
by the bishop of Milan: among such persons (the emperor declared),
   the unbridled lust to grab is mitigated neither by abundance of supplies
   nor by the fertile growth of yearly harvests. . . . They seek to narrow down
   the abundance that comes from a propitious climate, the benefits bestowed
   by the gods and the affluence associated with the good fortune of the state.
   Considerations of common humanity have led me, o my subjects, to place
   a limit on avarice.42
    Ambrose could not have said it better. But he had no illusions as to how this
new culture of criticism worked. It was not through high-­minded consciousness-­
raising in church (through the sort of sermons that now fill so many volumes of the
Fathers of the Church) but through the dogged task of lobbying the powers that
be that Christian benevolence was shown to work in late fourth-­century Milan.
    Ambrose set about this task with memorable verve. On one occasion, he was
believed to have gate-­crashed the private circus of the imperial palace—­entering

                                        144
                      ambrose and northern italy


through the same gateway as the venatores, the skilled beast hunters (that is, onto
the open arena where the beasts would appear)—­in order to gain amnesty for a
nobleman condemned for treason.43 It was the sort of spectacular intervention
people liked to associate with Ambrose.
   But we should not be misled by the occasional tour de force. Usually, Am-
brose got things done in a low-­key manner that differed not at all from the con-
stant lobbying of Symmachus. To take one example: A minor clerk in the ad-
ministration of the harbor works at Ostia faced confiscation on an unspecified
charge. He was the protégé of a well-­placed north Italian, Eusebius of Bologna.
Prompted by his friend Eusebius, Ambrose set to work immediately:
   As soon as I received your letter, I saw the prefect. . . . The prefect imme-
   diately granted forgiveness and ordered the letter of confiscation to be
   countermanded.44
   Such incidents reveal the other side of Ambrose. For all the contestational
stances through which he built up the cohesion and morale of his congregation,
Ambrose remained an insider. He knew how far he could go. As he wrote in the
De officiis:
   Here is something else which helps you gain a good reputation: rescuing
   someone in need from the hands of the powerful, or saving a condemned
   person from death. The way to go about this, as far as possible, is without
   making a fuss—­sine perturbatione: we must avoid giving the impression
   that we are acting more with an eye to boasting about it than to showing
   people mercy.45
    Ambrose also knew that there were certain things that a bishop could not
touch. One of them was taxation. As we have already seen, taxation was crucial to
the formation of late Roman society. And it was the emperor and his servants—­
not the bishop—­who determined the incidence of the taxes. Ambrose could not
avoid noticing that Julian the Apostate (361–­63), the last pagan emperor, was
still remembered warmly in the West: he had lightened the tax load in a way
in which no Christian emperor had done.46 In the crucial area of taxation and
the treatment of fiscal debtors, the late Roman state remained impervious to
Christianity.
    A generation after his death, people close to Ambrose were aware of the
­constraints this situation had imposed on the great bishop of Milan. Paulinus
of Milan wrote a Life of Ambrose at the request of none other than Augustine of
Hippo. He had no illusions as to what his hero could not do:
   He groaned deeply when he saw that root of all evil, avarice, a drive which
   neither abundant wealth nor shortage could diminish, increasing more and

                                       145
                                   chapter 8


   more among men and particularly in the holders of high office, so that in-
   tervening with them was an exceptionally heavy task because everything
   [at court] was up for sale. This avarice was what first brought every evil to
   Italy, and from then onwards everything went to the worst.47

    Paulinus of Milan knew the limits that were placed on Ambrose’s ability to
intervene in state affairs. Even when Ambrose was at the height of his career, as
an old and respected bishop in 396, imperial agents had marched into church
to arrest a political suspect. They pushed past Ambrose and his clergy who had
crowded around the altar to protect the fugitive and dragged him unceremoni-
ously from the church before the bishop’s own eyes.48
    Paulinus was no naive acolyte. He was legal adviser and manager of the estates
of the Milanese church in Africa. He knew the way the world worked. His de-
scription of the growth of avarice in Italy may even have consciously echoed the
History of the Caesars of Aurelius Victor, a supporter of the pagan emperor Ju-
lian, writing of the increased load of taxation placed upon Italy for the first time
by Diocletian and increased by Constantine.49 When it came to the central
functions of the Roman state, even the vivid Ambrose was a lightweight. He
could attack the avarice of private persons, conjuring up their abuses in the old-­
fashioned language of the Italy of an earlier age. He could not attack the fiscal
system from which so much of the wealth around him must have derived. It was
only a decade later, in a more crisis-­laden situation when the Roman state itself
was maimed by barbarian invasions, that Christian writers and preachers turned
explicitly against taxation and tax collectors. But in the Italy of the 380s and
390s this development still lay in the future.
    Ambrose died in 397—­some six years before his exact contemporary, Sym-
machus. By that time, a younger generation had become prominent in regions
far from northern Italy. We are entering the world of Paulinus of Nola, of Augus-
tine, and of Jerome. Each one came from a region very different from the Italy of
Symmachus and Ambrose. Augustine, in particular, came from a layer of Roman
society that had little in common with the senatorial world in which Ambrose
had moved and of which he never lost sight.
    Though he left behind him a striking memory of his actions as a public per-
son, many of Ambrose’s works became out-­of-­date with surprising speed. The De
officiis, from which we have derived so much of Ambrose’s view of himself in the
late 380s, seems to have had little immediate impact. It was a strange fate to over-
take a book that has been described by a modern scholar as “the first manual of
Christian ethics.”50
    In a sense, Ambrose had put himself out-­of-­date. His work in Milan was like
the ground course of a high building. It ceased to be noticed, but it had been
decisive. In creating in a major western city a Christian community sheathed in

                                       146
                      ambrose and northern italy


an aura of inviolable cohesion, Ambrose had begun a work that would be contin-
ued in many other cities of the West. He gave a language to this great enterprise.
He conjured up an imagined community in which the distinction between the
poor and the plebs was deliberately blurred. He brought the poor into the Catho-
lic community. He presented the care of the rich for the poor as a necessary con-
sequence of the unity of all Christians. Last but not least, Ambrose presented the
unity of the Catholic community of Milan as the living core of human society as
a whole. A fractured human race could regain its long-­lost solidarity by entering
the Catholic Church. It was by his attention to social issues, judged in the light
of that great hope, that Ambrose came to forge a language that proved to be well
adapted to the ambitions of a religion that had dared to think of itself—­at last
and for the very first time—­as a true “majority religion,” as the church rose “like
a moon waxing in brightness” above the Roman world.51




                                        147
                             Chapter 9
                             •••••
                                   Augustine
                                  Spes saeculi
  Careerism, Patronage, and Religious Bonding, 354–­384




                Tenuis municeps: A townsman of slender means

To turn to Augustine (354–­430) is to meet a figure from a different region and
from a very different social world from that of Ambrose. The story of Augustine
begins in Africa, and after a hiatus of less than five years spent in Italy, it picks up
again in Africa. A younger man than Ambrose, Augustine outlived the bishop of
Milan by thirty-­three years. It was from Africa, as bishop of Hippo, that Augus-
tine witnessed the unfolding of a crisis of empire, from the Gothic sack of Rome
in 410 onward, that was more drastic than Ambrose and any members of his
generation could ever have imagined.
    This chapter and the next two will deal only with the first forty years of Au-
gustine’s life. They will follow him from his early years as a provincial on the
make in Carthage, Rome, and Milan, from 373 to 387. Then they will describe
his return to Africa, in 388, and his activities up to the time of his ordination as
bishop of Hippo in 396 (a year before the death of Ambrose). They will present
the history of a career and of a conversion seen very much from the inside. De-
spite the vividness of Augustine’s life, which is surprisingly well documented for
us, it is important to maintain this inward-­looking focus. For an inner history of
Augustine does not mean that we will see him in isolation. On the contrary, such
a history throws an unexpected light on the stresses and strains of persons of his
social background. It gathers together in a single person the tensions of an entire
class.
    Augustine’s continuous search for a community of like-­minded friends goes
some way toward explaining the remarkable efflorescence of countercultural re-
ligious groups in late antiquity. With Augustine, we can follow this widespread
process of group formation in detail from small beginnnings to a momentous
conclusion. In the years between 373 and 396, Augustine and his close friends

                                         148
           careerism, patronage, and religious bonding


passed, decade by decade, from membership in a radical sect, to the formation of
a philosophical community, and eventually to the foundation to a monastery of
their own making. Little did they know it at the time, but the monastery Augus-
tine founded in Hippo, and about which he wrote after 391, was destined to
become the template for an experiment in communal living that condensed
some of the highest aspirations of the medieval Catholic Church in its attitudes
toward both wealth and society as a whole.
    Let us, however, begin the story when Augustine was thirty and had already
begun to taste the fruits of success a year after arriving in Rome from Carthage.
Not surprisingly, to come to Rome was to come to Symmachus. In 384, in his
first months as Prefect of the City, Symmachus was called upon to perform a
routine duty:
   A notification had come from Milan to Rome, that a teacher of rhetoric
   was to be appointed [for the city of Milan], with travel facilities provided
   by the imperial post.1
   The man chosen by Symmachus was an African, Aurelius Augustinus. He had
come to Rome a little under a year earlier, having taught rhetoric in Carthage for
eight years. It was the decision of Symmachus that ensured that the future Au-
gustine of Hippo moved from Rome to Milan in the autumn of 384.
   For Symmachus, it was an unremarkable event.2 He had constantly recom-
mended young men of culture to the great, whether informally or, in this case, as
part of his administrative duties as Prefect of the City, who was the official super-
visor of the teaching profession (and of their students) in Rome. Many of his
nominees went on to high posts in the bureaucracy or at the imperial court.
Their successes reassured him. They showed that “the pursuit of classical litera-
ture is a sure path to high office.”3
   Most of the young men Symmachus patronized have remained mere names to
us; this cannot be said of Aurelius Augustinus. He has become known to us as
Saint Augustine of Hippo. The vivid autobiographical passages that enliven his
Confessions (which he began to write in around 397), when combined with his
other works, enable us to follow from the inside the trajectory of Augustine’s
career from Thagaste (modern Souk Ahras in eastern Algeria) where he was born
(in 354) to Milan as a rhetor (in 384) and back to Africa as a would-­be monk (in
388). Through further works of his, we can continue to follow him from his or-
dination (in around 396) as bishop of Hippo (modern Annaba/Bône on the
coast of Algeria) until his death in 430.4
   Because of the abundance of our evidence, it is possible to place Augustine
year by year in a living social context as we can do with no other late Roman per-
son. It is important that we should try to do this. Augustine is so well-­known for
what he wrote that it is easy to forget the manner in which he lived. Augustine’s

                                        149
                                    chapter 9


writings would echo through the centuries. But they are not elevating sounds
that come from nowhere. They bore the flavor of a real world. In this, and in
subsequent chapters, I wish my readers to take up this challenge—­to trace the
evolution of Augustine’s thought on wealth, religion, and society against the
various social contexts in which he found himself in various stages of his life. For
each context was never a mere background to his life and writings. Each worked
its way into the texture of Augustine’s thought in a manner that accounts for his
unmistakable intellectual profile.
    To do this will not always be easy. It has proved difficult to find a place for
Augustine on our conventional map of late Roman society. This is partly the
fault of the very crude maps of late Roman society that have been available to
modern scholars until very recently. But even to contemporaries, Augustine was
hard to place. His social position was shot through with ambiguities. Seen
through the eyes of Symmachus, it was obvious that the young African lacked
the clear markers of status that characterized Symmachus’s world and that of his
fellow nobiles. Ambrose, though a product of the more recent nobility of service,
would also have viewed the young African from a great height. Though he wel-
comed Augustine to Milan satis episcopaliter—­“very much as a bishop should
do”—­Ambrose never put himself out to make intimate contact with him.5
    Altogether, in 384 Augustine’s social status was a blur. The most blatant sign
of his lack of clear social markings was the fact that, at the age of thirty, his mari-
tal status was uncertain. He had been living with a woman for twelve years and
already had a son by her. She was not his wife. But neither was she, in any formal
sense, his “concubine.” For a concubine was a woman debarred from lawful
marriage by the laws that prohibited the union of persons of known high status
with persons of low status. Augustine lacked the sort of high status that the late
Roman laws against mésalliance were designed to protect. He was sufficiently
unimportant to be free to marry whomever he wished. His companion was not
necessarily his social inferior. As Danuta Shanzer has suggested, in a trenchant
article, she may simply have been the woman with whom Augustine lived and
whom, for reasons we can only guess, he refused to marry.6 This situation, in it-
self, would have told Symmachus that Augustine came from a gray zone, unlike
his own. In Symmachus’s world, marriages were formally contracted because they
were linked to the alliance of families and to the joining of vast properties. Au-
gustine, by contrast, was free to live with whomever he chose and however he
chose because he was a man unfettered by the obligations of ancestral wealth.
    At the same time, it is misleading to speak of Augustine as if an utterly un-
bridgeable chasm separated him from the worlds of Symmachus and Ambrose. It
 has proved easy for his modern biographers to acclaim Augustine as a prodigy—
­as a poor man, the son of a poor man, who rose from rags to riches by his out-
standing talents alone. Some scholars have even called him “a nobody.”7 This is

                                         150
           careerism, patronage, and religious bonding


far too dramatic a view. Augustine had never been a nobody. Like many Romans
from the little cities of the provinces, he had always been somebody somewhere.
    To understand this, we must go back to the intense world of Roman north
Africa. As we have seen, every city in north Africa was a little patria of its own.
Each had its own, clearly defined social hierarchy. Because of this, we should see
Roman Africa as littered with little pyramids—­the social hierarchies of indi-
vidual cities. Larger pyramids—­whose peaks lay in Carthage within Africa and
beyond Africa in Rome and Milan—­hung over these little pyramids. Despite the
attractive power of major centers, which was a blatant feature of the society of
the fourth century, the large pyramids did not absorb the little pyramids entirely.
Social status came from one’s position in the little pyramid of one’s hometown
first and only then from one’s success in the wider world.
    Augustine’s family belonged close to the top of the little pyramid of Thagaste.
Looking back, from the fifth century, Augustine’s biographer Possidius described
Augustine’s parents as honesti.8 Honestus was a word as heavy with a sense of ill-­
defined superiority as the word “gentleman” used to be in traditional English
society. Augustine’s family were on the top side of the one truly significant shelf
in Roman society. They were members of the town council. Their wealth gave
them membership in the group that met in the “temple” of the town hall to man-
age the affairs of “the most resplendent city” of Thagaste. Augustine’s father,
Patricius, had an estate. The family owned slaves. Augustine never had to work
with his hands.9
    Augustine was unlike the Harvester of Mactar, whom we met in chapter 1.
The Harvester had finally entered the “temple” of the town council of his city
after years of labor beneath the burning sun. By contrast, Augustine’s eventual
ascent as a teacher of rhetoric was not one from rags to riches. In 384 he had
done no more than move from one little pyramid (where he had always been
somewhat privileged) to a position within sight of the top of the biggest pyramid
in the Latin West through being appointed to a teaching post in the court city
of Milan.
    In the conditions of the fourth century, to be on the upper slopes of a little
pyramid was not a particularly comfortable position. When he wrote about his
father in the Confessions, Augustine chose his words with care. He described
Patricius as a tenuis municeps. Tenuis was an ambiguous word; it had a dignified
Ciceronian ring to it. For Cicero, it had referred to those who brought their char-
acter, not their bankroll, to the service of the state. For Cicero, it marked such
persons off from the irresponsible rich. A tenuis was by no means a pauper.10
    We should not be confused by the fact that in later years (in the late 420s)
Augustine once described himself to his congregation at Hippo as “a poor man,
born from poor parents.”11 In using the word “poor” on this occasion he was
doing no more than many Latin authors had done for centuries. He spoke of

                                       151
                                   chapter 9


himself as “poor” “not as a clearly conceptualized condition of deprivation, but
negatively, as the opposite of wealth”—­the wealth, that is, of others wealthier
than oneself.12 “Poverty as unwealth”13 was all that Augustine had in mind when
he used the words tenuis and pauper of his father and himself.
   Patricius was, indeed, “poor” in this quintessentially Roman sense. He was
poor in relation to a considerably richer group of fellow townsmen who formed
the inner circle of the city’s town council. It was entry into this inner group that
Patricius sought, through nurturing the talent of his son. He paid out money
for Augustine’s education in the nearby university city of Madauros (modern
M’Daourouch, in Algeria) with an animositas—­with a pigheaded determination
—­that occasionally outstripped his resources. For one year, at the age of sixteen,
Augustine had to linger at home, called back from Madauros for lack of funds.
But Patricius was determined to succeed.
   At that time, everybody was full of praise for my father because he spent
   money on his son beyond his means. . . . Many citizens of far greater wealth
   did nothing of the kind for their children.14
   The praise of Patricius’s fellow citizens may not have been offered without
reserves. They knew what Patricius was up to. In Augustine he had a filius bonae
spei—­a gifted boy with a future ahead of him.15 He would spend his money so
that, from the rewards of a career in teaching or administration, his son might
finally break into the inner circle of Thagaste. Had Augustine not, in 386,
abruptly abandoned the spes saeculi—­the hope of advancement in this world
on which his father’s heart was set16—­an Album of the town council of Tha-
gaste, such as that which has survived from Timgad (to which we referred in
chapter 1), might have shown Aurelius Augustinus at last at the top, as Patricius
had wished him to be. He might have appeared as a honoratus—­a man “hon-
ored” by the emperor—­who had returned from a successful career in the wider
world as a teacher or an imperial servant to settle down in middle age among the
leaders of his city.
   Far from coming from nowhere, Augustine came from the most vivid and
creative section of the Roman society of his time. He did not come from the
established nobility of Rome or even from the inner circles of local society in
Roman Africa. He came from a far less secure and, for that reason, all the more
energetic group. In little towns scattered all over the Latin West (and especially
in the towns that lay particularly thick on the ground of Africa), men who had
grown up within sight of the top of their own, local society saw no reason why,
through their talents, they should not rise to the top of the greater, imperial so-
ciety that reached beyond the little cities of their region.
   That is what Augustine had achieved, by the year 384, at the age of thirty,
when he moved from Rome to Milan. It was no small achievement for the son

                                        152
           careerism, patronage, and religious bonding


of a tenuis municeps. But, while only the occasional nobleman of Rome when
threatened by downward mobility might find that he had to fight his way back
to the top with exemplary energy—­as Ambrose had done as a young man—­
literally hundreds of young men from town councils all over the West set out in
search of the same kind of success as did Augustine. They sought wider fields,
beyond the little pyramid of their hometowns, in which to shine through skilled
professions, through government service, and, as we shall see, through various
forms of intellectual and religious experimentation. Far from being a lonely prod-
igy, Augustine’s career was representative of the hopes of an entire class. Like the
hum of a swarm of rising hornets, it was largely the noise created by such persons
that gave unparalleled energy to the cultural and religious life of the Latin world
in the fourth and early fifth centuries.
    To move out of Thagaste, in the 370s, Augustine had to have a patron. His
great good fortune was that he got one. Romanianus was a truly rich member
of the Thagastan elite. In a work written in Milan in 386, Augustine drew on the
ancient image of the urban benefactor to describe Romanianus. He was a man
such as Symmachus would have recognized as a provincial version of himself.
Romanianus was an amator patriae in the old style. He was acclaimed
   through the [shouting] mouths of his clients in city and province alike as
   “the most humane . . . the most generous” . . . spotlessly neat in appearance,
   at the very top of his good fortune.
Like Symmachus—­though on a provincial scale—­Romanianus had held his fel-
low townsmen entranced by spectacular games:
   Indeed . . . , while you presented to the people of our town public shows
   that included bears and performances never seen before, the applause of
   the theater deemed you always to be the most prosperous of men.17
   We even have tantalizing evidence that Romanianus contributed in the tradi-
tional manner to the urban fabric of Thagaste. A fragment of beaded stone found
at Thagaste bears the name, carved in fourth-­century lettering, of a Cornelius
Romanianus.18
   Romanianus took care of Augustine. He did so for over twelve years, from the
time that Augustine was a young student of twenty (in 374) to the time of Au-
gustine’s final “conversion” from a career, in Milan (in 386). Romanianus had
taken “this poor young boy” into “his house, his payroll and his heart.” When
Augustine returned from Carthage to teach for a few years in Thagaste in 375,
Romanianus brought his gifted friend into the charmed circle in which Patri-
cius (only five years dead) had hoped to place him: “By your favor, by your inti-
mate friendship [your familiaritas], by sharing your house with me, you made
me, along with yourself, a famous leader of local society.” For the next ten years,

                                        153
                                   chapter 9


Romanianus provided the financial “nest” (we would say the “safety net”) that
supported Augustine’s rapid rise as a teacher of rhetoric at Carthage.19
    Without Romanianus’s protection, Augustine might well have remained
locked into the small-­town life of Thagaste for the rest of his days. Not only did
Romanianus give him financial support. It was probably through the interven-
tion of Romanianus that Augustine took what, in the conditions of the fourth
century, was the most important step of all for a young man bent on a career.
Augustine quietly slipped out of his obligations to serve in the town council of
Thagaste, to which he had become liable after the death of his father, which had
occurred around 370. Once he had obtained this precious exemption, the way
to the top lay open. His teaching career might even be crowned by governmental
posts that gave him entry into the new nobility of service.20


                                   Familiaritas

          Patronage, Friendship, and Group Formation

As we have seen, patronage of this kind was crucial to the social mobility that
characterized so much of fourth-­century society. But it is important that we also
look at the impact of this system on the attitudes toward society of those who
depended on it. We usually meet the patronage systems of this period as they
were administered with bland punctilio from the top, by persons such as Sym-
machus. In the case of Augustine, however, we get a stark, upward view of the
same system. It is like looking up into the branches of a giant tree up which Au-
gustine hoped to scramble so as to reach the top of Roman society. For the son
of a minor town councillor, who was wealthy enough to be a gentleman at home
but not wealthy enough to enter the wider world without support from others,
issues of wealth and poverty faded into the background compared with the ever-­
present and decisive fact of patronage. Augustine had grown up in a social world
where what you owned was less important than who you knew.
    This situation gave a distinctive flavor to his subsequent views on society. It
accounts for what might strike a modern reader of Augustine as one of his blind
spots. Apart from preaching conscientiously on almsgiving once he became a
bishop, he has little to say about the poor. This was because Augustine had al-
ways been surrounded by poverty of a certain kind. The constant, galling aware-
ness that he did not possess as much as did his more fortunate peers was what
had driven Patricius to such lengths to foster the talents of his son. For the first
half of his life, Augustine was in very much the same position as Patricius. His
social world was not divided primarily between rich and poor; it was divided be-
tween those who could get ahead and those who could not. The truly rich could

                                       154
           careerism, patronage, and religious bonding


afford to think about the poor. As we saw, part of Symmachus’s huge wealth was
deployed in a ceaseless, anxious dialogue with the plebs of Rome. Ambrose lin-
gered with fierce eloquence on the contrast between the avaricious rich and the
victimized poor. But Augustine was no Ambrose, and he was certainly no Sym-
machus. For him, society was veined from top to bottom by the fact of patron-
age. As a result, Augustine experienced his social world as a cat’s cradle of per-
sonal relationships. It was not a world of rich and poor; it was a world of patrons
and friends.
    This goes some way to explain why friendship, trust, and the concord of wills
were always more than abstract notions for Augustine. They had been the build-
ing blocks of his social world for the first thirty years of his life. Compared with
the robust sweep of Ambrose’s Ciceronian vision of a human solidarity made
ever more dense and enduring through Christian acts of benevolence, there was
an element of tunnel vision in Augustine’s early views on society. He did not
think big, as Ambrose had done. Rather, he thought in terms of small groups,
bonded by intense feelings of friendship based on shared belief.
    We should give due weight to this feature of the social thought of Augustine.
Put very briefly: in the 380s and 390s, Ambrose’s Cicero was the Cicero of the
De officiis. His view of society was rooted in a sense of natural solidarity. Augus-
tine’s Cicero, by contrast, was the Cicero of the Laelius. It was the Cicero of
friendship.21 But to this widespread classical ideal of friendship (to which men
such as Symmachus paid lip service) Augustine added a dose of urgency tinged
with anxiety. For him, human society was not held together by some massive,
original bond. It depended for its cohesion on the perilous free play of human
affections. Each friendship was a gamble. Each human group was the fragile
creation of an interplay of wills. Society was a risky business. Whatever solidar-
ity it managed to create depended on the subtle flow of shared affections and
loyalties.
    Thus in his earlier writings (from the late 380s to the early 400s) Augustine
tended to linger by preference on the quality and tenacity of bonds of friendship
and on the primacy of shared religious enthusiasms. His ideal remained a coun-
tercultural community of like-­minded souls. It was the microsociology of a small
community that held his attention—­whether it was the cell of a religious sect,
a philosophical commune, or a monastic establishment. Put briefly: Augustine
was a theorist of friendship and of groups based on shared enthusiasms long
before he emerged in middle age as the imaginative architect of a grandiose City
of God.
    How had this development begun? Part of the answer is simple. Friendship—­
amicitia—­had always been the gentler face of patronage. Patronage implied a
measure of asymmetry between patron and client, but this asymmetry could be
canceled. The patron might promote a client to a more intimate relationship.

                                       155
                                  chapter 9


Familiaritas might replace dependence, if by any chance the fortunate hanger-­on
was promoted from the position of a client to that of a friend.
    The transformation of patronage into friendship was expected to occur most
frequently in intellectual circles. In the many countercultures of late antiquity,
friendship was the most precious elixir of all. Differences of social status were
elided and even the heavy patron-­client bond was transformed through the join-
ing of like minds. Persons of potentially competing statuses within a fragmented
upper class could hope to sink their differences in a little group committed to the
common search for wisdom.
    In around 375, when Augustine was twenty-­one, Romanianus took this deci-
sive step. He adopted Augustine, his client, as a friend. This was not altogether
surprising. They were the same age. They shared the same high culture. In this
case, the patron and his client came together with others to form a group of
friends. A friendship based on the joining of like minds was even supposed to
cause the hard facts of money to melt into the background. In the words of the
ancient saying (which had already circulated for eight centuries): “All things are
held in common between friends.”22 In such charmed circles, the issue of who
depended on whose wealth was deemed to be of no significance. In the Confes­
sions Augustine has left a memorable picture of his days in Thagaste, in around
375, when the little group was first formed:
   These were [the things] which occupied my mind in the company of my
   friends: to make conversation, to share a joke, to perform mutual acts of
   kindness, to read together well-­written books . . . to disagree though with-
   out animosity—­just as a person debates with himself. . . . These and other
   signs come from the heart of those who love and are loved and are expressed
   through the mouth, through the tongue, through the eyes, and a thousand
   gestures of delight, acting as fuel and out of many to forge a unity.23
    What Augustine went out of his way not to tell us in this particular passage of
the Confessions comes as a surprise to modern readers. The group whose shared
enthusiasm Augustine described so vividly had been brought together by shared
adherence to the most exotic version of Christianity that had ever appeared in
late Roman north Africa. Augustine’s first experience of the cohesion of a group
was not derived solely from his secular friendships. It was forged through joining
a radical religious movement. From the age of nineteen (in 373), to his final tak-
ing up residence in Milan (in 384), Augustine and his friends adopted a religion
known to us as Manichaeism. (The words “Manichaeism” and “Manichee” come
from the Syriac term Mani de hayye: “the Mani of Life”—­pronounced with a
distinctive hard h, as in the Hebrew hayyim.) Mani was the preacher of “life”—­
of “salvation.” He was a prophet who had appeared a little over a century pre­
viously (he died in 277). He had been active far to the east, in what is now

                                       156
           careerism, patronage, and religious bonding


southern Iraq. For the remainder of this chapter, we must make the leap of the
imagination that is required to understand the role of Augustine’s ten-­year-­long
experience of Manichaeism in fostering his desire to live in a countercultural re-
ligious community among like-­minded friends.


                  “Sons and Daughters of the Light Mind”

                        Augustine the Manichee

From 373 to 384, Augustine was a member of the Manichaean sect.24 These were
crucial years for him. Yet Augustine’s later works make it more than usually dif-
ficult for us to enter into what this experience must have meant. Once converted
to Catholicism, he distanced himself entirely from his former religion. He in-
sisted that he had never penetrated the inner circles of the Manichaean cult. He
frequently stated that he had remained a mere “fellow traveler”—­an “Auditor,” a
“Hearer,” who did no more than listen to the preaching of the Manichaean “Elect”
and who ministered to their material needs.
    This was a credible claim. The Elect were the virtuosos of the Manichaean
religion. Uncannily pale, sexless, and without appetite, the Elect were like wan-
dering monks. The Hearers who supported them were not subject to the same
hyperascetic codes as were the Elect.25 Augustine also implied that he had never
been a fully informed Manichee. He stressed the fact that only the Elect knew
the secret doctrines of the sect.26 He even implied that, for most of the time, he
had been a half-­hearted adherent.27
    Furthermore, once he became a Catholic, Augustine consistently presented
the Manichees as gross outsiders to the Christian tradition. He attacked them as
the upholders of a particularly desperate vision of the universe. He stressed the
fact that they held that the material world was utterly corrupt. It was a ruined
portion of a Kingdom of Light that had been invaded by a principle of active
evil, known as the Kingdom of Darkness. To be a Manichee was to realize that
one had been trapped in a cosmic catastrophe. Manichees, as it were, dug among
the ruins of a fallen world to find frail but precious portions of light trapped
beneath a mass evil matter. They prayed, fasted, and ate together so as to send
these portions (which were their true selves) back to their former luminous home
beyond the Sun.28
    Once Manichaeism is reduced to a caricature, as Augustine presented it in his
later years, it is hard to imagine what he derived from being a Manichee. In his
old age, Augustine’s enemies even turned his own bleak summary of Man-
ichaean views against him. They claimed that Augustine had remained a crypto-­
Manichee. They implied that, like the Manichees, Augustine still held to a cata-

                                       157
                                   chapter 9


strophic view of the human condition. They claimed that he had continued to
believe, with the Manichees, that sexuality was a demonic force. They pointed
out that his doctrine of original sin echoed the Manichaean belief that all human
beings were the helpless victims of evil forces that had crushed them since the
dawn of time.29
    Faced by this high wall of stereotypes, we have tended to take one of two
stances. Either (like Augustine’s later critics) we suspect that, if there was any-
thing that Augustine learned from the Manichees, it was bound to be bad. Or we
claim that he had learned nothing—­that his adherence to the religion of Mani
was no more than superficial dabbling in a New Age cult.30
    It is time to revise both these views. In the first place, to become a Manichee
was by no means to cease to be a Christian. Augustine had grown up in a Chris-
tian family. He turned to the Manichees after reading the Hortensius, which was
Cicero’s exhortation to pursue the life of wisdom. He turned to them because,
unlike the pagan Cicero, their writings “bore the name of Christ.”31 Mani always
claimed to be a reformer of Christianity who had brought the message of Jesus
to its final perfection.32
    Nor was it surprising that Augustine should have fallen upon the Manichees
when he was in Carthage. Though bound by so many economic ties to Rome, the
port of Carthage also looked to the east, as it had done in the days of the Car-
thaginians. Carthage was the first major landfall in western waters for ships from
Antioch and Alexandria. In the fourth century, the presence of extensive Man-
ichaean communities in Africa marked the westernmost foam of a wave of radi-
cal ascetic Christianity that had swept through the Christian communities of
Mesopotamia, Syria, and Egypt. Those regions were accustomed to radical forms
of Christianity preached by wandering ascetics. In Syria and Egypt, the pale Man-
ichaean Elect—­monks on the move like many other monks—­did not seem at all
strange.33 In the same way, Manichees were welcomed in Carthage as radical,
“reformed” Christians. They were not viewed as the representatives of an irre-
mediably exotic cult.34
    What mattered most was that Manichaeism was a religion made up of small,
intense cells.35 Each cell was a “Holy Church” in miniature in which creatures
of the light gathered together in the midst of a darkened universe. Auditors re-
ceived the pale Elect into their houses. They fed them, and in return, they received
preaching and the blessing of long and mysterious prayers.36 The atmosphere of
the stilled study group, made up of chosen souls gathered at the foot of their
teacher, was what a Manichaean assembly offered to Hearers in the “Holy Church”
of Mani.
    Manichaeism gave Augustine and Romanianus just what they needed—­an
intensely religious version of the familiaritas they had sought to achieve, by more
secular means, in the years when their relationship of patron and client took on

                                        158
           careerism, patronage, and religious bonding


the more intimate form of a relationship between two like-­minded friends.
Shared Manichaeism had opened the way to friendship. Augustine himself ad-
mitted this in one of his anti-­Manichaean works: what held him was the famili­
aritas he found among the Manichees: “A sense of intimate friendship, which
crept into me under a false image of goodness, and encircled my neck like the
coils of a serpent.”37 It was this familiaritas—­this sense of intimate friendship—­
that kept Augustine and his friends for so long in the grip of the religion he later
came to travesty. Their ten years together as Manichees had by no means been a
superficial experience. It had offered them an intense experience of bonding in
one of the most starkly countercultural groups in the Latin West.
   This impression has been confirmed by the recent discovery of Coptic Man-
ichaean documents at Kellis in the Dakhleh Oasis of western Egypt. They date
from around 340. They include personal letters that show that, on a day-­to-­day
basis, members of the local Manichaean community thought of themselves as
bound together by strong ties of spiritual friendship.38 Their members spoke of
each other as “Sons and Daughters of the Light Mind.” They were inextricably
joined one to the other through the common possession of the “Light Mind”—­in
Coptic, pnous ñouaïne.39
   The “Light Mind” was, in many ways, the equivalent of the Holy Spirit among
more mainline Christians. Within the Manichaean community, it acted with
peculiar intensity as a bond of union. The “Light Mind” was an emanation of
the Spirit of Jesus. It had inspired the Apostles and was now shared by all mem-
bers in each Manichaean cell. Auditors and Elect alike shared in the same Light
Mind. This was a doctrine of spiritual solidarity of unusual force. It was derived
from an intensely physical notion of a shared spirit of light, divided up, as it were,
into brilliant particles, lodged in every member of the sect. Each possessed frag-
ments of this light; each soul drew closer to the other in order to create the
shared incandescence of the “Holy Church” of Mani. To rescue light from mat-
ter was not (as Augustine suggested in his anti-­Manichaean tracts) an absurdly
mechanical process. The dispersed light of the Manichees was nothing less than
an image of their own souls. To gather light and to send it on its way to heaven
was to gather kindred souls into a glowing unity of mind.40
   This view of a shared Light Mind was combined with a poignant hope for
transparency between members of the same community. Grouped around their
Elect, whose utter quiet and unearthly pallor made them seem as if they already
stood on the threshold of the Other World of Light, fellow believers felt that they
also would soon enter a better world where the tragic opacities of normal society
would be removed. In a letter discovered at Kellis, a son wrote to his mother:

   To my mother, my lord lady, very precious to me, the beloved of my heart . . .
   I pray that The Great Day of Joy should happen to us, the day for which we

                                        159
                                   chapter 9


   pray indeed every hour, and that God will grant us that we see the image
   of each other in full, transparent freedom, and with a smiling face.41
    This new evidence of the inner life of the Manichaean communities makes it
easier for us to understand how the Manichaean sense of community could pro-
vide such a potent glue of spiritual friendship for Augustine and his friends. Al-
most everyone touched by Augustine at this time joined the Manichaean church.
Romanianus, his son Licentius, Alypius, and many others became “Sons of the
Light Mind” along with Augustine. They all stayed with him in the Manichaean
faith for ten years. Some went further than Augustine. Alypius was inspired by
the continence of the Elect to adopt a life of celibacy.42 Even Romanianus seems
to have had his sex life in order while he was a Manichee. (This was no small
achievement for a grandee: at a later time, as a widower, Romanianus shocked
Augustine—­who was by then bishop of Hippo—­by taking a concubine imme-
diately after the death of his wife.)43
    It has frequently been pointed out that in all his years of supposed “wander-
ing” from the faith, Augustine never once abandoned Christianity. The “name
of Christ” had always been present in whatever religion he adopted.44 There is a
further corollary to this view. Throughout his secular career as a teacher, Augus-
tine always thought in terms of living, in some way or other, in the comforting
embrace of a religious community. His experience with the Manichees had given
him a heightened sense of spiritual friendship.
    This was Augustine’s greatest debt to the seemingly exotic religion of Mani. It
gave him, from a sect from the distant East, an intense experience of community
that classical authors, such as Cicero (whose views on friendship Augustine and
Romanianus would have shared, as did every educated person), had promised
but had not delivered. Religious bonding was one of the fixed components of
Augustine’s life as a teacher in Carthage and Rome. As far as the patterns of his
social life were concerned, he simply brought these components with him to
Milan in 384. More than that: as we shall now see, Augustine’s hope for an ideal
community took on a different form after 386. It guided him in the years before
and after his return to Africa in 388. But, c’est le premier pas qui coûte—­it is the
first step that matters. And, for Augustine, this first step toward a life in a reli-
gious community was taken in the “Holy Church” of Mani.




                                        160
                          Chapter 10
                          •••••
                       From Milan to Hippo
        Augustine and the Making of a Religious
                Community, 384–­396




                 Inhiabam honoribus: I was agape for honors

                                Milan, 384–­8 6

When Augustine took the road from Rome to Milan in late 384, it might have
seemed as if he had succeeded in making his way to the top of the Roman world.
The imperial court was at Milan. But we must remember that this court was only
one of three imperial courts set up in different parts of the immense empire. It
was the smallest and the least successful. It was flanked by strong and ambitious
rulers. The emperor Theodosius was firmly installed at Constantinople. Gaul
and Spain were ruled from Trier by Maximus, who had recently ousted and killed
Gratian, the older half brother of Valentinian II. Augustine must have been one
of many persons who, on making their way to Milan, realized quickly that they
had found the right job—­but in the wrong place and at the wrong time.1 It was
time to get busy, before the next regime change blocked further chances of
promotion:
   I was agape for honors, high fees and a wife. . . . What a great thing it is
   to seek advancement to a high [governmental] office—­who could wish for
   anything higher? We have friends in high places. If nothing else, let us put
   the pressure on and get, at least, a minor governorship.2
Augustine meditated for the very first time in his life a true change in his social
position. He would move from a dignified but studiously low-­profile role as a
teacher of rhetoric into the privileged world of government servants.
   But in order to do this, Augustine had to make up his mind about his woman.
She was sent away “because she was a hindrance to my marriage.” She returned
to Africa, “vowing never to know a man again.” This may refer to a formal vow.

                                       161
                                   chapter 10


If so, it was possible that she was taken care of by the Catholic Church as a
sanctimonialis—­a nun.3 This brutal arrangement had been negotiated by Augus-
tine’s mother, Monica, who had followed Augustine to Milan. As a widow, she
expected to be housed by her son. It is revealing that Monica and Augustine each
had a very different view of what this proposed marriage meant. For Monica, it
meant that, with a Catholic wife, Augustine would be baptized—­and baptized by
none other than Ambrose, the bishop of Milan. The stain of Manichaeism would
be washed both from his soul and from his reputation.4
    Unlike Monica, what Augustine singled out (in retrospect) about the pros-
pect of marriage was the role it would play in his plans to continue a search for
wisdom in the company of his friends. Their shared enthusiasm for Manichaeism
had cooled. This is not surprising, as they approached a court whose emperors
regarded Manichaeism as a peculiarly loathsome heresy. But they had not aban-
doned their shared enthusiasm for wisdom. The new wife could help Augustine’s
little group of chosen souls. It was not necessary that she should be a rich heiress;
the high-­minded professor “would not dare” to think of that. But the cachet of
an upper-­class spouse would give prestige and protection to Augustine and his
friends. Her dowry would set Augustine free to lead the philosophical life with-
out having to spend all his time earning money as a teacher. In this way, the future
wife (who was probably only twelve at the time) was envisioned by Augustine,
quite bluntly, as a replacement for Romanianus.5
    This projected marriage remained somewhat up in the air. What was of more
immediate importance was a scheme to found a philosophical community.
   Many of our friends and I had been deeply mulling over a scheme, the
   subject of many discussions, for escaping with scorn from life’s onerous
   churnings. We had all but decided to withdraw from the mass of men and
   to live a life of philosophical detachment. The detachment would be struc-
   tured thus: we would pool all our belongings, creating a single household
   fund, so that in open fellowship no one would own this or that, but the
   contributions of each there would be common property, the whole of it
   for each, and all of it shared by all of us. It seemed to us that ten or so
   people could live in such a community. Some of us were quite wealthy,
   above all Romanianus. . . . He was especially enthusiastic for this project,
   swaying others in discussion of it since his financial means far outstripped
   everyone else’s.6
   But the fact that Romanianus was in Milan at all was a bad sign. A legal battle
with an urbane but tenacious enemy (perhaps a kinsman) had taken him far from
his base in Africa. To appeal to the imperial court was a perilous maneuver. To
have one’s principal patron involved in high-­risk litigation did not bode well for
the scheme.7

                                        162
            augustine and the making of a community


   Yet this was not the only problem the men of the group had to face:
   Later the thought began to occur to us whether this would be acceptable
   to the ladies—­many of us had wives and I myself wanted to acquire one.
   On this the entire project which we had so well planned collapsed in our
   hands: it was broken up and abandoned. We returned to sighs and groans
   and careers following the broad and well-­trodden ways of the world.8
   The opposition of the women deserves to be stressed. It was not that women
were excluded from philosophical communes. The great Pythagoras (on whose ex-
ample this scheme may have been modeled) was well-­known for having welcomed
women disciples.9 But the women gathered in Milan were the mothers or the
potential mothers of children. They did not wish to see the inheritances of their
sons (and with those inheritances, their own hope of support as widows) vanish
into a common pool so as to support the project of a high-­minded professor.


       Candida iura bonorum: The clear-­faced company of the good

                  Cassiciacum to Thagaste, 386–­8 8

It was for these reasons that the project for a philosophical commune failed in
385. When he looked back, over ten years later, to write the Confessions, Augus-
tine brushed past this scheme in only one paragraph. This was because it seemed
to him with hindsight as he wrote the Confessions that the swift unfolding of
God’s purposes in the next year had rendered it irrelevant. But this was not en-
tirely the case. As anyone who has followed the story of Augustine knows, he ex-
perienced a stormy encounter with select writings of Neo-­Platonic philosophers
(most notably Plotinus) in the summer of 386. This encounter was followed by a
decision to become celibate and to seek Catholic baptism. By the autumn of 386,
everything had changed in Augustine himself—­everything, that is, except for
the social setting in which he intended to live his new life.10
    When Augustine retired in late August 386 to Cassiciacum in the foothills of
the Alps (perhaps at Casciago, near Varese, fifty-­five kilometers northwest of
Milan), the group that followed him was in many ways similar to the commune
of like-­minded souls that he had planned in 385.11 The retreat to Cassiciacum
was not a totally new departure; it was a return to the hopes of the previous year.
It seems unique to us only because it was the first gathering around Augustine
of which we know directly through the writings that he produced at this time—­
the famous Cassiciacum Dialogues.12
    We know how this group looked to one of its members. Ten years later, Licen-
tius, the son of Romanianus (who had been around sixteen at the time), described

                                       163
                                  chapter 10


in a poem the days that he had spent at Cassiciacum. Against the majestic back-
ground of the Alps, the group of friends had spent their time “experiencing along
with you the freedom of leisured hours, the clear-­faced company of the good.”13
    But what would be the bonds that now held together this “clear-­faced com-
pany of the good”? Seen from the outside, the retreat to Cassiciacum was a staid
affair. Augustine later spoke of it as a period of “otium devoted to the Christian
life.”14 Otium was a charged word. It had unmistakable aristocratic overtones.
Symmachus and his friends enjoyed long periods of otium in the countryside
outside Rome or in Campania. “Tired of the affairs of the city,” they liked to
“tame their great minds in solitude” on their estates. Senators in otium were like
Catholics “on retreat.” “Turning over the learned writings of the men of old” in
the well-­watered gardens of their villas, they renewed their allegiance to the cul-
ture that was supposed to make them truly noble.15
    Otium was not mere leisure. It implied engagement in intellectual pursuits.
Those who emerged from a spell of otium had to have something to show for it.
This was particularly the case with Augustine, who was still tied to patrons whose
teenage children he continued to educate. For these patrons he developed an
elevated intellectual program that he put forward in a series of Dialogues. The
dialogue Contra academicos, Against the Academics, refuted the skepticism of the
New Academy, which had been upheld by Cicero. In it, Augustine proved that
the human intellect could penetrate to ultimate, otherworldly truth. But this
required a grooming of the mind. Hence the next dialogue, De ordine, On Order,
sketched out an intellectual program that would enable the mind to rise to ele-
vated truths. Finally, De beata vita, On the Blessed Life, showed that it was pos-
sible to enjoy, through contemplation, the supreme happiness of a life lived in
the presence of God.
    These dialogues were recorded by stenographers, although they were later re-
worked by Augustine. Stenographers were a luxury item.16 Their presence hinted
at an aristocratic leisure lived in the countryside surrounded by eager scribes. But
this was only a tasteful backdrop. Those who participated in the Dialogues were
by no means aristocrats. They were a distinctly motley group. They included Au-
gustine’s mother, Monica, who was fulsomely praised for her untutored wisdom,17
and two cousins of Augustine’s who were entirely uneducated. These cousins
give us a rare glimpse of the low level of the culture of average town councillors,
if their fathers did not pay out money for their education, as Patricius had done
for Augustine. But Augustine stressed that there was also room for unschooled
persons such as his cousins in his program of intellectual grooming: “They have
hardly been exposed even to a grammarian [in primary school] . . . but their very
gift of commonsense I judged necessary for the discussion.”18
    Indeed, Augustine went out of his way to communicate that the one thing
that brought together the participants of his otium was not a shared upper-­class

                                        164
             augustine and the making of a community


culture. The Dialogues were meant to be manifestos for a new Christian culture
that spoke to persons of all levels of education and to both sexes. Truths the pagan
philosophers had hidden from the masses, in esoteric traditions, had been made
available to all by Christ’s coming to earth, “through an act of clemency to an
entire people.”19
    Behind their somewhat faux classical façade, the Cassiciacum Dialogues were
written to communicate the zeal of a religious group. The dialogue On the Blessed
Life ended with Monica chanting a hymn composed by Ambrose.20 It was one of
the hymns that had been used in Ambrose’s basilica, in the spring of 386, during
his confrontation with the court. Altogether, Augustine’s Dialogues were a dar-
ing venture in the democratization of ideas. Truths once accessible only to a few
great philosophers were declared to have been made available to all through the
preaching of the Christian churches. In this, the Dialogues were an echo of Am-
brose’s attempt, earlier in the year, to make the higher levels of theology available
to all, as he rallied excited crowds in the basilicas of Milan by means of hymns
and sermons.21
    So much has been written in recent years on the stages of Augustine’s con-
version and on the sources that contributed to his intellectual development that
it is easy to forget that Augustine’s principal conversion at that time had been to
a mighty God. This was God conceived of as the Supreme Beauty in a high Pla-
tonic tradition that Plotinus (a Greek philosopher of the mid-­third century) had
expounded to his followers with mystical fervor. Plotinus’s writings had set Au-
gustine on fire.
    This is well-­known. But what is not often stressed is the manner in which
Augustine’s new view of God deeply affected his attitude toward the religious
friendships that bound his group together. A new God meant a new basis for the
group. Augustine and his friends ceased to see themselves as “Sons and Daugh-
ters of the Light Mind,” bound together by an almost physical sharing of parti-
cles of light. Instead, they became Platonic lovers. They were united by the vision
of a single Beloved, a Supreme Beauty who was both utterly distant from them
and yet hauntingly present. In ceasing to be Manichees, they shifted from a form
of intense horizontal bonding thought of as a blending of like minds, such as was
characteristic of a sect, to a more starkly pyramidal model. Each one of them
strained to reach a Beauty whose sheer delight rendered each one of them forget-
ful of his or her own self. All were drawn together to share in a common, high joy.
    Augustine insisted that if the existence of this Supreme Beauty was certain,
then the friendships of those who were joined in seeking this Beauty were also
certain.22 They were friendships made in heaven. They were based on the thrill of
a shared love of God. This was what Augustine wanted to make clear to Roma-
nianus in his dialogue Against the Academics. Augustine opined that their shared
love for God as the Supreme Beauty was so intense and so certain to reach its

                                        165
                                   chapter 10


goal that even Romanianus’s rival (a grandee as elegant and cultivated as was Ro-
manianus himself ) would give up his lawsuit and join with Romanianus to rush,
“panting with desire,” to taste, along with him, the beauty of God.23 This was a
shared passion, which blotted out the normal sense of “mine” and “yours.” For a
shared love of Beauty to lead two late Roman gentlemen to abandon a lawsuit
was to expect a lot. But Augustine meant what he said. His euphoric phrases
show that he was already thinking his way to a new, even more intense form of
spiritual bonding than he had ever experienced when he was a Manichee.24
    Given the mood we can glimpse in the Dialogues of Cassiciacum, it is not at
all surprising that Augustine closed the ninth book of the Confessions with an
account of a shared mystical experience. The famous Vision of Ostia showed that
it was indeed possible for two people to be engulfed in a common vision of the
One God.
    In the autumn of 387, Augustine and Monica were waiting at Ostia to take
ship for Carthage:
   It came about, as I believe by your providence, . . . that she and I were stand-
   ing by a window overlooking a garden. It was at the house where we were
   staying at Ostia on the Tiber, where, far from the crowds . . . we were re-
   covering our strength for the journey. . . .
       Alone with each other we talked very intimately. Forgetting the past and
   reaching forward to what lies ahead (Phil. 3:13) we were searching together
   in the presence of the Truth, which is yourself. We asked what quality of
   life the eternal life of the saints will have, a life which neither eye has seen
   nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man (I Cor. 2:9). But with
   the mouth of the heart wide open, we drank in the waters flowing from
   your spring on high, The Spring of Life (Psalm 35:10) which is with you.
   Sprinkled with this dew to the limit of our capacity, our minds attempted
   in some degree to contemplate so great a reality. . . . That was how it was
   when at that moment we extended our reach and in a flash of mental en-
   ergy attained to the eternal wisdom which abides beyond all things. If only
   it could last! Then this alone could ravish and absorb and enfold in inward
   joys the person granted this vision. . . . Is this not the meaning of Enter into
   the joy of your Lord (Matt. 25:21)?25
   For followers of Plotinus, there would have been nothing strange about this
mystical ascent—­except for one thing: in the ancient world, the mystical ascent
had always been a strictly individual affair. But Monica and Augustine had shared
the experience. A shared ecstasy of mother and son is calculated to cause eye-
brows to be raised among modern scholars of Freudian persuasion.26 Augustine
would not have been so prudish. Decades of shared religious intensity, first as a
Manichee and then for a short time as the pioneer of a philosophical commune,

                                         166
             augustine and the making of a community


had been greatly sharpened by the months spent at Cassiciacum. It seemed quite
natural to him that the search for God should be a venture in which an entire
community of like-­minded souls might be engaged. Augustine had decided that
it was possible to have the vision of God and to live the rest of his life in a group
made up of those who shared his longing for this vision. But what exactly would
be the form of the community where such a thing might happen?


                              The Road to Poverty

            From Italy to Thagaste and Hippo, 388–­9 1

In 388 Augustine returned to Africa along with an unusual party of retired bu-
reaucrats and failed would-­be courtiers. They eventually settled in their home-
town, Thagaste. Thagaste was no place of exile. It lay on the inland plateau of
Numidia, but it was well situated on roads that led northeastward, back to Car-
thage, and directly north, to the port of Hippo Regius on the Mediterranean
coast.27 The little group was a somewhat eccentric version of a well-­known phe-
nomenon. It marked the return to their hometown of a cluster of successful
careerists. Each one of them, in his own way, had gained distinction through
imperial service (as had Alypius) or (in Augustine’s case) had held a major teach-
er’s chair at a court city. Their careers would have entitled them to the privileges
of honorati—­“honored men”—­in retirement. They had succeeded while their
run-­of-­the-­mill peers, the average town councillors, had stayed at home to un-
dertake the routine tasks of local government. Though privileged, they were ex-
pected to settle down in Thagaste and to use their influence and new wealth to
support their hometown.
    But something else would also have struck the inhabitants of Thagaste. They
were a group of intellectuals. Excitements of the mind were what they offered to
their hometown, not the splash of circus games. Furthermore, most of them had
been Manichaeans and “Sons of the Light Mind” a little over a decade earlier.
They remained a closed religious group. But they now presented themselves in
reassuringly old-­fashioned terms as living a life in otio. They were no longer mem-
bers of a suspect esoteric sect. They were a group of men of leisure intent on
“becoming like God” through prayer and reading.28
    But there was one crucial difference between what they had been and what
they now were. No rich patron towered above them as the ultimate source of
their security, as Romanianus had done when Augustine was a young man. They
were an independent commune. They had arranged their life according to a “holy
agreement.” Originally they seem to have pooled their wealth in a tradition taken
from philosophical circles. But the pooling of resources changed its meaning over

                                        167
                                  chapter 10


the years and now took on a Christian flavor. It became associated in their minds
with the life of the first Christians of Jerusalem as had been described in the Acts
of the Apostles.
    The formation of what scholars have called the Jerusalem Community was
regarded as a foundational act by Augustine and by all later advocates of the
monastic life in the Latin West. As a result of the descent of the Holy Ghost at
Pentecost, the first Christians had become of one mind and one soul. Then—­and
then only—­did they decide to concretize their divinely inspired unanimity by a
community of property: “no one said that any of the things which he possessed was
his own, but they had everything in common (Acts 4:32).”29
    This was how Augustine and his friends read the Acts of the Apostles. There
were other ways in which the story could have been read. Preaching at Antioch
and Constantinople, for instance, John Chrysostom stressed the fact that the
pooling of wealth among the Christians at Jerusalem had taken place so as to
make money available for the needs of the poor.30 But this was not Augustine’s
reading. The poor did not concern him at that time; unity was all. Shared wealth
was no more than the material sign of the divinely inspired miracle of shared
minds.
    Appeal to the Acts of the Apostles justified what was a daring move. By empha-
sizing their unity in one heart and one mind, Augustine and his friends deliber-
ately unhooked themselves from the life support machine of patronage. By pool-
ing their wealth they would “go it alone” in an ideally self-­supporting community,
such as they imagined the first Christians of Jerusalem to have been. Though
they might welcome occasional gifts, they would never again accept patrons.
    In order to pool their wealth in the manner of the first Christians, they first
had to renounce it. But what exactly did renunciation mean in the late fourth
century? When he wrote about this period of his life, in a letter written a quarter
of a century later (in 414), Augustine assumed that his Christian readers would
know what he had done.
   I, who write this, fell deeply in love with that perfection, of which the Lord
   spoke, when he said to the Rich Young Man: Go, sell all that you have, and
   give to the poor (Matthew 19:21).31
    But a quarter of a century was a long time in the history of the Latin churches.
In 388 the mechanics of renunciation were far from clear-­cut. For a town coun-
cillor such as Augustine, there was little room for drama in the giving up of
wealth. Whatever the size of his property, he could not simply throw it away;
the claims of other family members had to be met. Augustine’s relations with the
town council of Thagaste had to be settled definitively, possibly by the cession
of some of his lands to the city. The final decision may not have been taken until
the death of his son, Adeodatus. This was a bitter tragedy of the years between

                                        168
            augustine and the making of a community


388 and 391, whose exact date we do not even know. Only then would Augus-
tine have been free to alienate his estates without compromising the future of his
son. Maybe the final arrangements for the transfer of Augustine’s property did
not happen until his brother Navigius died, as also happened around this time.32
Only then was Augustine’s wealth free from claims both from his family and
from the town council of Thagaste. Altogether, the renunciation of wealth was
never the headlong matter that advocates of the ascetic life presented it as being.
To sell all often meant to sell slowly.
    Nor was the wealth realized from Augustine’s property given directly to the
poor. Gifts to the church tended to be spoken of, in a pious formula, as if they
were gifts “to the poor of the church.”33 Most probably, Augustine’s estates and
those of his friends were quietly donated to the church of Thagaste. In return
each may have received an annuity or the usufruct of a portion of the revenues
of their estates. They would then contribute this income to the common fund of
the new community.
    It is also far from certain that Augustine and his friends made themselves
notably “poor,” in the sense of identifying themselves with the real poor in the
streets and countryside of Thagaste. This did not mean that they were either half-­
hearted or pampered. Rather, they defined “poverty” itself in a particular, old-­
fashioned manner. What still mattered for them was not the new Christian anti­
thesis between “the rich” and “the poor” but the ancient antithesis between “the
rich” and “the wise.”34 What the wise rejected was not wealth itself. It was the
dire drive for ever more wealth that characterized the unwise rich. The wise opted
for “unwealth.” They did not opt for destitution but to be content with what
they had and to avoid the very real social and political dangers that went with the
active pursuit of riches. This did not mean that they did not live in a relatively
comfortable manner, surrounded by books and even, perhaps, by servants. None­
theless, at Thagaste an important step had been taken. No individual member of
the community owned anything. It was the community itself that was “poor.” Its
members lived modestly so as to make do with their pooled wealth. They lived
sparingly, as philosophers had always done. But they were by no means a com-
munity of paupers.
    Even this step took courage. Fourth-­century persons lived in a dynamic social
world where it was dangerous to stand still. For just as wealth was a state toward
which the rich always strove, poverty was a state toward which one might always
slide. Relative poverty, linked to the fear of impoverishment and to the bitter
shame of déclassement, preoccupied all members of the municipal classes. Augus-
tine had grown up among persons who were dogged by the fear of impoverish-
ment. He and his new group had reason to be afraid that they might slide back
into the shabby gentility and unimportance of minor city notables once they
loosened their grip on their private properties.

                                       169
                                   chapter 10


    For this reason, it is not sufficient to ask whether Augustine and his friends
became poor or remained rich at this time. The issue was, rather, what resources
could they draw upon to protect themselves once they had brought to a full stop
in themselves the momentum of the drive to wealth. Would they slip back into
poverty and social impotence?
    The answer to this question was “no.” Many of Augustine’s friends were rich.
Quite apart from his landed wealth, a man such as Alypius had drawn a large
salary as a government servant. Within a few years of his return to Thagaste,
Alypius was able to engage in one of the most expensive enterprises of all in the
ancient world. Travel had always been the privilege of the rich, and some time in
the early 390s, Alypius traveled all the way to the Holy Land to gather books
from Saint Jerome.35 He was soon chosen as the Catholic bishop of Thagaste. As
bishop he would have found himself administering the properties that he, along
with Augustine and others, had given to the church. Like any urban benefactor,
he had bought himself into a leadership role by such gifts. As bishop of Thagaste,
Alypius remained a pillar of the community. He traveled constantly to and from
Italy to bring the affairs of Thagaste and of the African churches in general to
the attention of the emperor. Indeed, in the 420s Alypius spent more time in
Italy, as a sixty-­year-­old bishop charged with lobbying the court, than he had ever
spent there when making his career as a young man.36
    To those who knew of it, the community established at Thagaste would have
looked like any other gathering of leisured, bookish persons. Augustine intended
to contribute to the religious life of the region “by spiritual advice to those pres-
ent and to those who were absent, as well as by books.”37 Books cost money. To
write five books against the Manichees “all duly put together and emended” was
an expensive undertaking.38 In a letter he wrote to Romanianus at this time, Au-
gustine spoke of the material costs of such work. He had already loaned Roma-
nianus his ivory writing tablets for perusal. He wrote to Romanianus that he must
be content with cheap and durable sheets of parchment (taken, perhaps, from
local herds) rather than with the more elegant format of imported papyri.39
    It is one of Augustine’s last letters to the grandee of Thagaste who had played
such a crucial role in his early life. He no longer had any desire to depend exclu-
sively on patrons of the size of Romanianus. Rather, he found himself gravitat-
ing, almost insensibly, toward a new, more acceptable but no less demanding set
of patrons—­the Catholic bishops of Africa. At this time, Augustine wrote many
books against the Manichees. But he did not do this only out of “indomitable
pugnacity.”40 He wrote out of loyalty to an institution—­the Catholic Church in
Africa—­which had begun to show that it could take care of its own.
    We are on the edge of a significant generational change. The fourth-­century
world had been characterized by an exuberant growth of grassroots religious in-
stitutions, whether these were the monasteries of Egypt, the widespread cells of

                                        170
            augustine and the making of a community


the Manichees, or the Catholic communities in major cities, such as that which
Ambrose had conjured up in Milan. Among these institutions, the Catholic
churches had begun to pull ahead. After 370, all over the Latin West, real wealth
and cultural prestige had begun to tilt in their direction. Smaller groups, such as
that founded by Augustine and his friends, had originally based themselves on
ancient models of spiritual friendship and on the ideal of otium—­of leisure de-
voted to the cultivation of spirit and mind. Such groups were the last of a series
of countercultural experiments with long roots in the upper-­class culture of the
ancient world.
    Even when created by Christians, these little groups were notably unchurched.
Like many Christian intellectuals, Augustine tried hard not to look down on
clergymen. But it was difficult not to do so. As we have seen, the clergy were
generally persons of middling or low status. They did their job in shepherding the
masses. But, in Augustine’s opinion in 388, this left them with little time to pur-
sue the philosophical wisdom that truly healed the soul. This was what he and his
well-­to-­do friends hoped to do in a little community of their own founding.41
    But now the time had come for the leaders of such small groups to make up
their minds. Could they continue to “do it their way”? They had to decide to
which larger, richer institution they might turn to guarantee their own survival.
It is the logic of this situation, working against Augustine’s own conscious in-
tentions, that unexpectedly pushed him toward what, in many ways, was a pre-
dictable resolution of the dilemma that faced any small, self-­supporting group of
religious persons in the late fourth century. He became a clergyman and placed
his monastery under the wing of a bishop. Let us see how this happened.
    In early 391 Augustine went to Hippo Regius, a coastal city, to give spiritual
counsel to a devout layman. The bishop of Hippo, Valerius, aided by a zealous
congregation, forced him to become a priest. In the eyes of the Christian “peo-
ple” of Hippo, their very violence showed that they had been moved by a forcer
larger and more compelling than themselves—­by the Holy Spirit—­much as the
populus of a city were accustomed to imposing their will by shouting “inspired”
acclamations in the theater. Acting in the name of the Holy Spirit, the church of
Hippo claimed Augustine as its own by imposing on him ordination as a priest.42
    In a letter Augustine wrote to Valerius immediately after this event, Augus-
tine laid down the terms on which he would serve the church of Hippo.43 The
monastery must come with him. He would bring a chosen number of his fellows
from Thagaste. Valerius gave Augustine permission to set up a monastery in the
bishop’s garden. This may have been a garden close to the main church, near the
episcopal residence within what has been called by archaeologists the “Christian
quarter” of Hippo.44
    In the next few years, the situation of the monastery became more clear. By
the time Augustine succeeded Valerius as bishop of Hippo, in 396, the crucial

                                       171
                                 chapter 10


document known as the Praeceptum—­The Command—­had been drawn up. It
was addressed to those “who live in the monastery.” It began with a masterfully
concise statement of principle, drawn from the Acts of the Apostles:
   The chief motivation for your sharing life together is to live harmoniously
   in the [one] house and to have one heart and one soul seeking God—­in
   deum. Do not call anything your own. Possess everything in common.45
   The opening phrases of the Praeceptum brought lapidary closure to a decade
spent in search of a community fused by the shared vision of God. It had begun
with plans for a philosophical community in Milan that would replace the sec-
tarian solidarity of the Manichees. It had continued under the ancient guise of a
period of otium within sight of the Alps at Cassiciacum. Between himself and
Monica, the striving for a shared vision had reached a mystical climax “at a win-
dow, overlooking a garden” in Ostia. Now, this vision of the shared life had come
to rest in a bishop’s garden at Hippo, across the sea from Ostia. In this commu-
nity, the sharing of wealth had become central. In Augustine’s view, shared goods
both condensed and further enabled a vibrant unity of hearts. Let us now turn
to see what Augustine’s monasteries in Hippo were like. Then we will linger on
the views on society and on the human person (some very ancient and some very
new) that had come to weigh upon Augustine in such a way as to infuse the
seemingly straightforward words of his Praeceptum with a quite distinctive tone.




                                      172
                           Chapter 11
                           •••••
        “The Life in Common of a Kind of Divine
                 and Heavenly Republic”
                Augustine on Public and Private
                  in a Monastic Community


                           The Monasteries at Hippo

From the time of his ordination as a priest at Hippo in 391 to his death in 430,
Augustine’s life and thought were inextricably linked to the monastery that he
had founded. Its importance in his life is obvious. But, unfortunately, the precise
course of its development as an institution is shadowy. For most of the time, ex-
cept when provoked by the occasional scandal, he took the existence of the mo-
nastic backdrop to his daily life for granted and seldom discussed it. As a result,
it remains for us the dark side of the moon of the life of Augustine.
    But we do know something of the early history of the monastery. In 391 Au-
gustine had brought to Hippo from Thagaste a group that still contained many
of his friends. They formed the nucleus of the new monastery in the bishop’s
garden. But this group soon became more diverse. It was joined by persons with
whom Augustine had not previously been acquainted. Many came from social
backgrounds different from his own and from that of his friends. It may have
been this situation that produced the famous Rule of Augustine. It has been co-
gently argued by George Lawless that this Rule was drawn up in around 397. It
fell into two parts, an Ordo monasterii—­a set of Regulations for a Monastery,
which laid down a daily routine of prayer and work—­and the Praeceptum, The
Command, which took the form of a series of commands. This last was a lucid
summary of the ground rules of life in a monastery. Like most monastic rules
produced in late antiquity, the Rule of Augustine was not a foundational docu-
ment. It was not intended to provide a carefully composed blueprint for a future
monastery. Instead, it was a response to crisis in an existing monastery. It laid
down rules to handle a new situation that had been brought about by growing
social and cultural diversity within the monastery in its first five years in Hippo.1


                                        173
                                   chapter 11


    At the same time as the Ordo monasterii and the Praeceptum were being
 drafted, the monastery itself split into two parts. When Augustine became bishop
 of Hippo in 396, he wished to continue to live as he had previously. He found
 that he could not act effectively as a bishop in the monastery that he had founded
 in the garden. As bishop, he had to keep open house to lay and clerical visitors
 from the city and from all over Africa. This could not be done without disrupt-
 ing the life of the monks. So he moved some monks from the monastery into the
 bishop’s palace and left the others in peace in the monastery in the garden.
    The monks who moved to the palace had either already been ordained as
 clergymen or became clergymen. They formed a little monastery in the palace,
 subject to the same rules as those which had prevailed in the monastery in the
 garden—­no marriage and, above all, no property.2 It was they who always shared
Augustine’s table. Visitors to the bishop’s table would have noticed that this was
 not the table of an ordinary local dignitary. There was no display of wealth at
 meal times. The cutlery was of silver, but the dishes were of terracotta and wood.
 Augustine had even written verses on the tabletop, warning those present to
 avoid malicious gossip.3
    What Augustine had done, in effect, was a very Roman thing. Roman politi-
 cians and governors had always surrounded themselves with a group of iuvenes—
­a handpicked staff of up-­and-­coming young men. The monk-­clerics (as we might
 call them) who gathered around Augustine in the bishop’s palace were his
 iuvenes—­his intimate staff. Apart from surrounding himself with his own circle
 of monks, Augustine made no attempt to impose a monastic life style on all
 other clergymen. Though he wrote passionately on the topic of monasticism in
 general, he had no grand policy for the churches of Africa. Many ordinary cler-
 gymen in Hippo as elsewhere remained married. All retained their property. But
 they were not members of Augustine’s in-­group.4 It was from this in-­group that
 Augustine chose bishops for cities all over Africa—­at least ten persons were cho-
 sen in this way.5 This was exactly what Ambrose had done when he placed “his”
 bishops (most of whom were not monks) in the little towns of northern Italy. It
 was also what Symmachus had done by constantly forwarding likely young men
 to posts at court and in the bureaucracy. In all this Augustine followed the typi-
 cally late Roman tendency to use personal bonds to conduct public business.
    For this reason he did not overlook the remnants of his family. His sister ap-
 peared from nowhere (she is not mentioned in the Confessions) as the head of a
 convent of nuns organized along exactly the same lines as Augustine’s monas-
 tery.6 His nephew (the son of Navigius, named after Augustine’s father, Patri-
cius) found a place as a monk-­cleric at Augustine’s table.7 It is a reminder that in
 the real world outside Augustine’s writings on the ideal nature of the monastic
 community, blood was always thicker than ink. For in late Roman Africa, as else-
 where, blood got things done.

                                        174
           public and private in a monastic community


    Augustine came to use the word “monastery” for his community. At the time
this was a novel buzzword of Greek origin. It had only just begun to circulate in
Latin. But the members of the monastery were not called monks. They spoke of
themselves as “brothers” and “sisters.” They were known in the outside world as
“servants of God.” Their monastery and convent were not large establishments;
each may have housed around twenty persons. Augustine’s inner circle of cleri-
cal “brothers” in the bishop’s palace probably numbered no more than ten at one
time.
    Nor was the monastery in the garden a remarkable building. Neither the
monks in the garden nor the nuns at some other place we do not know were
isolated from society by high walls.8 They mingled freely with crowds of both
sexes in church and in the streets. They were exposed to temptations such as
could only have occurred for those who lived in a monastery without walls.
   When you see a woman, do not fix your eyes on her. . . . You are not forbid-
   den to see women when you are out of the house. It is wrong, however, to
   desire women. . . . Such lust is stimulated on both sides, not only by tender
   touches, but by the gaze.9
   Compared with how we tend to imagine monks and monasteries, based on
their later history in the West, Augustine’s monasteries and those who lived in
them were almost indistinguishable from the world around them. Yet Augustine
expected these men and women to participate in the most carefully thought-­
through experiment in creating a community without private property yet to be
imagined in the Christian West. As Adalbert de Vogüé makes plain in his great
survey of monastic literature, Augustine’s Regulations for the Monastery (the sup-
plement to the Praeceptum) was “one of the most clear and complete expositions
which anyone has made of a monastic community in the ancient world.”10


    “The more you come to give care to the common good . . . the more
              you will know that you have made progress”

             Rich and Poor in Augustine’s Monastery

Augustine’s monastery was a community with a profile all its own. If we com-
pare the Regulations and the Praeceptum with other rules from Cappadocia and
Egypt, we are struck by how little Augustine had to say on issues to which east-
ern monastic leaders paid great attention. First and foremost, Augustine refused
to take on frontally the issue of social differences within the monastery. Unlike
Basil of Caesarea, he made no attempt to blot out the previous social persona of
the members of his community by imposing a uniform dress code upon them.

                                       175
                                  chapter 11


Nor, unlike monastic founders in Egypt, such as Pachomius, did he impose a
uniform workload on all monks. He was prepared to make allowances for the
fact that his brethren came from very different walks of life, had worn very dif-
ferent clothes, and had brought with them very different skills. In the words
of Adalbert de Vogüé, rich and poor were thrown into “the crucible of charity,
which these communities wished to be, to melt and fuse as best they could.”11
    There may be a good reason for this seeming insouciance. Up to 391, the little
group at Thagaste had been made up of persons of roughly the same class as Au-
gustine himself. But the social atmosphere among Augustine’s friends at Tha-
gaste was rarefied in the extreme compared with that of a large port city such as
Hippo. Sooner or later, Augustine’s monastery in the garden, and even the mon-
astery of his clergy, were joined by persons from the middling and lower classes
such as had always formed the bulk of the Christian congregation. As in Ambrose’s
Milan so in Hippo—­if on a smaller scale—­an active group drawn from the
higher levels of society found themselves, for the very first time, sharing the same
institution with men and women of distinctly mediocre standing. But what for
Ambrose could be presented as the euphoric overcoming of social distances in a
crowded basilica was a recipe for grumbling, if not outright hatred, in the small
face-­to-­face world of a monastery.
    We should not underestimate the shock of this sudden opening of an elite
group to take in more average persons. Each group was disturbed by finding it-
self at close quarters with the other. Poor monks had to be warned:
   They should not consider their present good fortune to consist in the pos-
   session of food and clothing which were beyond their means elsewhere
   [outside the monastery]. Nor should they put their nose in the air because
   they associate with people they did not dare to approach in the world.
Rich monks had to be told not to
   belittle their brothers who come to this holy society from a condition of
   poverty. They should endeavor to boast about their fellowship with these
   poor brothers rather than about the social standing of their rich relatives.12
In fact, Augustine’s Praeceptum was written as a Zen for the handling of social
difference.13 It assumed that each brother (and each sister, for the document
applied equally to nuns) would suffer from innumerable little slights that came
from the fact that not all their colleagues were of the same class as themselves.
    Take the issue of clothing. What we know about the role of clothing as a bla-
zon of social status in a late Roman society explains Augustine’s immense sen­
sitivity to this issue. In the monastery and the convent, clothes were distributed
from a common store. But what if the brother or sister received, at random, a
shabby robe, very different from the high-­quality robes he or she had donated to

                                        176
           public and private in a monastic community


the monastery? As a concession to their frailty, the Praeceptum ruled that such
persons could keep a personal robe if they so wished. But they could do this
only on the condition that their other robes remained in the common ward-
robe. Brothers and sisters alike were expected to accustom themselves, slowly but
surely, to the thought that their clothes—­and all other kinds of belongings—­
were no longer their own. They belonged to the community.14
   Augustine was determined to drive this message home. The Praeceptum was
to be read out every week. The extent to which each brother (or sister) learned to
place the good of the community above his or her own needs (even in apparently
banal situations, such as the distribution of clothes) was the benchmark of their
spiritual growth: “and in this manner, the more you come to give care to the
common good rather than to your own, the more you will know that you have
made progress.”15
   It is important to grasp the weight and the long-­term consequences of this
overwhelming concern, on Augustine’s part, for the common good. For this rea-
son, let us move to higher ground. Let us linger on the intellectual preoccupa-
tions that lay behind the carefully phrased rulings of the Praeceptum.


                                   Res publica

            Augustine, Cicero, and the Common Good

For Augustine, the monastic experiment was in many ways an exercise in applied
social theory. The monastery was a microcosm. Life within it revealed the im-
mense, as yet unrealized potentiality for unity of the entire People of God. Au-
gustine remained convinced that the latent possibility of a firestorm of love
lurked, largely unseen and unrealized, within the immense, unwieldy macrocosm
of the Christian churches. A monastery was simply a place where that fire of love
was given the chance to burn more vividly than elsewhere. Like the hot point
created by a magnifying glass in the sun, life in a monastery concentrated into a
single, burning spot the diffuse love that bound together every Christian com-
munity. Augustine was confident that the love generated in a monastery pointed
the way to an unimaginable future at the end of time. Then the firestorm of love
would engulf the entire company of the blessed: “Out of many souls there will
arise a City and a People with a single soul and heart, turned towards God.”16
    When it came to speaking about the unity of this City at the end of time, it
was Cicero who gave Augustine the language that he needed. For Cicero, as we
have seen, was deeply concerned with the cohesion of society and with the con-
ditions that strengthened this cohesion in the face of violence and self-­will. But
Cicero’s overriding concern could be interpreted in many ways. In their differing

                                       177
                                    chapter 11


attitudes toward Cicero we can measure the distance between Ambrose and Au-
gustine. Ambrose wrote his De officiis only eight years earlier than the framing
of Augustine’s Praeceptum. Yet the two texts seem to belong to two different ages.
Ambrose followed Cicero in claiming to rally Roman society after its original
cohesion had been sapped by greed. His was a call to return to a lost solidarity.
Augustine also followed Cicero, but he followed a different Cicero. He followed
the Cicero who had asked how any society (and especially his own society, the
Roman Republic) had come into existence in the first place. Above all, how could
a society, once formed, maintain that sense of the public, common good that had
first brought it together? How did the all too precarious miracle of human unity
around a common goal begin? How was it to be maintained? What would it fi-
nally achieve—­and when?
    Augustine had doubtless repeated Cicero’s opinions for years on end as a
teacher, long before he became a bishop.17 What Cicero had passed on to him
was an acute sense of the tension between the public and the private good—­
between unity around a common goal and disunity caused by individual self-­
interest. This tension had been crucial to Cicero’s view of society. He had always
urged the claims of the community upon the loyalty and the energy of its private
citizens. For him, the word res publica—­the Commonwealth, the Republic, the
Common Cause—­carried so heavy a freight of meaning that it is almost impos-
sible to translate the term into a modern language. The shifting relations of Ro-
mans to their res publica summed up for Cicero the state of Roman society and
explained the course—­alternately splendid and disastrous—­of Roman history.18
    This was a side of Cicero with which Augustine identified wholeheartedly.
For it laid bare a tension of the will in pursuit of two potentially opposed aims.
It saw the private will as pitted against the public good. But we must remember
the extent to which Augustine further sharpened this tension. He read his Ci-
cero with the eyes of a fourth-­century subject of a centralized and autocratic
empire. The late Roman empire was committed to a high notion of the rule of
law. Like the law of God, the law of the emperor was “public” law in the most
stark sense. It was a law for all. To act outside this law was to seek a “private” field
of action that was invariably associated in the governmental mind either with pri-
vate violence or with private dabbling in the occult. “Private,” for such persons,
meant rebellion and sorcery.19
    And Augustine was also a religious thinker. After the first optimism of his
Dialogues at Cassiciacum, he returned to wrestling with the problem of evil, if
only to find an answer to the Manichees. He began to take the measure of the
catastrophe under which the human race had labored as a result of the fall of
Adam. But what sort of “fall” had this been? Augustine came to the conclusion
that the fall of Adam had taken the form of a free act of rebellion that had been
preceded by the equally free rebellion of the angels. He described both of these

                                         178
            public and private in a monastic community


events in terms that echoed Cicero. Both were rebellions in which private self-­
will was pitted against the common good. For God was the common good of all.
The rebellion of Satan and then of Adam both stemmed from “a love which the
Latin language has judiciously called ‘private.’”20 It was not a love of which Au-
gustine expected his readers (well versed as they were in Cicero) to approve.
    But Augustine was prepared to go further than Cicero ever went in order to
assert the primacy of the public good over the private will. He defended the pub-
lic good in a way that Cicero would never have done: he deprived his monks and
nuns of private property. For Cicero, the tension between public and private was
so dramatic precisely because it was left unresolved. For Cicero, private wealth
was a fact of life. It came to an aristocrat from birth, almost like a robust charac-
ter trait. To suggest a leveling of private fortunes through legislation struck him
as “utterly condemnable.”21 For to deprive a statesman of his private fortune was
like depriving him of the rugged aspects of his character—­his sharp expression,
his distinctive quirks, his unmistakable, individual tone of voice—­he brought
to the service of the public good.22
    Ultimately, what mattered for Cicero was loyalty, not the abolition of private
property. The heroes of the early republic were so vivid in the minds of Roman
readers, Augustine among them, because they demonstrated the overriding loy-
alty of men of property to the Respublica they served. The Respublica in its hey-
day had been characterized by a magnificent imbalance between the public wealth
of the Roman state and the private egestas of its leaders—­their simple lifestyle
and their lack of interest in accumulating private wealth. These were the qualities
for which Augustine praised the ancient Romans in his City of God: “Those Ro-
mans had a republic richly endowed with all resources . . . while they themselves
lived in poverty in their houses.”23
    This was unwealth at its most heroic. An age of unwealth stood at the very
origins of Roman greatness. For this reason, it is not surprising that Augustine
conjured up the figure of no less than Scipio Africanus in order to encourage poor
monks to practice their handicrafts for the good of the monastery as a whole and
to think no longer of their private gain:

   If the former leaders of this earthly state [the Roman Republic] are com-
   monly set forth as subjects of exceptional praise by Roman authors, be-
   cause they placed a shared commitment to the interests of the entire
   people of their city above their own private interests—­to such an extent
   that one of them who had just celebrated the conquest of Africa [Scipio
   Africanus] could not get together enough private funds even to provide
   a dowry for the marriage of his daughters—­then what should be the at-
   titude to his Republic of a citizen of that eternal City, the Heavenly
   Jerusalem?24

                                        179
                                  chapter 11


    These words were written in a somewhat formal text. But if Augustine’s mes-
sage trickled down to the monastery itself, it would have been the first time that
an artisan of Hippo had found himself (or herself ) likened to the greatest gen-
eral of Rome. Yet the loyalty of a “brother” or a “sister” in the tiny Respublica of
the monastery was based on something yet more drastic: the total abandonment
of all forms of private property. By insisting on this aspect of the monastic life
Augustine made plain that he was not content simply to rally the private to a
public cause, as Cicero proposed to do. He was bent on the erasure of the private
itself. Unwealth must become no wealth at all. To what other traditions did he
turn to justify so drastic a step?


                    “Not cut off . . . but part of the whole”

   Plotinus and the “Spiritual Communism” of Augustine

It has proved relatively easy to trace the “Ciceronian” elements in Augustine’s
views on society. Cicero has long been familiar to us. The imprint of his thought
on Augustine, as on Ambrose, has been exhaustively studied.25 But Cicero could
offer Augustine nothing on the issue of monastic poverty. Indeed, Cicero was
committed to the view that private property was essential to a properly ordered
society. It is important to realize that Augustine agreed entirely with Cicero
when it came to normal human society. Like Cicero, Augustine believed in no
uncertain manner that the state existed to protect the property rights of private
persons. After Adam’s fall, private property guaranteed and protected by a strong
state was the best that humans could hope for. Only a regime of private property
validated by imperial law could fend off the worst effects of the pride, avarice,
and violence that had come to be so deeply rooted in the human condition.26
    But what happened in normal society had nothing to do with the building
up of a monastic community A glass wall stood between the two worlds. Nor-
mal society arose from the clash of fallen human wills. It belonged to a doomed
present. The union of hearts and minds in a monastery, by contrast, was a glimpse
of the future. It showed the first, hesitant stages of the creation of an ideal com-
munity that would reach fulfillment only in a Heavenly Jerusalem at the end of
time. The abandonment of private wealth was a first step toward that future. It
pointed the way to a radically new world in which the private itself would fade
away. To give philosophical weight to this ambition, Augustine drew on another,
more austere and more exotic source—­the thought of Plotinus. Plotinus gave
Augustine what he needed. He enabled Augustine to go beyond the tense bal-
ance between public duty and private interests that had preoccupied Cicero.


                                        180
           public and private in a monastic community


   Plotinus was a mystic. He lived as if perched on the edge of a vast ocean of the
spirit. For him, the greatest puzzle of human existence remained how to explain
the fact that, though bathed in the glorious abundance of the One, the human
soul had allowed itself to slip into so many cramping, partial loves. A Greek
metaphysician, the Roman tension between “public” and “private” meant little
to Plotinus. What he had to explain was how the human soul (as we are usually
aware of it) had become such a pathetically cramped thing. It had somehow be-
come “partitioned off ” from a greater Unity to which it must return.27
   For Plotinus, the “private” was invariably tinged with the strong negative
valence of “privation” of the Good. Hence Plotinus’s repeated call to the soul to
“return” to that primal Whole to which it rightfully belonged:
   But we . . . who are we? We were There, we were different from who we are
   now.
      Some of us were even gods, pure souls, intellects united to the fullness
   of reality . . . not [as we now are] marked off or cut off, but part of the
   Whole.28
    In reading the works of Plotinus in Latin translation, Augustine had hit upon
these passages. But he read them with Roman eyes, and very soon with the eyes
of a Roman Christian who had begun to meditate on the rebellion of Adam. One
cannot but be struck by the different tone of the two men. Plotinus evoked the
silent, almost mesmerized fall of the soul into matter and, thus, into a cramped
and privatized existence.29 Augustine, by contrast, had before his eyes the fall of
the Devil and the fall of Adam. Both the Devil and Adam had been fully con-
scious rebels. In late Roman style, they had pitted their own private wills against
the public law of God. They had acted “boasting as if in their own strength, in
their private resources, in which all pride takes its delight.”30
    By writing in this way, Augustine put forward an act of “privatization” as lying
at the very root of the fallen human condition. The victory of the private over the
public good was not something that had happened in the distant past, at the end
of a Golden Age (as Ambrose had suggested when he described the origin of
private property). It was the template for all sins—­from the first sin of Adam up
to the present.
    For Augustine, a sense of the dire consequences of the fall of Adam rever­
berated on every level of society. But it was in the little community of his mon-
astery that he was most passionately committed to combating the “private” will.
“Brothers” and “sisters” who pitted their desire for private possession of anything
against the common good of the monastery were not merely ignoring the over-
riding claims of a Respublica. They were pitting their private wills against a
greater whole. In so doing, they reenacted the fateful rebellion of Adam. And, on


                                        181
                                   chapter 11


a yet deeper level, they also played out once again the fall of the soul into cramped
particularity whose tragic consequences Plotinus had traced with serene regret.
   Augustine was at his most sharp when he wrote on these themes. In around
395 he wrote to a “brother” who still felt pulled by a sense of responsibility for
his mother. In Augustine’s opinion, this preoccupation held the would-­be monk
back from the chance to return to a unity as immense as any envisioned by
Plotinus:
   Let each man question himself regarding his soul, to learn to hate in it a
   private feeling . . . and to love in it that communion and society of which it
   is said They had but one soul and one heart outstretched to God (Acts 4:32).
   So, indeed, is your very soul not your own; it is also that of all your broth-
   ers, whose souls are yours, or rather whose souls combined with yours are
   no longer souls, but a single soul, the One Soul of Christ.31
    Augustine was so severe because of his sense that private loves were incom-
mensurably less generous than was a love directed toward higher, wider things.
He had drawn from Plotinus the lasting certainty that, in touching God, humans
touched an abundance that dwarfed their private striving to possess. From Cas-
siciacum onward, he had been committed to the notion of the ability of all to
share, equally and without the competition of a zero-­sum game, in the sweet im-
mensity of Wisdom. Augustine’s call to a common enjoyment of Wisdom (in his
Soliloquia of 386) went out of its way to awaken in his readers almost a frisson,
such as had long been associated, in philosophical circles, with remissive thoughts
of “philosophical” Free Love:
   A woman will only strip for a single-­hearted lover; yet, what limit can be
   placed on the love of that [Divine] Beauty, in relation to which not only
   do I not envy others, but I even seek out more and more those who will
   grab hold of her with me, will gasp to have her with me, will hold her with
   me and, along with me, have full enjoyment of her: and these will be even
   better friends to me, the more our darling is shared between us.32
Modern readers are more easily shocked by such language than were the an-
cients. We tend to dismiss such a passage as the product of a youthful exuber-
ance, produced by the somewhat overheated atmosphere of Cassiciacum. But this
was not the case. Decades later, the theme of shared delight in Wisdom reappeared
in a fully public sermon on the Psalms:
   But what does the lover of the Wisdom of God say? Proclaim along with
   me the greatness of the Lord. (Psalm 33:4) I do not wish to love alone. It is
   not as if when I have embraced her no one else can find a place to put their
   hand. There is such ample space in Wisdom, that all souls may caress her
   and enjoy her to the full.33

                                        182
            public and private in a monastic community


    In all this, we are dealing with a highly idiosyncratic “bleeding” of one dis-
course into another. A Roman suspicion of the private as a potential obstacle to
the common good took on an even sharper tone when joined with a Plotinian
call to transcend the “compartmented” state of normal existence. Whenever he
came to speak and write about the community of goods within his monastery,
issues of actual wealth were never uppermost in Augustine’s mind. Rather, what
drove him was a passionate sense of the supreme abundance of God and an aver-
sion to the depletion inherent in all private striving to possess. It is this rare mix-
ture of republican Roman virtue (represented by Cicero) and a mystic’s yearning
for the infinite (represented by Plotinus) that formed the basis of what has been
called by Goulven Madec, its most perceptive exponent, “the spiritual commu-
nism” of Augustine.34

   This is the life in common of a kind of divine and heavenly Republic—­a
   Commonwealth in which the poor [the humble worshipers] are sent away
   full (Luke 1:53) for they seek not their own but the things of Jesus Christ
   (Phil. 2:21).35


           “It was good for us to be bathed in that common Light”

Whenever he preached on the theme of unity based on the sharing of a common
good, Augustine’s voice was tinged with great sadness. The victory of the “divine
Republic” would only happen in heaven. And heaven was a long way off. Yet it
was not beyond yearning for. Preaching in the early 420s (now an old man, ap-
proaching seventy), he brought his sermon to an end:

   I sense that your feelings have been drawn upwards with me to heaven. But
   now I will put away the copy of the Gospel. You will go home, each your
   own way. . . . It was good for us to be bathed [for a moment] in that com-
   mon Light. It was good that we rejoiced. It was good that we have exulted
   together. But, as we now walk away from each other, as we go each to our
   own home, may we not walk away from our shared God.36

   But that was thirty years ahead, and in sadder times for Africa and for the
empire as a whole. In 395, nothing of that future was known. What had hap-
pened so far in Augustine’s life was no small change. An upwardly mobile member
of the class of town councillors (and, for that reason, more than usually depen-
dent on a network of patrons and intimate friends) had found his way, through
a series of shared enthusiasms—­within a religious sect, within a philosophical
community, and finally, within his newly founded monastery—­to the ideal of a
property-­less community. When applied to monasteries, this ideal would remain

                                         183
                                   chapter 11


for all of a millennium the most prominent and the most charged model of human
institution building in the Latin West.
    Though prepared by a long inner evolution, Augustine’s monastic experiment
did not take place in a sheltered retreat. Hippo was a major port; Augustine and
his monks stood on the edge of the wider world. They were well placed to par-
ticipate in the web of spiritual friendships that well-­to-­do Christians had begun
to weave around the Mediterranean. In 395 Augustine and his monks in Hippo
received a letter that amounted to an invitation to enter into one such spiritual
friendship. It came from Pontius Meropius Paulinus, a senatorial nobleman with
properties in Italy, Gaul, and Spain. Paulinus had come to settle in Nola, in Cam-
pania, having formally renounced his vast fortune.37
    The conversion of a member of the super-­rich such as Paulinus was a remark-
able event. For a short time in Milan, Augustine had come within sight of wealth.
He knew that the wealth of Paulinus was real wealth. It was not the wealth of a
mere careerist, nor was it the wealth of a bureaucrat. It was old money. It was the
wealth of a senatorial nobleman, based on generations of accumulation and
spread over many provinces. This was wealth woven into the very fiber of Pauli-
nus’s being. Augustine was impressed:
   For some mysterious reason, [he wrote, in answer to Paulinus’s first letter]
   superfluous and earthly things hold you more tightly if they are already
   yours, than if they are merely desired. This was why the Rich Young Man
   went away saddened . . . for he had great wealth (Luke 18:22–­23). . . . It is
   one thing not to wish to make one’s own what one does not have, and
   something very different to tear out what is already part, as it were, of one’s
   own flesh. What we do not have can be refused, like food. To renounce
   what we already own, is like amputating parts of one’s own body.38
    The renunciation of Paulinus had occurred in the same years as Augustine
had been settling back in Africa. To understand it, we have to leave the southern
Mediterranean far behind. We have to leave Africa and even Italy to get a sense
of what great wealth had meant to Paulinus and to those around him, in his days
of comfort in the great villas of Gaul and Spain. We then have to follow what it
meant to Paulinus to unravel this fortune and to put it to use, in Campania, as a
letter writer, builder, and living exemplar of Christian renunciation in the midst
of a region which, for the pagan Symmachus, had been the chosen landscape of
his heart.




                                        184
                          Chapter 12
                          •••••
          Ista vero saecularia: Those things, indeed,
                          of the world
     Ausonius, Villas and the Language of Wealth




           The Parting of Friends: Ausonius and Paulinus, 394–­95

Pontius Meropius Paulinus is known to us now as Paulinus of Nola. He was al-
most exactly the same age as Augustine. When they first made contact with each
other (in 395, a year after Paulinus’s definitive rejection of his wealth), each had
just entered their forties. Both had made drastic changes in their lives in their
mid-­thirties. Augustine, the son of a modest town councillor, had abandoned a
promising career. Along with a group of his friends he had thought himself ever
deeper and deeper into the ideal of a life in a small community radically stripped
of private wealth. Given the proliferation of similar small groups at the time,
among persons of roughly the same unprepossessing background as Augustine,
it was an unremarkable solution. The long-­term implications of his setting up a
monastery linked to the bishop’s palace in Hippo were by no means apparent at
the time.
    Paulinus, by contrast, had passed through a spectacular conversion. He had
abandoned an entire senatorial fortune. It was like the crash of an avalanche. For
the first time, Christian ascetic teaching had touched a male member of the
super-­rich. Ambrose (now in his mid-­fifties) was delighted. Writing to a fellow
bishop in 394, he took particular pleasure in describing how the colleagues of
Paulinus in the Roman Senate (Ambrose’s own peers—­one can imagine the el-
derly Symmachus among them) would react to the news:
   What will the nobles say? . . . That a man from that family, with that lin-
   eage, with so much talent . . . has abandoned the Senate and broken the
   continuity of a noble line: this is intolerable.1
   Not only was Paulinus’s act of renunciation made instantly notorious at the
time. It has been preserved for all ages by the poignant exchange of poems that

                                        185
                                 chapter 12


took place between Paulinus and his former mentor, the eighty-­year-­old Auso-
nius of Bordeaux.2 Ausonius was appalled by Paulinus’s decision. The poems Au-
sonius wrote to dissuade his friend and the cruel sublimity with which Paulinus
answered them have been the delight of readers of late Latin poetry ever since.
More than any other documents, they seem to sum up the turning of an age. In
the words of Nora Chadwick:
   We feel the beauty and dignity of these two men, so different in outlook,
   so incompatible in ideals, the eternal gulf which separates each generation
   from its predecessor, and which no affection or education can bridge.3
   The two men stand out with an autumnal clarity: “Ausonius is the last of the
untroubled age. . . . And suddenly,” writes Helen Waddell in the opening chapter
of her exquisite book, The Wandering Scholars, “in the midst of this lacquered
correspondence . . . the great wind blows.”4
   But we must not let this moving exchange of poems absorb the whole of our
attention. We are dealing with more than a clash of personalities. Ausonius and
Paulinus stood for two options for the rich of the late fourth century and for the
two worldviews that were summed up in these options.
   For we must never forget that Paulinus’s conversion was about wealth. What
he turned away from was certainly not paganism; both he and Ausonius came
from Christian families. Nor (despite Ausonius’s fears) did Paulinus opt for an
asceticism of a punishing and antisocial kind that took him out of Roman soci-
ety (as was known to have happened in the case of many more radical ascetics).
But he had, in no uncertain manner, turned away from wealth. He had slipped
out from under the widely diffused mystique associated with great riches. This
mystique pressed down on all members of his class with the imperceptible but
crushing weight of an entire atmosphere.
   For this reason, this chapter will not be concerned with Paulinus. It will deal
with the world that preceded his renunciation. It will attempt to convey some-
thing of the sheer weight and seriousness of the mystique of wealth that Auso-
nius shared with his peers and that he, Paulinus, rejected. For only after we have
measured the intensity of this mystique can we spell out the implications of Pau-
linus’s refusal to take part in it.


                 Praesedi imperio: I presided over the Empire

      Decimius Magnus Ausonius and the Empire of Trier

The best way to enter into this mystique is to look more closely at Ausonius him-
self. Let us begin by placing Ausonius against the wider landscape of fourth-­

                                       186
                      ausonius, villas, and wealth


century Gaul. So far, we have concentrated mainly on Italy and Africa. But to
cross the Alps from Italy into Gaul was to enter a very different world. It was a
world where, for much of the fourth century, many roads led to Trier—­and few
to Rome. Trier had been the imperial capital par excellence of the Latin-­speaking
world for almost a century. Constantine had endowed it with one of the largest
public baths in the entire empire. It was second only to the baths of Rome. By the
370s, most of the space of these baths had been taken over by government offices.
This vast complex was the Pentagon of the West.
    The Porta Nigra of Trier has usually been associated with the emperor Valen-
tinian I (364–­75). It is still standing; it is the highest surviving Roman building
north of the Alps. Its heavy towers seem to conjure up associations of a medieval
castle. It has been presented as the sign of an empire under siege, but at the time
it was viewed as a supremely confident monument. It was a triumphal arch that
faced aggressively northward toward the frontier of the Rhine, which lay a mere
sixty miles away. From the coast of Wales overlooking the Irish Sea to the Iron
Gates of the Danube, Trier, and not Rome, was the capital of non-­Mediterranean
Europe.5
    Trier was the center of an unusually active state. The more we study west
Roman society in the fourth century, the more we realize the extent to which the
flow of taxes and supplies to Trier and to the armies of the Rhine primed the
pump of the economy from which the landowners of Gaul, Spain, and southern
Britain derived their wealth. In the time of Ausonius, a persistent fiscal current
flowed through what are now southern England, France, Spain, and Portugal.
This fiscal current was not uniform and did not always penetrate deeply into the
agrarian landscape of many regions. But it did create what students of the Otto-
man empire have called “corridors of empire.”6 It is along those corridors of em-
pire that we find the wealthiest landowners and the most splendid villas. In a
world where, from the fiscal point of view, all roads ran to Trier, this was wealth
derived (in the irreverent words of two recent scholars) from a landscape “tied to
an imperial gravy train.”7
    Ausonius trod the “corridors of empire” to good effect. It was in Trier, in 369,
that he met none other than Quintus Aurelius Symmachus, then a young man
not yet thirty. Symmachus had made his way, for the first and last time in his life,
to Trier. He did it ostensibly for fiscal reasons. He brought to the stern emperor
Valentinian I a large sum of gold, collected from the Roman Senate, as a “free
will offering” to fund the emperor’s campaigns in Germany. Symmachus had also
come to Trier to find friends in high places. In this he succeeded. In Ausonius he
met a man twenty years older than himself who proved to be one of his most firm
allies, “a father and a friend.”8 Had Valentinian I’s dynasty proved more endur-
ing, Trier and not Milan might have remained the effective capital of the West.
It would have been the city to which Symmachus traveled regularly. We might

                                        187
                                   chapter 12


have heard considerably less of Ambrose. Even Augustine the African might have
found himself teaching beside the banks of the Moselle.
    Ausonius was in many ways the “shadow” of Symmachus. He was a nobleman
by culture without the solid advantages of old money such as Symmachus en-
joyed. He had been born in Aquitaine into a circle of civic notables. His family
nursed a claim to an ancient nobility that had been lost a century before in the
civil wars of Gaul in the 260s. Ausonius’s grandfather had come to Aquitaine as
a refugee from Autun. His claim to nobility was somewhat tenuous. In reality, he
and his family were little more than local landowners and town councillors who
had risen by their talents. Ausonius’s father was a doctor. Ausonius became a
poet and a teacher. Up to 365, the schoolrooms of Bordeaux—­and no great an-
cestral villa—­had been the center of Ausonius’s life.9
    But if Ausonius was no Symmachus, he was certainly no Augustine. The aura
of faded nobility that seems to have clung to his family proved an advantage to
Ausonius. It enabled Ausonius and many of his relatives to marry upward into
better-­established local families in Aquitaine. One cannot imagine Augustine,
the son of a mere tenuis municeps, doing this. Romanianus had offered him fi-
nancial support, but not a bride.10 Furthermore, to be connected with Bordeaux
was very different from being a town councillor of Thagaste. Bordeaux was not
only a major cultural center; it was the Trier of the Atlantic. It was the seat of the
Vicar (the deputy of the prefect) of the southern provinces of Gaul. The recent
excavations of its port have shown wide commercial contacts, which included
links with Britain, a silent world whose role in the economy of fourth-­century
Atlantic Europe has only begun to be explored by numismatists and archaeolo-
gists.11 Two relatives known to Ausonius had traded there.12
    One suspects that Valentinian I looked with favor on Ausonius in part so as
to establish a comfortable relationship with Bordeaux and with Ausonius’s pu-
pils, the landowners of Aquitaine. He appointed Ausonius as tutor to his son,
Gratian. In 375 he became quaestor (framer of the imperial edicts). When Val-
entinian died, in 375, to be succeeded by Gratian, Ausonius found himself cata-
pulted into prominence. In 377 he was named Prefect of the Gauls. In 378–­79
his prefecture was extended to cover Africa and Italy. In 379 he even became con-
sul for the year. The old professor (now in his mid-­sixties) was put on display. He
was dressed in the same set of heavy, gold-­stitched consular robes that had once
been worn by none other than the emperor Constantius II, the son of Constan-
tine. As Ausonius later told his grandson in a celebratory poem, for three eu-
phoric years “I presided over the Empire.”13
    Ausonius (of course!) ascribed his success to the young emperor Gratian’s
gratitude to his old tutor. In reality, he had emerged as a compromise figure in an
elegant public relations maneuver by Gratian’s court. Gratian’s advisers realized
that they had to back down a little from the tradition of hard rule upheld by

                                         188
                       ausonius, villas, and wealth


Gratian’s father, the tight-­fisted Valentinian I. The nobility of Rome had to be
placated. Records of tax arrears were burned in solemn bonfires. A few scape-
goats were found and duly executed as exemplary punishment for their mishan-
dling of Roman senators. But that was as far as Gratian and his advisers were
prepared to retreat.14
    Here Ausonius proved useful to the court. His appointment as prefect and
then as consul was the perfect way to send a reassuring message to the nobility of
Rome and, at the same time, to block further claims by them. No Roman senator
could object to Ausonius. He was a teacher of the classics and an upholder of the
ideals to which the senatorial nobility of Rome claimed to be devoted. He was
the ego ideal of an entire class, which valued otium and the cultivation of classical
literature. But, at the same time, Ausonius was not a Roman of Rome. He was a
mere professor and no more than a municipal notable. His egregiously humble
speech of thanks to the emperor for his consulship (which we considered in chap-
ter 5) showed that Ausonius was mercifully without the arrogance and the sense
of entitlement of the real article—­the nobiles of Rome.


                    De herediolo: On my little family estate

                         Ausonius and His Wealth

Ausonius’s good fortune did not last. In 383 the British armies, headed by Maxi-
mus, took over Trier. Gratian was killed. Ausonius withdrew from Trier to Aqui-
taine. He spent the last decade of his life alternating between Bordeaux and the
estates that lay within easy distance of the city.
    In this decade, his poetry and letters took him down memory lane.15 He wrote
on his family (the Parentalia). He wrote vignettes on the professors of Bordeaux.
His letters and poems dwell lovingly on an Aquitanian landscape criss-­crossed
by gifts and by visitors perpetually on the move from one well-­stocked villa to
the other. In doing this, he created, in his seventies, a distinctive landscape of the
heart that was quite as vivid, as appealing to modern scholars—­and quite as much
a fruit of wishful thinking—­as was the heritage zone of Symmachus’s Campania.
This is the Ausonius we know so well: Ausonius the landowner and citizen of
Bordeaux, whose last and most poignant poems were written so as to lure his
friend Paulinus back to Aquitaine.
    Ausonius left the court of Trier because of a brutal regime change. But late
Roman gentlemen did not dwell on their political reverses. Time out of office
was not treated as a defeat; it was presented as time dedicated to otium. As we
have seen, otium meant many things to different sections of the late Roman upper
classes. For Ausonius, otium represented a moment of blessed equipoise. Freed

                                         189
                                       chapter 12


                                 Rudston                                      towns       Trier
                                                                              villas      Welschbillig
                                  Water Newton


                                                            Welschbillig
                     Woodchester
                                                          Trier
                                                                       Desenzano



     Quinta das
     Longas         Bordeaux                                               Palazzo Pignano
                    Montmaurin

                                              Turissa                                          Faragola
                      Carranque            Barcelona                       Rome
                                                                                   Nola



                                                        Hippo         Carthage
São Cucufate                                                               Sidi Ghrib     Piazza
                                                                                          Armerina




                         Map 2. A World of Villas, ca. 400 ad
The reader should know that this map of the distribution of villas is impressionistic. Unlike
 towns, almost all villas are known to us through modern excavations. Their distribution
  reflects to a large extent the good fortune or the interest of archaeologists in different
                                     regions of Europe.




from the noisy streets of Bordeaux and from the endless personal encounters
that were the cost of keeping abreast of the political life of the city, Ausonius
could enjoy (if only for a few months in the year) the ultimate reward of a man
who had arrived—­a nobleman’s freedom to do as he pleased:
   You dispose of your times as if you yourself and your affairs were in your
   own hands, so that there is nothing that you do which you have not your-
   self willed.16
   Otium gave Ausonius the chance to turn once again to the Muses. And what
better reason to seek their inspiration than to celebrate his own wealth? Hence
Ausonius’s remarkable poem, entitled De herediolo, “On My Little Family Es-
tate.” At first sight, the poem is remarkable in its precision. Here we have a late

                                              190
                       ausonius, villas, and wealth


Roman estate, situated somewhere outside Bazas, that measured (so Ausonius
tells us) exactly 1,050 jugera (264.411 hectares or 653.33 acres). Of these, 700
jugera (436.47 acres) were woodland (woodland was valued not only as a reserve
for wild game but as a commercially profitable source of timber and of pitch for
ships and wine amphorae); 200 jugera (124.70 acres) were plough land; 100 were
vineyards; and 50 were meadows. It boasted warehouses (those fateful signs of
accumulation) with enough capacity to store food to last for two years. No other
literary source in the entire history of the ancient world gives such statistics. It
was a substantial estate. On a rough calculation, the arable land alone would
have brought in around 1,000 solidi. This was the equivalent of one of the large
estates given by Constantine to the Roman church.17
    But Ausonius did not write the poem as a document of social history. Least of
all did he write it so as to flaunt his wealth. He wrote it as a sort of economic
Gnôthi seauton—­a “Know Yourself ” manual, in which he projected the image of
himself as a modest man.18 The De herediolo was not intended to be an account
of Ausonius’s wealth. Rather, it was an account of the sort of wealth others would
allow Ausonius to possess without criticizing him for unseemly greed. It re-
flected a pose a person of Ausonius’s class and culture—­a member of the nobility
of service—­was supposed to adopt.
    Furthermore, like Symmachus, Ausonius went out of his way to present his
estate as part of his “ancestral” wealth. In reality, it may have come from his de-
ceased wife (the daughter of a local civic notable). But Ausonius wrote of it as if it
formed part of the “hereditary realms” handed down from his great-­grandfather.19
Above all, it was an estate appropriate to the measured soul of a “Man of the
Muses”:
   It is a tiny patrimony, I allow; but never yet did property seem small to
   those whose souls are balanced. . . . It is upon the soul—­in my measured
   judgment—­that wealth depends, and not a man’s soul upon his wealth.20
Alas, the unforgiving eyes of modern scholars have discovered, through careful
sifting of the correspondence of Ausonius with his friends, what Ausonius never
tells us: apart from this “little heritage,” the old courtier had managed to accu-
mulate, by the end of his life, at least six other estates.21 These were scattered
around Bordeaux, as far apart as Saintes to the north and Bazas to the south.
    Ausonius had come into wealth. Let us linger for a moment on what this
wealth looked like, in the form of the villas and the town houses of the fourth
century. We will then consider from what sources this wealth was derived, and
hence what were the sort of persons who had an interest in displaying it. We will
end the chapter on a more general note. We will trace the distinctive imaginative
associations of wealth that were shared by villa owners of the age of Ausonius
and Paulinus.

                                         191
                                   chapter 12


    Vita bona fruamur felices: Let us, the lucky ones, enjoy the good life

In order to do this, we must abandon a figure for a landscape. Although we know
much about the landscape of Gaul from the poetry of Ausonius, we have to look
deeper than the shimmering surface these poems present. We must look at the
material remains connected with the villas of Britain, Gaul, and the Iberian pen-
insula (both modern Portugal and modern Spain). What we meet in these re-
mains, even in their present fragmentary state, is nothing less than the stuff of
dreams expressed in stone, mosaic, glass, gold, and silverware. We are looking at
the splendor of the rich and at what this splendor was meant to convey. We have
already seen how much the rich expected to stand out in late Roman society
through their brilliant clothes and through the heady moments of their giving of
great games. But these were transient flashes of grandeur compared with what we
can see in the villas, the town houses, and the baths in which the wealthy lived
out their lives both in the countryside and in their cities.
    It is a good moment for us to take stock of the mystique of wealth at this time
as expressed in material objects. Due to the heartening progress of archaeology
all over western Europe and north Africa, a rapidly increasing number of monu-
mental villas of the fourth and early fifth centuries have been revealed by survey
and excavation. Their discovery has thrown new light on the horizons and life-
style of the late Roman rich. In particular, the Spain and Aquitaine known to
Paulinus and Ausonius have come to be associated with unusually impressive
villas that are now the subject of comprehensive monographs.22 Visiting late
Roman villas as a tourist or an archaeologist, looking at their plans, examining
their mosaics, and viewing in museums all over Europe the statuary and silver-
ware associated with them makes us realize that we are not only being presented
with economic and social documents that help us measure the power and wealth
of those who owned them. We are listening to the heavy voice of wealth in a
distant age. These varied artifacts present us with a diffuse but insistent message
on the imagined origins and use of riches. They speak to us of
   wealth . . . transmitted into ornament, luxury, pleasure . . . like an old wine,
   [it] had let the dregs of greed, even of care and prudence, fall to the bot-
   tom of the barrel, leaving only verve and color.23
   If we want to understand the full implications of Paulinus’s rejection of such
wealth and of the changing mood in late Roman society that made his renuncia-
tion possible, we are well advised to listen to the voice of wealth as it spoke, loud
and clear, to the majority of his upper-­class contemporaries.
   What first strikes us is the splendor—­the sheer éclat—­of late Roman houses.
The residences of the late Roman rich—­whether their villas or their town houses
—­were characterized by an explosion of color on their walls and floors, which

                                         192
                      ausonius, villas, and wealth


went hand in hand with the sudden explosion of color in their dress.24 In the
houses of the truly wealthy, the effects of color would have been overpowering.
We must remember that we see only the last traces of these splendid mansions.
Only the mosaic pavements have survived, laid out like great carpets on ground
level. But mosaic was a relatively cheap art form. The real wealth of an upper-­
class residence lay in the multicolored marbles that covered its walls. The few
examples of inlaid marble decoration on the walls of secular buildings that have
been discovered are spectacular.25 Only by going into churches that have sur-
vived intact from the late Roman period (such as parts of San Vitale in Ravenna,
the apse wall of the basilica at Poreč, or the cascade of colored marbles that pours
down the inner sides of the Hagia Sophia in Istanbul) can a modern person glimpse
the blaze of opulent color that sheathed the walls of the wealthy from floor to
ceiling.
    Faced by so much magnificence, there is a tendency among scholars to em-
phasize that the layout of town houses and villas reflected a stark stratification of
late Roman society. Simon Ellis, in particular, has argued that the rich of the
fourth century built their villas and town houses in such a way as to dominate
their clients and dependents.26 The open, flowing spaces of the old Roman house
were closed in. Reception rooms and rooms for solemn dining came to predomi-
nate. These were built as opulent and grandiose stage sets, designed to heighten
the status of the master of the house. Oriented toward a domed apse at one end,
the great halls were as solemn and as overpowering as courtrooms. These inner
halls were approached by long corridors and shielded from public view by exotic
tapestries.27
    Yet we must be careful not to exaggerate this trend. As Kim Bowes has re-
cently pointed out, in an acute revision of the dominant opinion, much of this
architecture was built so as to delight quite as much as to overawe. Apses did not
always create the effect of a virtual throne room. Often, they simply lightened
the spirit. They made each owner’s villa seem recondite and surprising.28 There
is a social corollary to this reinterpretation. Villas were not built only by the few,
so as to highlight their outright dominance over the remainder of society—­far
from it. Their pursuit of baroque ingenuity pointed, rather, to the existence of a
relatively widespread and competitive class of persons whose incomes might vary
considerably region by region and family by family. Like the carefully crafted
poems of Ausonius, there was a bijou quality about the architecture of many vil-
las. They could be miniaturized or expanded according to the resources of their
owners. As a result, we should not concentrate only on the few truly great villas
of the period. Villas came in any number of sizes, from small jewel boxes set in
the countryside of Spain and southern Portugal to the overpowering spread of the
great villa of Piazza Armerina in Sicily or of Carranque in Spain. Wherever they
occurred, villas were not built only by a privileged few. They hint at the strong

                                        193
                                  chapter 12


competitive urges of a widespread class of landowners, each of whom was anx-
ious to stake out a claim on the landscape. In the words of Kim Bowes (adapting
a phrase of Le Corbusier), villas were not so much “machines for living” as “ma-
chines for competition.”29
    In all this, we are not faced simply with an art of the rich. We are dealing with
art by the rich that was devoted with peculiar zest to the theme of being rich. For
instance, we are shown the rich dining in great luxury. They had always done
this: but now they were shown doing it—­and with gusto.30 The same applies to
the other aspects of the activities of the rich. They were shown hunting. They
were shown relaxing in front of spacious villas. The architectural features of these
villas were often shown on silverware or on mosaics as crowded together so as to
indicate in a condensed visual shorthand their opulent and varied appurtenances,
right down to the cluster of domes that show active bathhouses from which
steam emerges in happy puffs. Villas were shown as if they were little cities. But
this was not because they blocked out the city in the imagination of their own-
ers. It was because, like the city, the villa was thought to contain everything nec-
essary to the full life of a nobleman.31
    Only occasionally did the literary coyness of an Ausonius appear in real life.
Even then, this coyness was applied only to the personal behavior of the rich
and not to the splendor of the buildings in which they lived. A villa has recently
been discovered at the far, eastern end of the Roman empire of the West. It lay
very much on a corridor of empire, a few miles off the great imperial road that
stretched across the Balkans, in the area between Naissus (modern Niš) and Scupi
(Skopje) (in what is now Nerodimlje, near Uroševac in southwest Kosovo). In
this villa, a well-­appointed apse for dining looked out over a large, regularly pat-
terned mosaic. At the head of the mosaic (where the guests could see them as
they passed to their dining couches) were images of the Seven Sages of Greece.
Beneath each image was a Latin version of a saying. These sayings were as calcu-
lated to dampen the fun as were the sermons of any Christian bishop. Pittacus of
Lesbos reminded the diners, “Know Yourself ”; Solon of Athens added Ne quid
nimis—­“Do not overdo it”; Creobulus of Myndos chimed in with “Due measure
is always useful.”32
    Such moralizing language was usually avoided. The scenes of provincial life
(which serve to illustrate so many recent books on the society of the later em-
pire) would not have been there for us to look at if the rich themselves had not
wished to show in a peculiarly assertive manner that they were rich, that they
intended to remain rich, and that they greatly enjoyed it. An exquisite drinking
glass (possibly made in Trier) was found in a fourth-­century villa in southern
Britain. Around it was written the slogan for a toast: Vita bona fruamur felices—­
“Let us, the lucky ones, enjoy the good life!”33 This was the motto of the age that
produced both Ausonius and the young Paulinus.

                                        194
                      ausonius, villas, and wealth


                 Art and Life: Who Were the Villa Owners?

But where did this wealth come from? In answering this question, we must be
careful. The interpretation of these glittering artifacts has been affected by deeply
rooted historical stereotypes. The splendor of the scenes portrayed on late
Roman mosaics and silverware has often been used to illustrate the moralizing
discourse of contemporary pagan and Christian texts. As in the sermons of Am-
brose, we are invited to see these representations as a direct mirror—­as candid
camera shots, as it were—­of the crass lifestyle of the late Roman rich. We assume
that a lifestyle that was patently so luxurious and so supremely self-­centered was
bound to be bad for late Roman society as a whole. Above all, we are encouraged
to believe that this art can be invoked as direct visual evidence for a widespread
and sinister social development: the growth of the great estate as an autonomous
unit, independent of the city and even of the imperial government.
    This impression reflects a deeply rooted trend in the study of late Roman so-
ciety. The power of the landowners of Gaul and Spain has tended to be viewed
as immemorial. For Camille Jullien, the great historian of Gaul of the 1920s,
the wealth of the villa owners of the age of Ausonius represented “a return pure
and simple to the days of the ancient Gauls.”34 For Jullian and for many others
(Mikhail Rostovtzeff among them), landowners like Ausonius were either the
last Celtic chieftains or the first medieval barons. They were presented as rural
potentates, ensconced at the head of vast pyramids of dependents. Their villas
were thought to have looked out like medieval castles over landscapes that they
alone controlled. Their leisured lifestyle rested on “the unshakable organism,
which a landed aristocracy had formed over ten centuries.”35
    As we saw in chapter 1, the fourth-­century reality is significantly different
from this view. As we follow it in his letters and poems, the wealth of Ausonius
and of his peers in southwest Gaul was considerable. But it was far from stable. It
was never independent of the state or of the cities near which these villas lay. The
landowners of Aquitaine depended for their wealth on maintaining close rela-
tions with the governmental and commercial center of Bordeaux. To live in the
countryside alone would have been social and political suicide. Rather, city and
estate were the twin foci of an ellipse. Ausonius and the landowners of the region
constantly moved between both foci. Aquitaine was a rich agrarian region, which
furnished supplies to the Rhine frontier. As a result, the aristocracy of Aquitaine
was a court aristocracy in its economic horizons, even if not all of its members
had made their way to Trier to become courtiers as Ausonius had done. Their
wealth and status did not grow peacefully out of the timeless earth of Gaul. It
depended on the vigor of an imperial system that was driven hard from Trier.
    It is significant that monumental villas do not turn up in every region of the
Roman West. They appear only in regions that served as corridors of empire—­

                                        195
                                  chapter 12


southwestern Gaul, parts of Spain (but not others), the region around Trier, and
southern Britain. Villas also appear near the great imperial roads that snaked
across the Balkans behind the Danube frontier.36
    Let us take one corridor of empire that threw up a remarkable number of
villas—­fourth-­century southern Britain. Here we have a profoundly agrarian
region whose towns were much smaller than the cities of Aquitaine or Spain.
Between twenty and thirty late Roman villas have been discovered, mainly dat-
ing from the first half of the fourth century. They stood out in a landscape that
was still dotted with round houses of Celtic design that were as distant from the
life and values of the owners of the villas as the huddled huts of the villages of
nineteenth-­century Russia and Poland were distant from the Palladian country
houses of the gentry.37
    But these villas were not lost in the depths of the countryside. They gravitated
around the little cities. They were often built within a radius of little more than
ten miles from town. These cities in turn were connected, through the fiscal sys-
tem of the empire, to the principal centers of consumption in the West. They
were connected to the imperial court at Trier, to the armies of the Rhineland
frontier, and to rich regions such as Aquitaine.
    Careful study has shown that the mosaics of the British villas were the prod-
ucts of local schools, each of which radiated from an urban center—­such as
Dorchester, Cirencester, or Durobrivae (Water Newton, which, at the time, was
an important iron town whose church, as we saw, already boasted an impressive
collection of silver plate). Through following the spread of the work of each
school in its own region we can trace the building activities of a gentry who were
intensely aware of each other’s buildings.38 They competed with each other in
the common coin of late Roman art. They wished to make their floors radiant
with bright mosaics. Their efforts varied. At Thruxton, a long hall that was little
more than a Celtic farmhouse was upgraded with a single mosaic added to one
end. This showed a wickedly plump and colorful Dionysos beneath the name
of the owner along with his clients or kinsmen, who bore the mysterious Celtic
name of “the Bodeni.”39 By contrast, at Woodchester, to the west of Cirencester,
twenty floors were covered with bright patterns. At least one elegant mythologi-
cal statue from a contemporary eastern workshop stood in the main hall. The
floor of this hall was covered by a large mosaic, made of one and a half million
cubes of local stones and brick. It showed Orpheus surrounded by a circle of wild
beasts as firmly designed and as forbiddingly muscular as were any of the lions
and tigers displayed on the bloodthirsty amphitheater mosaics of north Africa.40
The conclusions arrived at from the study of these British examples are also valid
for Gaul and Spain. They show that a villa was never simply an economic center.
Nor was it a proto-­feudal castle. It was a monument. It radiated a message to its
neighbors that its owner had arrived. And among the fluid and fragmented elites

                                        196
                      ausonius, villas, and wealth


of the fourth century, whether in Britain or in Gaul and Spain, there was no lack
of persons anxious to declare that they had arrived.
    The end of the villas in the Roman West throws light on the reasons for their
unprecedented flowering in the fourth century. The moment that the Roman
state and its fiscal energy began to wobble, as a result of civil wars and barbarian
invasions, monumental villas of this kind vanished. Many villas survived as eco-
nomic centers. They served as places for storage and for processing wine and oil.
But they became faceless. Their owners left no strong imprint on them. For they
no longer served as the blazons of new wealth. By contrast, the lifetime of Auso-
nius and the early years of Paulinus saw the villas at their height. They stood for
a belle époque, for a fragile moment of glory associated with the age of gold and a
strong empire.41
    Thus, we should not imagine the owners of villas as a closed group of super-­
rich landowners solidly ensconced in a position of overwhelming superiority
over against all other members of society. Rather, villa owners varied greatly in
wealth and in levels of culture. Far from being the unchallenged lords of their
region, they were often new men in fierce competition with their peers. They
notably lacked the stability that modern scholars have tended to ascribe to them.
But what they did have in common was a mystique of wealth, which gave solidity
to their own, often fragile fortunes. It bathed their lives in a sense of splendor
and excitement. Divided and precarious though they were, they were the felices,
the lucky ones. It is for this reason that we should listen attentively to the mes-
sage their art and furnishings conveyed. Let us do this by entering into their vil-
las as if they were palaces of dreams.


                                  Sume!: Take!

                    An Iconography of Abundance

First and foremost, the late Roman villa was presented as a place of unproblem-
atic abundance. To go out to one’s villa in the spring and summer was to claim this
abundance as one’s own. Even the layout of late Roman dining rooms stressed
this fact. The half-­circle shape of the late Roman stibadium couch derived from
the more informal arrangement of cushions in an al fresco picnic.42 On the stiba­
dium couch the guests lay looking outward into the main room rather than fac-
ing each other, as on the straight couches of the old Roman triclinium. The most
solemn dining occurred in indoor dining halls. In such halls the curved couches
lay under the dome of an apse at one end or they were placed around the large
hall beneath a series of half domes, arranged in the form of a triconch.43 But how-
ever solemn and enclosed late Roman dining arrangements became, the outdoor

                                       197
                                  chapter 12


picnic remained its model. For it was by eating the diverse products of the land
on the land itself that the owner and his friends positively rolled in the agrarian
surplus that was the secret of their wealth.
    High warehouses for the careful hoarding of the year’s grain might be the
grim reality. The dream, however, was innocent abundance.44 Hence the impor-
 tance of portrayals of the sea and of freshwater products. Fish and frutti di mare
 were pulled from the most abundant and the most innocent source of all—­the
 ocean and lakes and rivers. Such food came from an element free of envy. The
 liquid immensity of the ocean could never be the object of a zero-­sum game. It
 could never be divided up by estate boundaries, as was the ungenerous earth. Even
 in the depths of the dry Numidian plateau, at Mactar, a dining room mosaic
 represented a sea filled with edible fishes.45
    Ambrose might claim that the abundance of nature was to be shared by all,
but the mosaics of those who owned the land spoke in a different voice. They
claimed that nature herself would provide the landowner with limitless resources.
Significantly, none of these resources was shown as the fruit of human labor. Har-
vesting is rarely represented. The bitter incidents to which Ambrose referred in
his sermons were passed over. Instead, sprightly peasants are shown bearing bas-
kets filled with the good things nature provided with seemingly effortless ease.
    At their tables, hosts made sure that their guests would not lack tokens of
the unforced generosity of nature. In the great villa of Montmaurin on the river
Touch, southwest of Toulouse (a true pleasure palace, it is one of the most grand
and frankly delightful villas of Aquitaine), archaeologists discovered six fish
tanks, one of which was still filled with unopened oysters from the Atlantic
coast.46 They had been brought 150 miles inland from the beaches near Bor-
deaux. Such food was offered in the same spirit as Symmachus had gathered
 crocodiles and Irish wolfhounds to put on display before the people of Rome.
 They showed that the rich could reach out to the very edges of the known world
 so as to provide their guests with unexpected delights.
    Hence the importance of the little gifts of food and fruit known as xenia.
 Ausonius, for instance, sent to his son, Hesperius, ducks from the marshes with
 legs of crimson red and rainbow plumage, along with twenty thrushes that had
 flown into the net as if “wishing to be caught.”47 Signs of the submission of
­nature itself, such xenia were also used as tokens of submission to those who
owned the land. Carefully chosen items of food accompanied the rents of ten-
 ants to their landlords and the petitions and bribes of inferiors to those above
 them.48
    Eating, therefore, was more than a pleasure for the rich. It was an assertion of
something bigger: it was a celebration of abundance. It ratified the unfaltering,
cosmic energy of the natural world from which all wealth was thought to derive
with an ease as ineluctable as was the unfolding of the seasons of the year. As in

                                        198
                      ausonius, villas, and wealth


previous centuries, mosaics of the four seasons remained an essential element in
the decoration of the floors of villas and town houses. Representations of the
four seasons presented the natural world as charged, through the succession of
the seasons, with the promise of perpetual, ever-­recurring affluence.49
    In fourth-­century mosaics, nature itself took on a muted divinity all its own.
Individual gods and goddesses associated with fertility were no longer shown.50
Rather, a diffuse cosmic force was thought of as pulsing through the natural
world. The world now danced, as it were, with its own divine energy, without
help from the old gods. The mosaic of a recently discovered town house in
Ravenna shows the four seasons as happy children, dancing in a ring.51 In a simi-
lar grand house at Ravenna (known as the “palace of Theodoric”), an inscription
beneath the Seasons urges the reader, Sume!—­“Take!”: “Take what Autumn, what
Spring, what Winter and what Summer bring back again and again, and what
good things come into being in the whole round world.”52 Derived from ancient
themes, the theme of cosmic abundance (summed up in the dance of the sea-
sons) was the new, more faceless but no less potent god of the new rich.


                       Salvus lotus: Washed and healthy

                              The Happy Body

But nowhere did the late Roman rich wish to draw on the life-­giving pulse of the
universe more than in the care of their own bodies. Late Roman persons held
that the human body was in a very intimate manner a microcosm of the great
macrocosm of the mundus, of the physical universe as a whole. The same energies
that pulsed through the stars also pulsed through their bodies.53
   For this reason, the bodies of the rich were presented as eminently happy ones.
For the healthy and energetic body of the individual participated in the same
pulse of cosmic exuberance as did the natural world from which his or her own
wealth derived. Like food, health also was at the beck and call of the rich. Not for
them the fate of the poor, as described by the fourth-­century astrologer Firmicus
Maternus as dim souls, born under sluggish stars: “miserable, humiliated . . . con-
demned to labor and always occupied in inglorious tasks, whose bodies and
mouths are rendered vile by a foul stench.”54
   Moralizing historians have often regarded this pushing forward of the well-­
bathed body as a symptom of the luxury and self-­indulgence of the late Roman
rich and as a sure omen of the imminent decline of Roman society. It was no such
thing. It was a personalization—­one might say a somatization—­of the energy
and good fortune which, in their own mind, characterized the successful mem-
bers of the wealthy classes.

                                       199
                                   chapter 12


    To obtain this fighting trim, the rich went frequently to the private baths of
their villas and palaces. Throughout the fourth century, they devoted constant
effort and expense to making these baths ever more splendid and delightful. But
we must be careful how we interpret this phenomenon. The building of private
baths has often been represented as a withdrawal into a purely private world at
the expense of the great baths of the city. There is little evidence for this view.
In Africa, where urban public baths have been much studied (not least, most
recently by Anna Leone), public baths did not decline.55 Rather, the city still
lingered in the imagination of those who built private baths in the countryside.
They often wrote of the building of their private baths as if they were a form of
civic benefaction, offered by the owner to the restricted populus of his or her cli-
ents and friends. Let us look at one vivid example of such a bath.
    Nineteen miles southwest of Carthage, an exquisite late Roman bath com-
plex was found (in 1983) at Sidi Ghrib. It was built quickly, almost as a “folly,” by
a fortunate pair. Through this bath, husband and wife set their mark for a genera-
tion upon a hot and dusty landscape.56 The builder of the bathhouse advertised
his achievement on an inscription placed in the high-­domed frigidarium—­the
deliciously cool and spacious hall (roughly twenty-­five by twenty-­five feet) that
formed the sociable center of the complex. It read: “I have built more than my
income allowed, but never as much as I would have liked.” It was the old boast
of a “lover of the city.” But the builder of the bath at Sidi Ghrib had not strained
his resources to lavish good things on a large citizen body. He had built only for
himself and for the circle of his peers:
   If you like it, it is all for you. Whether you like it or not, it is mine. Three
   words: cato sedes ebria—­for those who appreciate such things, it is a place
   of intoxicating charm.57
    The bath was “a place of intoxicating charm” precisely because (in the words
of Yvon Thébert) it was a “building filled with wonders.”58 The bathhouse was
thought of as a miniature universe. With its complicated heating arrangements,
the separate spaces of the bathhouse echoed the miraculous blending of the an-
tithetical powers of fire and water and of hot and cold, on which the universe
itself depended. And the bath, in turn, worked mysteriously on the balance of
the humors within the human body itself. To move between the caldarium and
the frigidarium of such a bath was to recover, from a charmed atmosphere in
which steam and coolness mingled, the correct balance of the humors within
oneself.59
    It is not surprising then that a conversational manual in Greek and Latin,
associated with Trier (and perhaps even with colleagues of Ausonius himself ),
should have instructed those who met each other in the baths to greet each other
with the phrase, Salvus lotus: “Be healthy, Have a Good Wash.”60 Emerging from

                                         200
                      ausonius, villas, and wealth


the baths with firm tread, with exuberant, well-­groomed hair, and with the glow-
ing complexion of the well fed and the well washed, the rich emerged at their peak.



                      Wealth, the Universe, and the Gods

Altogether, the mystique that surrounded the rich as they ate and went to the
baths reveals an aspect of the religious climate of the age that we tend to over-
look. Traditionally, the fourth century is presented as an age dominated by the
conflict between Christianity and paganism. The more we study the period,
however, the less this conflict bulks large in it. When we turn to the mystique
of wealth in the fourth century, this conflict is almost entirely absent. The late
Roman language of abundance and good health was “secular” and “worldly” in
the deep, ancient meaning of the two terms. It was in no way irreligious. It car-
ried with it a numinous thrill whose intensity we should not underestimate. This
was the thrill evoked by a sense of the beauty and abundance of the mundus or
the saeculum, the physical universe (of which our word “secular” is a pallid echo).
The charm of a rich landscape was thought of as an emanation of the glory of the
mundus—­of a material world shot through with invigorating energies. In the
fourth century, it was quite possible to neglect the traditional gods of paganism.
But landowners still treated with due respect the invisible powers who lurked
close to the earth in the lower levels of the universe. For those hidden beings
tended the fields, the woods, and the fruits of the harvest.61
    When Augustine preached to north African congregations, many of whom
had been Christian for considerably longer than most of the Christian inhabi­
tants of Gaul had been, he made plain that what really stood between his own,
austerely monotheistic definition of Christianity and the attitude toward the
natural world of his hearers were not specific pagan rites directed to specific
gods. It was, rather, the sense of a hiatus between God and the material universe
(the mundus or the saeculum) that had remained fixed in the back of the minds
of the majority of late Roman persons:

   There are those who say: “God is good, he is great, he is supreme, eternal
   and inviolable. It is he who will give us eternal life and that incorruption
   which he promised at the resurrection. But those things, indeed, of the
   [physical] world (ista vero saecularia) . . . belong to the daemones and to the
   Invisible Powers.”
       They leave aside God, as if these things did not belong to him; and by
   sacrifices, by all kinds of healing devices, and by the expert divination of
   their fellows . . . they seek out ways to cope with what concerns the present
   life.62

                                        201
                                  chapter 12


    Among the rich, Christian monotheism had by no means drained the world
of its numinous qualities. Christianity had merely placed a new god far above the
visible universe. Christ was a high god. He was a god appropriate to an other life,
in another world beyond the stars. Since Constantine, Christ had also been the
god of the emperors. He was a high god, suitable to the high purposes of a head
of state.
    Here it is important that we return for a moment to the figure of Ausonius.
Careful reading of his writings has enabled us to seize the texture of a confidently
“worldly” Christianity very different from the Christianity of the younger gen-
eration of ascetics with whom Paulinus chose to ally himself.63 Here we are deal-
ing with a generational change of great significance. Ausonius was by no means
a hypocrite or a crypto-­pagan. He was probably born a Christian and may even
have represented a Christian faction within the teaching profession of Bor-
deaux.64 But, by the 390s, the old man’s Christianity was out-­of-­date (or, rather,
it had been declared to be out-­of-­date by a small but vocal minority in the
churches of the Latin West). The Christianity of Ausonius was the Christianity
of the Constantinian age. It was a form of Christianity that now seems deeply
alien to us. But this is because Christianity itself changed in the last years of
Ausonius’s life and in the decade after his death. As a result, the Christianity of
the old poet seems reticent to the point of seeming insincere when compared
with the sharp contrasts between Christians and pagans and between divine
and “worldly” affairs that were played up in the public rhetoric of new-­style bish-
ops such as Ambrose and by converts to the ascetic life such as Augustine and
Paulinus.
    Put briefly, Ausonius’s religion was by no means wishy-­washy or insincere.
As befitted a man who grew up in the reign of Constantine and his immediate
successors, it was fashionably transcendental. It was in tune with current philo-
sophical notions of an immaterial god, who was to be worshiped in spirit alone.65
But this was a transcendentalism that left the mundus—­the physical universe—­
undisturbed. It revered Christ, but it kept Him out of this world. It limited His
power to the ethereal realm to which He properly belonged. Truly high powers
on earth, such as the emperor, might be close to Christ. Thanking the emperor
Gratian for his consulship, Ausonius could say that to turn his thanks and prayers
from Gratian to God “was to make only a small detour”!66 Christ was close to
Gratian, as befitted an emperor. But there was no reason why He should be close
to Ausonius.
    By contrast, what was close to Ausonius was the mundus and all that went
with it—­the shimmer of the landscape, the sparkling variety of an ancient litera-
ture filled with delightful stories of the gods, the warm breath of the Muses on
the hearts of poets like himself. Christ did not challenge Ausonius’s world. From
a safe distance beyond the stars, He simply guaranteed it.

                                       202
                      ausonius, villas, and wealth


    Many thought as Ausonius did. For that reason, it is not at all surprising that
astrology was so immensely popular among the upper classes of the later empire.
For astrology was a system of thought and practice that concentrated whole-
heartedly on the workings of the material universe. It focused on the relationship
between the stars, the planets, and events on earth. By doing so, it did not deny
the existence of God or of the gods. But (like Ausonius) it kept them at a dis-
tance. The god of the astrologers lived in lonely majesty above the stars. He made
contact with human beings only indirectly, through the influences the planets
shed upon the earth. He was as distant from the world as Christ could be thought
to be distant by persons such as Ausonius. Thus, there is nothing strange in the
fact that the most complete astrological manual of the time—­the Mathesis—­The
Teaching—­of Firmicus Maternus—­was written for a Roman nobleman by a man
who may well have been a Christian at the time of writing, or who soon became
one.67
    The attitude of Firmicus to the mundus was very like that of Ausonius and of
others like him. Firmicus believed that a great God ruled the universe, but He
had delegated “worldly” things to an intricate interplay of energies, which radi-
ated from the planets and the stars within the universe itself.68 The farther from
heaven and the deeper into the material world one went, the more powerful these
influences became. The art of the astrologer was to interpret the interplay of in-
fluences by following the courses of the planets as they slid with sinister effect
across the Zodiac. Each movement of the planets stirred up eddies of hatred,
love, success, or failure in the world below. The destinies of their clients depended
on those subtle eddies, whose movements the astrologer claimed to be able to
predict.69
    We meet persons who dabbled with astrology in every section of the upper
classes. Ausonius’s grandfather had practiced astrology “under cover.”70 A Gallic
doctor, Vindicianus, whom Augustine met when Proconsul of Carthage, told
Augustine that he had been tempted to become a professional astrologer as well
as a doctor. Used to scanning the opaque body for signs of health and illness, as
an astrologer Vindicianus would have been doing much the same. He would have
scanned the vast body of the sky in an attempt to detect (in the shifts in the rela-
tions between the individual planets, traced against the background of the Zo-
diac) the source of the ripples of fortune and misfortune raised, among human
beings, by the conflicting energies associated with the planets.71 Altogether, as-
trology was the default religion of the upper classes of the later empire. It was so
attractive precisely because it concentrated attention on the alternation of good
and evil fortune, played out in a living, material universe. This universe—­the
mundus or the saeculum—­lay close at hand, far below the somewhat faceless
supracelestial realm of the new High God of the Christians. It was from this uni-
verse that wealth came, in a mighty, heartening tide, to the fortunate rich.

                                        203
                                   chapter 12


                                   Living Myths

Securely rooted in the mundus, at a safe distance from the High God who reigned
above the stars, the rich reached back with gusto to the classical myths that had
always given life and drama to their lives on earth. They did this to express their
claims to abundance, good health, and success in all their ventures. In so doing,
they drew on an imaginative universe in which Christianity was almost totally
absent. When dealing with the use of classical mythology in the fourth century,
it is important to stress its majestic indifference to the hard-­and-­fast religious
divisions that had developed in certain circles at this time. When we turn to the
art of the wealthy classes of the fourth-­century Latin West, we have to adjust our
ears to the deafening silence on the religious issues that bulk so large in Christian
texts. In the mosaics, statues, and silverware of the rich, the conflict between
paganism and Christianity might as well be happening on another planet.
    There was nothing frivolous or, indeed, irreligious about this absence of clear
signs of Christianity and paganism in the use of mythological scenes by the rich.
This art spoke to weighty issues that were charged with diffuse religious over-
tones. What was needed was a language with which to do justice to the aspira-
tions of an entire class, irrespective of their religion. Wealth was a serious matter.
It demanded a heavy voice, tinged with religious awe. In the fourth century, this
voice could only be found in an imagery taken from a past that owed nothing to
Christianity. Let us end this chapter by seeing how this was done.
    In certain situations, well-­to-­do Christians were prepared to signal their spe-
cial religious adherence. The Christogram—­the XP monogram of the name of
Christ—­is to be seen everywhere in the domestic as well as in the public art of
the period. But it is revealing to see exactly where the Christogram appeared. It
appeared only in places traditionally associated with good fortune: on the thresh-
olds of houses and at the center of reception rooms, flanked by the Seasons and
by similar classical emblems of abundance.72
    One such Christian was Sevso, probably a military man whose massive plate
(recently discovered in mysterious circumstances) signaled rare success. He is por-
trayed with his wife, presiding over a picnic that marked the successful conclusion
of a hunt. His favorite horse—­carefully inscribed with its name, Innocentius—­is
shown beside him. His guests have begun to tuck into a large fish. An inscription
ran around this happy scene, placed in the middle of a massive plate, made from
over nineteen pounds of solid silver.
   May these, o Sevso, yours for many ages be,
   Small vessels fit to serve your offspring worthily.
Though dwarfed by the inscription and by the sheer shimmer of so vast a plate,
the Christogram was present. It hung above the heads of the couple like a benefi-

                                         204
                       ausonius, villas, and wealth


cent star. It declared that Christ (and no other god) guarded the fortune of Sevso
and his wife.73
    Sevso appears to have owned a further 130 pounds of silverware, which bore
no sign of Christ. Heavy silver vessels were emblazoned with scenes from Greek
mythology and from Greek drama. They were placed on the plates (along with
images of charioteers and of wild beasts from the amphitheater) like so many
decals. They advertised Sevso’s allegiance to the classical past. To judge from his
name, Sevso may have been a cavalry man of Alan background. But Sevso wished
to show that he shared with persons as different from himself as Symmachus,
Ausonius, and the young Augustine a love of the classics.74
    Altogether, the art of the fourth century was an art framed for a diverse class
of rich persons. All were rich; but some were a lot less rich and less certain of
their place in society than were others. Some, indeed (like Sevso), were barely
Romans. Such persons needed a shared visual culture (much of which hinted at
a shared literary culture) so as to get along with each other.
    Hence the enormous appeal of classical myth. The appeal to myth was by no
means a sign of unreflecting conservatism. The artists of fourth-­and fifth-­century
mosaics deliberately pulled these myths into the present. They implied that the
owners of the mosaics and of the silverware were, themselves, “living myths” in
their own time.75 For only classical mythology could do justice to the glorious
démesure, to the epic “larger-­than-­life” quality of the rich, in all their activities,
from the strenuous courage of the hunt to the sexual magnetism that was sup-
posed to radiate from their privileged bodies.
    The myths were “modernized.” They became, as it were, part of the heraldry
of the great—­much as, in medieval times, the heads of feudal lineages made their
own the courage, the ferocity, and the loyalty of the beasts that decorated their
shields. But the myths provided more than emblems of status. In the age of Auso-
nius, we are still in a deeply polytheistic world. The gods still filled the imagina-
tion of most persons. Compared with the deathless energy of the gods, human
passions and human delights were thought of as thin and fleeting in themselves.
They gained a numinous “fourth dimension” through being associated with the
heroes of the past and with the figures of gods and goddesses.76 The gods might
still be worshiped as divinities by some, but their stories were known by all.77 They
lived in an uncanny alternative world at once “intimate and strange” that gave
meaning and glory to the lives of mortals.78
    For this reason, gods and goddesses still hovered around the rich. They added
a touch of majesty to the high moments of their lives. Every young bride on her
wedding day might still look into her mirror while above her hovered an image
of female beauty more solid and vivid than herself—­the voluptuous shape of
Venus (with her hair done up in the late Roman manner, with great pendant ear-
rings and with a heavy necklace draped across her naked body) as she rode with

                                         205
                                   chapter 12


her retinue across the waves. This was how the young Christian girl, Proiecta, was
shown on a great fourth-­century silver toilet case—­the Esquiline Casket of the
British Museum (so-­called because it was discovered on the Esquiline Hill, a re-
gion of great palaces). An inscription complete with Christogram wished the
married couple “long life in Christ.” The inscription was attached to the casket in
such a way that it ran between the portrait of the young bride and the splendid
Venus above her. If anything, the inscription was an invocation of Christ to make
the myths come true—­for Venus and the bride to merge, so that beauty and de-
light might flourish in the ancient manner in a family of rich Christians.79
    In the same way, all over the western provinces (from Britain to the south of
Spain) Bellerophon is shown piercing the chimera. Rather than referring to some
finespun allegory, the figure of the triumphant Bellerophon was seen as the ego
ideal of the owner of the house—­a vigorous hunter on a flying horse.80 Indeed,
the myths had become so much a part of the texture of life that gods and god-
desses, heroes and heroines, were often no longer shown in proper classical dress.
In Malaga, Bellerophon was shown as a huntsman of the later empire complete
with the cloak and trousers that distinguished the gentry in every province. The
ancient past and the modern present were merged.81 On a sarcophagus from
northern Portugal, the deceased was shown surrounded by the traditional Muses.
But he was no longer dressed in the classical toga, as had been normal when a
gentleman was shown communing with Muses. Far from it: he was shown in
entirely up-­to-­date dress, with the wide cloak, the fibula brooch, and the trousers
of an imperial official.82
    Not all areas produced mosaics with mythological scenes. The mosaics of
Aquitaine, for instance, are surprising for their absence of mythological scenes,
compared with the full-­blown iconography of Spain, Africa, and Britain. But,
wherever they lived, whether they were Christians or pagans, it was the air of the
classical tradition the rich chose to breathe, drawing in its oxygen in deep and
cheering breaths. For them, there was no other air.
    Nothing shows this more clearly than the recent discoveries of sculptures
that decorated late Roman villas all over the West. The statuary of the villas of El
Ruedo (near Cordoba) and Valtorre de Jarama (south of Madrid), in Spain, echo
the stunning collections previously discovered at Chiragan (near Toulouse) and
at St. Georges-­de-­Montagne (near Bordeaux) in Gaul. These villas housed large
private collections of classical and imperial statues.83 Placed in the courtyards of
late Roman villas in the West, works of classical sculpture provided their owners
with epitomes of Greco-­Roman history and culture. The long pool of the villa of
Welschbilling (outside Trier) was enclosed with a line of busts placed on the pil-
lars of a balustrade. In this way, the figures of Socrates and Demosthenes, of Cae-
sar and Marcus Aurelius, were brought to a villa that lay only sixty miles away
from the northernmost frontier between Rome and the barbarian world. They

                                        206
                      ausonius, villas, and wealth


were a reminder of the heritage a fourth-­century villa owner such as Ausonius
was expected to cherish and defend.84
    We, who know about the withering of the great villas in the crisis of the fifth
century, find that there is something hauntingly distant about the secular art and
literature of the age of Ausonius. It seems to lie on the far side of a divide be-
tween the pagan and the Christian world. Yet what we have seen is an art of the
Christian rich quite as much as that of pagans. We are looking, in fact, not at
a pagan world so much as a world where a distinctive Christianity—­the Christi-
anity of the age of Constantine and his successors—­had come to coexist, for a
moment, with a classical heritage that seemed at the time to be unshakable and
unproblematic.
    Ausonius was a sincere representative of the Christianity of that generation.
The rich, pagan and Christian alike, still felt at ease in the world. But Ausonius
and the many like him could not have foreseen the emergence of a new attitude
toward wealth among a small but vocal section of their Christian peers. This new
attitude cast a cold shadow over the mundus as a whole. For those who listened
to the message of Christian ascetics, wealth could no longer be seen as the un-
problematic overflow of the imagined abundance of the universe. The “world”
was a dark place. Its beauties were a source of temptation. Wealth was “slime.”85
It was not an exuberant by-­product of the semi-­divine world of nature. It was a
burden that had to be shed if the soul were to fly away from a world of dull ma-
teriality to join Christ “in the air.”86 Wealth could be tolerated only if it passed
continuously upward (through pious acts) into a silent, unseen world, which lay
beyond the stars. Like the Rich Young Man of the Gospels, the eye of the needle
must be faced. Treasure on earth had to be renounced so that it could become
treasure in heaven. Let us turn in our next two chapters to see how Pontius Me-
ropius Paulinus, the friend of Ausonius, became (to Ausonius’s great distress) the
spokesman of this radical new mood.




                                        207
                          Chapter 13
                          •••••
Ex opulentissimo divite: From being rich as rich can be
 Paulinus of Nola and the Renunciation, of Wealth,
                     389–­395




   Lacerataque centum per dominos veteris Paulini regna: The hereditary
     domains of old Paulinus torn apart by a hundred [new] owners

              Paulinus, Renunciation, and Civil War

The great villas of Aquitaine have been described by Catherine Balmelle as “dy-
namic and complex places . . . that lay at the heart of a network of sociability.”1
This is certainly how they appeared to Ausonius in the poignant last decade of
his life, after he had left the court of Trier in 383. In his letters and poems, he
presented the region around Bordeaux as a charmed world, held together by the
punctilious exchange of poems and of little gifts of food between like-­minded
neighbors.
   It was important for Ausonius that this world should hold together. For be-
hind the gracious luxury and cultural wealth displayed in these exchanges lay a
weightier reality—­the need for solidarity within a regional nobility, probably
the richest and most enviable in Gaul, caught in a time of intermittent civil war.
In 383 Maximus replaced Gratian; in 388 Theodosius replaced Maximus. The
roundabout of regime changes would continue until, in the dire years after 406,
civil war and barbarian invasion became disastrously intermingled in the politics
of Gaul and Spain.
   As we saw, the landowners among whom Ausonius moved were not insulated
against these events. They were not the great owners of latifundia that many
scholars have imagined them to have been. They did not live ensconced in the
depths of the countryside on virtually autarkic estates while political regimes
came and went. They were a class partly created by the late Roman state. For this
reason, they were directly vulnerable to the impact of court revolutions and civil
war. Hence it was more than usually important for them to maintain their soli-

                                       208
                      the renunciation of wealth


darity. They did this by rallying to a distinctive way of life of which their villas
and their shared classical culture were the most secure landmarks. For one of
them to abandon this style of life was not only to break up a friendship. It was to
betray their class and their region at a moment of danger.
   This was precisely what Ausonius’s friend and former pupil, Pontius Mero-
pius Paulinus, did. Around 389, Paulinus moved out of Aquitaine to the estates
of his wife, Therasia, in Spain. The couple settled in Complutum (Alcalà de
Henares), on the austere plateau of Castile, twenty miles from modern Madrid.
A fourth-­century town house at Complutum has been excavated. Its mosaic
floors spoke with characteristically late Roman zest of the good life. A line of
servants, with well-­cut tunics and healthy, bulging calves, were shown on the
corridor leading to the dining room. One mosaic panel showed Jupiter in the
form of a cheeky swan, leering expectantly upward at Leda as her dress slipped
from her shoulders to reveal her naked body.2
   Such scenes were not for Paulinus and Therasia. Three years of soul-­searching,
rendered tragic by the death of their only child, ended with a joint decision by
Paulinus and Therasia to adopt a life of continence (they would produce no fur-
ther heir) and to sell up their properties. Paulinus went further. The couple
moved to the Mediterranean coast. On Christmas Day 394, Paulinus was or-
dained a priest at Barcelona, by the acclaim of the Christian people, inspired by
the Holy Spirit—­just as Augustine had been ordained at Hippo only three years
before. With the exception of Ambrose (who immediately became a bishop),
no member of the senatorial order had ever become a mere clergyman. Ordina-
tion distanced Paulinus yet further from his noble background.3 But he did not
stay in Barcelona. In 395 Paulinus and Therasia crossed the Mediterranean to
Campania and settled at Nola, in the shrine of Saint Felix in Cimitile—­the
“Cemetery”—­which lay a short distance outside the town.
   Ausonius died around 395, at the age of eighty-­five. He only witnessed the
opening years of Paulinus’s religious odyssey. But what he saw in his last years did
not reassure him. The series of poetic letters he sent to his friend show that he
feared that Paulinus was bent on committing social suicide. In his first letters,
he pleaded with his friend not to lock himself away in melancholy isolation in
the middle of the rough landscape of Spain. When Ausonius later heard (in the
spring of 394) that Paulinus had also renounced his wealth, this was the last
straw. For the only time in his poems to Paulinus, Ausonius turned to the Chris-
tian God to pray to Christ that such a thing would not happen:

   Lest we have to mourn that the family wealth of the Paulinus of old [prob-
   ably an ancestor of the third century or even of the second century ad] be
   grabbed and scattered, and his hereditary domains [his regna] be torn
   apart between a hundred owners.4

                                        209
                                  chapter 13


    Ausonius did not use the word regna to conjure up estates the size of king-
doms, as many modern scholars assume. He had used the same word for his own
“Little Heritage.” It was the fact that these were ancestral estates heavy with a
sense of heritage that mattered, not their size. He wished to warn Paulinus that
if such ancestral lands could go, then anything might go. Why had Paulinus acted
in so drastic a manner?
    One suspects that Paulinus had moved to Spain in 389 for reasons that were
not entirely religious. Hence the alarm Ausonius expressed at his withdrawal.
Color-­blind as always to confessional issues, Ausonius was far more concerned
with the political and social implications of Paulinus’s departure from Aquitaine
than with his religious preoccupations. After the fall of Maximus, in 388, Gaul
had become reconquered territory. It was now ruled by Theodosius I, an em-
peror based on Constantinople. Until recently Aquitaine had been a privileged
province. It was the breadbasket of Trier. Now Aquitaine found itself on the
margins of a tenuously united empire ruled, in effect, from distant Constanti-
nople. It is as if in modern times the administration of Bordeaux had switched
from Paris to Istanbul. Ausonius the old courtier knew that if the nobility of his
region were to have any say in the new regime, they should hang together. This
was why he wished to lure Paulinus back from Spain to Bordeaux so as to remain
active in the political life of the region. In so doing, Ausonius could present him-
self to Theodosius as a “patronage broker” who had rallied the Aquitanian land-
owners, Paulinus among them, to the new regime.5
    But Paulinus had had enough of politics. There was a good reason for this. He
came from a family that was both more wealthy and more vulnerable in times of
civil war than was a mere civic notable of Bordeaux such as Ausonius. Though
closely associated with Bordeaux, Paulinus’s family was not limited to that one
region. It had roots in the senatorial aristocracy of Rome and southern Italy. Pau-
linus’s wealth was more like that of Symmachus than that of Ausonius or even of
Ambrose. It was old money. His family owned land in Italy. He found it easy to
marry into an aristocratic family of Spain which, like Paulinus, had also main-
tained its links to Rome. He could step with ease across the western Mediter-
ranean. Ausonius knew that, like a multinational company, Paulinus could pull
out of Bordeaux with little difficulty. Hence Ausonius’s urgent concern to tie
Paulinus to his own region and his fear that Paulinus, as a member of the super-­
rich, could have taken himself and his wealth to reside in any number of other
localities.
    But, in times of civil war, this scattered wealth spelled danger. With estates in
every region, persons like Paulinus were temptingly wealthy. At the same time,
they lacked the local support networks (built up over the years by canny mar-
riages and by well-­maintained relations with local allies) that protected humbler
members of a mere provincial aristocracy. Put bluntly, members of the super-­rich

                                        210
                      the renunciation of wealth


were the piggy bank that new regimes, chronically short of cash, were tempted
to raid.
    Paulinus’s family may well have counted as one such piggy bank. At some
time in the late 380s, Paulinus’s brother had been executed—­Paulinus uses the
grim word caesus of his mysterious death. Paulinus himself was in danger of hav-
ing his own estates confiscated.6 He may even have bought himself out. This is
what Symmachus may have done, a year earlier, after he had committed the near-­
fatal error of having rallied to the cause of Maximus of Trier only a few months
before Maximus was defeated by Theodosius I.7 Though the selling off of Pauli-
nus’s estates was eventually rendered memorable by being presented as an act of
Christian renunciation, his family fortunes may already have been on a downward
slide. Certainly, when Paulinus retired to Spain, he was already a man with wealth
very much on his mind. Coming to Spain, he found himself in a province where
the Christian churches also were greatly preoccupied with the issue of wealth—­
with how rich Christians might spend their fortunes.


                           The Shadow of Priscillian

The memorable intensity of Ausonius’s reaction to the withdrawal of Paulinus
and the high-­minded response of Paulinus to his aged mentor have tended to
dominate our perceptions of the entire story of Paulinus’s withdrawal and renun-
ciation. Scholars of classical inclination have lingered on Paulinus’s conversion
as if it were a quiet affair—­a dignified farewell to the Muses. But this view has
excluded any consideration of what was happening in the Christian churches
of the time. In reality, as we will now see, Paulinus’s public renunciation of his
wealth came as the trenchant solution to a little-­known but bitter dispute on the
role of the wealthy in the Christian churches that had already raged in Gaul and
Spain for a decade. It is to this that we must now turn.
    To be very brief: behind Paulinus stood Priscillian, and behind Priscillian
stood the remarkable decade that saw the end of the age of consensus in the
churches imposed by Constantine and his so-­called Arian successor, Constan-
tius II. As we have seen, this decade witnessed the unexpected entry into posi-
tions of ecclesiastical power of ultra-­Nicene dissidents, whose wealth and social
standing marked a new departure for the churches of the West. We know that
this happened in northern Italy with the emergence of the maverick nobilis Am-
brose as bishop of Milan in 374.
    We often forget that the same thing happened a decade later in the churches
of Spain and Aquitaine. In this region, however, the crisis took on a peculiarly
acute form. It was associated with controversy over the views and person of a
well-­educated and charismatic Spaniard—­Priscillian. Priscillian was a teacher of

                                       211
                                  chapter 13


extreme ascetic views, based on what struck his enemies as a Gnostic, even Man-
ichaean, worldview. The controversy first became public in 380 and gained in
vehemence when Priscillian became bishop of Avila in 381. It ended, sometime
between 384 and 386, suddenly and in a gruesome manner, with Priscillian’s ex-
ecution at Trier.
   Priscillian was not executed as a heretic. The bishops of Spain who had rallied
against him treated his ordination as invalid. He was tried as a layman and con-
demned not for his beliefs but for having practiced sorcery and seduced noble
ladies. Yet the trial itself had been set in motion in response to clamorous denun-
ciations of Priscillian, while still a bishop, by his fellow Spanish bishops.8
   This was because there was more to Priscillian than his role as a guru. He
crystallized the hopes of an entire disaffected party of well-­to-­do Christians. As
Victoria Escribano has recently shown, Priscillian was supported by extreme
members of the pro-­Nicene faction. It was with their support that he became
bishop of Avila in 381. To those who mistrusted him, Priscillian looked much as
Ambrose had looked to his “Arian” enemies in 374. He was an intruder who had
come from outside the lackluster circles of the Spanish episcopate. He had been
pushed into a bishopric by a ginger group of rich lay zealots.9 But Ambrose sur-
vived while Priscillian did not. This was because Ambrose had been a senatorial
governor and was independently wealthy. Priscillian was merely the darling of a
faction within the Christian aristocracy. He represented a troubling alliance be-
tween a religious leader and the wealth of a new class of lay patrons. In Spanish
conditions, the sudden pushing forward of Priscillian represented a real threat to
the other bishops. If the dubious Priscillian came forward, who else might follow
him as protégés of the new Christian rich?
   This anxiety was exacerbated by an imbalance between city and villa. Thus, to
understand the savagery of the reaction of the bishops to Priscillian, we should
go out of the towns to the great villas of the Spanish aristocracy. In a series of
recent articles, Kim Bowes has drawn attention to a peculiar disparity in the so-
cial landscape of fourth-­century Christian Spain. The urban churches of Spain of
the fourth and early fifth centuries were strikingly modest. They were the product
of a low-­profile, urban Christianity, supported by distinctly middling persons, as
had been the case in so many other churches of the Latin West (one thinks of the
Christian communities of northern Italy before the days of Ambrose).
   In Spain, however, the low social profile of the urban churches stood in un-
usually sharp contrast to the wealth the Christian landowners of the region had
deployed in building mausoleums and churches adjacent to their own villas.10 As
we saw in the last chapter, these villas were by no means cut off from the cities.
Country villas were only one focus on the ellipse which, throughout the year,
joined local elites to the city when in the countryside and to the countryside when
in the city. It was taken for granted that, at certain seasons, an urban notable

                                        212
                       the renunciation of wealth


might retire to the countryside so as to conduct the business of the city in the
comfort of his villa. Provincial governors had to be warned not to do this. They
were often tempted to accept the invitation of local villa owners to conduct the
business of state out of town, in “delightful retreats” away from the heat and
noise of the city. Such governors had to be reminded that they were supposed to
reside in the city in the governor’s official mansion.11
   Laypersons took this alternation of city and countryside for granted. But the
Christian communities within the cities were more recent. Their leaders felt less
secure. It mattered to bishops that rich members of the congregation did not
attend church in the city’s principal basilica. They suspected the worst of those
who “lingered in villas” during the Lenten season. Such persons threatened to
turn what had been a season of communal penance in the city (in which all
classes were joined and in which the mediocres predominated) into the religious
equivalent of an aristocrat’s otium—­a time of intense devotion, at a distance
from the city, in the select company of one’s family and friends. Even worse, dur-
ing such periods of otium, men and women might also mingle freely, as they had
always done in the high-­minded house parties of the great. Favored teachers of
uncertain orthodoxy might be brought in to instruct these little gatherings.
Thus, absenteeism from the ceremonies of the city and the suspect mingling of
the sexes at religious conventicles held around charismatic teachers in country
retreats were the twin refrain of the bishops assembled at Saragossa (Zaragoza)
in 380:
   The women of the Catholic church should be separated from assemblies
   of strange men. . . . They should not join together with them to learn or to
   teach.
       At the time of Lent . . . no persons should absent themselves from the
   churches. . . . They should not go out to the villas of others to attend meet-
   ings. . . . No one should remain in their house or reside in their villa or seek
   out mountain retreats, but all should run together to the churches. . . . Let
   no one take for themselves the title of Teacher.12
   Altogether, the Spanish bishops who aired their suspicions at the council of
Saragossa felt threatened by the splendor of the villas that ringed their cities.
These villas were impressive places. The owners of many of them were newly
wealthy. Many had been successful courtiers in capitals as far apart as Trier and
Constantinople. Most of the art they patronized was soundproof to Christian-
ity; this was art that did justice to their worldly glory. But, as Christians, they
also had to make provision for the afterlife. They continued the tradition of plac-
ing impressive mausolea on their properties. Excavations of the villas of Spain
and Portugal show that in doing this they deployed a “dizzying array of plans
and materials” to provide themselves with impressive buildings linked to private

                                         213
                                   chapter 13


Christian cult and to private burial on their estates. To take only one example:
the great domed building that was erected close to the villa at Carranque con-
tained architectural echoes of the great Church of the Holy Apostles, founded
by Constantine at Constantinople as his own burial place. It represented, in the
middle of a Castilian plateau dotted with distinctly mediocre cities, a daring
combination of saint’s shrine and private mausoleum, built by a wealthy person
who may have been a leading courtier.13
    It was among such persons that the followers of Priscillian were thought by
the bishops to lurk. This social tension was crucial to the fate of Priscillian. It was
not the ascetic nature of the movement itself nor yet the troubling esotericism
associated with the teachings of Priscillian that fueled the moral panic that passed
through many of the major Spanish churches between 380 and 385. It was Pris-
cillian’s access to the wealth and support of persons from outside the proud but
socially unprepossessing circles of the Spanish urban clergy.
    The problems raised by this imbalance did not apply only to Spain, although
they were felt most acutely in that region. It is worthwhile lingering for a mo-
ment on this situation. Nowadays, we tend to assume that the ascetic movement
shocked contemporaries for much the same reasons as it shocks us. It was world
denying. It emphasized self-­ mortification. It led to the abandonment of social
duties. It deprecated marriage and exalted the suppression of sexual drives. This
was the view of a pagan, Rutilius Namatianus, who described a colony of monks
on the island of Capraria (modern Capraia between Elba and Corsica), which he
passed when sailing home to his estates in Gaul a generation later:
      squalid the isle and filled
   With men who shun the light: they call themselves
   “Monks”, a name in Greek, because they wish
   To dwell alone [as monoi: alone], observed by none. . . .
   What madness of a brain diseased so crazed
   As fearing evil, to refuse all good.14
    Though the most vocal of the critics of monks were pagans, many were also
Christians. We take their judgments as a sufficient explanation for the unpopu-
larity of monks and virgins in this period. We do so because we tend to agree
with them. After all, monks were extremists and world haters. Yet the fact re-
mains that, in the later empire, ascetics of all kinds were less often criticized for
their world-­denying practices than for their relations with wealthy devotees. The
relation between holy men and their financial backers was a highly charged issue.
In the words of the pagan emperor Julian, referring to monks: “They are . . . men
who by making small sacrifices gain much . . . from all sources . . . levying tribute
on specious pretenses, which they call ‘alms.’15 These suspicions were by no means
limited to pagans. In 403 Augustine had to write an entire tract against monks

                                         214
                       the renunciation of wealth


who made a practice of begging for alms rather than working for a living—­the
De opere monachorum, “That Monks Should Work.” He also rebuked a lady
Ecdicia who had given away her husband’s fortune to two such charismatic beg-
gars.16 These practices reminded him of his younger days, when he and others
had supported the Elect of the “Holy Church” of Mani. We will see, in a later
chapter, how the fund-­raising activities of the ascetic Jerome among the pious
women of Rome raised a storm of protest. Altogether, whenever the relationship
between ascetics and lay donors appeared to be excessive or dubious, late Roman
Christians (quite as much as late Roman pagans) were more than usually unfor-
giving. Suspicion of the wealth of rich supporters was a principal reason for op-
position to the ascetic movement in the Latin West. This suspicion was justified.
The new wealth of many Christians frequently made itself felt in the churches in
an invidious manner through patronizing ascetic stars at the expense of the run-­
of-­the-­mill clergy.
    Priscillian was one of the first ascetics in the West to fall victim to these suspi-
cions. He had failed to clarify his relations to the wealthy persons who supported
him. He was by no means a Manichee in his beliefs, but, in his social profile he
was, in many ways, a throwback to an earlier age of Gnostic spiritual guides. As a
person, he was “above” money. But he remained surrounded by a disquieting
aura of great riches. His followers in Spain and Aquitaine were well-­to-­do local
aristocrats. They ministered to him. They did not renounce their wealth but used
it for the cause of their leader. Their considerable funds were deployed at court in
order to defend their leader and to secure the condemnation of his enemies.17
    This was unforgivable. Priscillian, the bishop of Avila—­a would-­be Ambrose
of Castile—­was hounded to death by his episcopal colleagues as a sorcerer and a
seducer of noble women. When Paulinus moved definitively out of Aquitaine to
live on his wife’s estates in eastern Spain, we must remember that barely six years
(at the longest) had elapsed since the body of Priscillian—­headless and bearing
the marks of torture—­had been taken back to Spain by a group of followers who
continued to honor him as a martyr.
    We should bear these recent events in mind when we consider the options Pau-
linus faced when in retreat on his wife’s estates between 389 and 394. He faced
many options as to what he would do with his wealth. What exactly were they?
    It is important to realize that the option he may have known best offered him
least guidance when it came to planning his future. This was the life of Saint
Martin of Tours. Paulinus had been a sincere admirer of Martin of Tours. Some-
time around 387 (when the old monk-­bishop of Tours was in his seventies) he
had met Martin and had even been cured of an infection of the eye by him. His
closest friend and correspondent in the years immediately following his con­
version was none other than Sulpicius Severus, the author of the famous Life of
Martin.18

                                         215
                                  chapter 13


    Paulinus once wrote that in Sulpicius “Saint Martin still breathes.”19 But this
was a Martin who had surprisingly little to say on the issue of wealth. A member
of an earlier generation, the bishop of Tours had not given much attention to
the precise manner in which laypersons could dispose of their wealth when they
adopted the ascetic life. Most of Martin’s monks had been well-­to-­do. On con-
version, they had given property to the monastery at Marmoutier and lived off
the income. They did not work. Like aristocrats in otium they were engaged in
higher pursuits. They devoted their time to contemplation, to reading, and to
copying. Ordinary peasants worked the land for them with the heavy oxen of
northern Gaul while they themselves occasionally went fishing in the river Loire.20
Martin and his monks took their relative poverty for granted. Their conversion
had not been preceded by a spectacular and widely publicized renunciation of
wealth.
    But Paulinus could no longer afford to be offhand about his wealth, as Martin
and his monks had been. Not only was he more than usually rich. In the years
when he retired from Aquitaine, the shadow of Priscillian had fallen across the
landscape of Spain and southern Gaul. Paulinus had to make clear quickly and
for all to see and hear what was his own stance to his own, vast riches. The Chris-
tian communities of his region needed to know exactly how a man as rich as Pau-
linus intended to use his wealth—­how much of it he would retain, and, should
he sell up his properties, where exactly all that money would go.
    Hence Paulinus’s decision to make a public declaration (probably at the Eas-
ter festival of 394). He said that he would follow to the letter Christ’s command
to the Rich Young Man. He would sell all. He would give to the poor. He would
place his treasure in heaven. He himself ensured through his own correspon-
dence that his conversion was acclaimed throughout the western Mediterranean
in the stark terms provided by the Gospel story.21 Seen against the background
of the churches of Spain, the subtext of the message was clear: Paulinus was
“clean.” He had freed himself from the aura of undeclared wealth that had made
the followers of Priscillian appear to be a sinister and incalculable faction.


       Homo quondam ex divite pauper: A man who from being rich
                            became poor

                        From Aquitaine to Nola

Paulinus, therefore, announced the renunciation of his wealth with an archaic
starkness that impressed like-­minded Christian contemporaries. The elderly Mar-
tin of Tours was predictably delighted with the news:


                                       216
                      the renunciation of wealth


   “There,” Martin kept exclaiming, “there is someone to imitate.” He held
   that our generation was blessed in possessing such an example. For Pauli-
   nus, a rich man with great possessions, by selling all and giving to the poor
   [as Christ had asked the Rich Young Man to do in Matthew 19:21] has
   illustrated Our Lord’s saying. He has proved that what is impossible with
   man is possible with God (Matthew 19:26).22
As we have seen, Ambrose also was thrilled.23
    For persons such as Martin and Ambrose (as later for Augustine), Paulinus
instantly became, in the words of Dennis Trout, his most skilled recent biogra-
pher, a “Verbal Icon.”24 He was a living reminder that the story of Jesus and the
Rich Young Man could have a happy ending. Paulinus, a very large camel, had
indeed been able to pass through the eye of a needle by abandoning his fortune.
This was how Augustine presented his friend in the first book of the City of God:
“Paulinus noster: Our Paulinus . . . who, from being rich as rich can be, [ex opulen­
tissimo divite] made himself extremely poor.”25
    But the very starkness of this “Verbal Icon” is precisely what has rendered
Paulinus’s actual financial arrangements in the years after 394 opaque to the his-
torian. In the economic conditions of the later empire, to live up to an ascetic
promise to sell all was as cumbersome and as slow an operation as was the mobi-
lization of wealth that followed the promise of a senator such as Symmachus to
give splendid games. Paulinus had to confront the obstacles that faced any absen-
tee landowner forced to raise money quickly or to secure unaccustomed deliver-
ies of supplies. Whether this was crocodiles from the Nile, as for Symmachus, or
wine for the poor of Nola, for Paulinus, these ventures required constant atten-
tion and the support of friends. In 396 Paulinus wrote to Sulpicius Severus with
a request to give him help on the spot to ensure that old wine he had stored at
Narbonne was transported to Nola: “for my freedmen, slaves and brothers have
let me down.”26
    But at least on one point the fears of Ausonius were proved to be ill-founded.
The ancestral lands of the Paulini did not fall entirely into the hands of foreign
carpetbaggers. Paulinus may not have put them up for sale before offering first
choice to his kinsfolk and neighbors. We have no account of exactly what Pauli-
nus did in 394, but a text from the sixth-­century Christian East gives us some
idea of what may have occurred. When Thomas, a great landowner of Armenian
royal descent, decided to get rid of his properties, he
   sent a message to the magnates of the district, his neighbors, and stated
   that, if they were willing they could buy his lands which bordered upon
   theirs, and, if they were not willing, they were not to be annoyed if strang-
   ers came in and bought them.27


                                        217
                                   chapter 13


    Paulinus and his agents may well have done the same. In Aquitaine, it appears
that another branch of the Paulini (the descendants of Paulinus’s brother) sur-
vived into the late sixth century. We may meet the last of his line in the 560s, in
the person of Leontius, the bishop of Bordeaux. As described by the Italian poet
Venantius Fortunatus, Leontius had refurbished the villa at Preignac where Pau-
linus’s brother had lived 150 years before. Lying at ease in old Roman style on his
stibadium couch, Leontius looked out over flowing pools filled with fish set in a
landscape of wheatfields, which waved in the breeze like heavy blond hair.28 Ve-
nantius had read his Ausonius. In the world of poetry, at least, Ausonius’s idyllic
landscape remained unchanged. It had not been destroyed by Paulinus’s isolated
act of renunciation. It was still there, in the hands of comfort-­loving persons with
classical tastes. Even if he was a bishop, Leontius belonged to a class that had con-
tinued to appreciate the poetry of Ausonius and of those, such as Venantius, who
imitated him. Though ruled by Frankish kings, they wished to be thought of as
living like Roman gentlemen.
    Yet the unwinding of so much property would have been a noteworthy event,
not unlike the massive confiscations that scythed the fortunes of the aristocracy
at times of civil war or in the wake of trials for sorcery or treason. A grim edict of
the emperor Valentinian I, issued in 369, shows what was at stake:
   If any person . . . should suffer the sentence of proscription, an investiga-
   tion of his property shall be very thoroughly made. . . . A full inventory . . .
   shall include the extent and character of the rural property . . . what is the
   charm and attractiveness of the various parts; what is the equipment of the
   buildings and landholdings; how many slaves . . . are contained on the es-
   tate, and in what skills such slaves have been trained . . . the amount of gold
   and silver, clothing and jewelry . . . and what is found in the storerooms.29
Such was the wealth Paulinus had abandoned, in 394, in a dramatic act of auto-­
proscription.
    Yet, despite the apparent trenchancy of Paulinus’s renunciation, things moved
slowly. Money seems to have continued to come in to Paulinus from his estates
for many years. As we shall see, in the next chapter, he used this money to fund
ambitious building projects at the shrine of Saint Felix at Cimitile. These projects
lasted until at least 404, if not later. Paulinus became bishop of Nola in around
408. He died only a year after Augustine, in 431. By then, Paulinus of Bordeaux
(as Ausonius wished him to be) had become saint Paulinus of Nola.
    Nola was not a place of exile for Paulinus. Nor was it a hiding place, as the
hinterland of Spain might have been. To move to Nola was to move close to
the center of a very ancient world. Nola lay near the Via Appia as it crossed the
mountains of Samnium, toward Brindisi and the East. Travelers who made their
way along the tax spine of the later empire, which joined Rome to Africa, would

                                         218
                       the renunciation of wealth


also have found it easy to visit Nola. African bishops on their way to the court
often stopped by to visit Paulinus at Nola and to pass on to him the letters of
Augustine.30
    Nor was Nola a new city for Paulinus. The shrine of Felix had been known to
him since his youth, as it lay close to properties owned by his family. At the age
of twenty six (in 380–­81), Paulinus had served as senatorial governor of Campa-
nia. As governor, he had added a porch to the shrine and had improved the road
that led to it.31 Nor did Paulinus limit his gifts to Nola. Like Symmachus, his
family had contacts with many towns. In 404 he gave a brand-­new basilica to the
Christians of Fundi, on the Appian Way as it approached Rome. He spoke of his
gift as if it were the action of a civic benefactor, such as Symmachus would have
recognized. He had built a basilica for the local Christians “as a token of my love
for the city and in memory of the estate my family used to own there.”32 Alto-
gether, Paulinus had chosen to settle in a region heavy with memories of his own
family. His renunciation had not led him to flee his homeland but to return to it
on different terms.
    Yet Paulinus’s settlement at Nola should not be seen only as an example of the
untroubled continuity within the Christian church of the lifestyle of a senatorial
benefactor and patron. Despite the presence of family lands and the continued
pressure of social expectations and of habits of thought inherited from his sena-
torial background (indeed, one suspects, because of the challenge presented by
such continuities), Paulinus went out of his way to ensure that he would not be
mistaken for his old self. He did this by emphasizing his new poverty.
    But what sort of poverty would this be? It is understandable that modern
scholars, when confronted with Paulinus, should stress the continuities of his
life. Revenues continued to trickle in from his estates. He continued to assume
that his clients in Aquitaine would still obey him and be rewarded for their ser-
vices. When he set about rebuilding the shrine of Felix at Cimitile, he showed a
“proprietary sensibility” worthy of the builder of any great villa. These traits
make us doubt that Paulinus had become “poor” in any obvious sense.33 Modern
parallels with movie stars who insist on living the simple life have made us skepti-
cal when dealing with great senators turned monks. The wicked phrase “designer
poverty” springs to mind.34
    But to be too skeptical is to ignore what we saw in the last chapter—­the very
specific semiotics of wealth in a late Roman society. We have seen that to be rich
was not simply to have an income. It was to advertise the fact, all the time, in as
assertive and as visible a manner as possible. To possess and to show splendor—­
éclat—­was what being rich was all about. To be poor (whether as an unsuccessful
professor, an impoverished country gentleman, or a pauper—­it was all the same)
was to lose this éclat. Once one’s “little light of glory” dwindled (to use Ausonius’s
telling phrase), one sunk into a state of dim anonymity.35

                                        219
                                  chapter 13


    Splendor—­éclat—­was the key term in the definition of wealth. Splendor as-
sumed income. But the practice of splendor gave little thought to financial mat-
ters in themselves. Rather, it had everything to do with how one looked, how one
dressed, how one ate, how one traveled, and, last but not least, how often one
bathed. Wealth sheathed the bodies of the rich with a set of unmistakable signals
of prosperity and good fortune. By contrast, with Paulinus and Therasia, that
splendor was well and truly dowsed.
    It was in terms of a retreat from splendor that Paulinus communicated his
new lifestyle to his spiritual friends. In a language of fierce precision, he took
apart and inverted, at every point, the social semiotics of the fourth-­century rich.
In describing himself and his fellow ascetics, Paulinus left a memorable portrait
of “poverty” not as “unwealth” but as “anti-­wealth.” The state of anti-­wealth was
as dramatically lodged in the body through ascetic practice, as the state of wealth
had been lodged in the body, through a privileged lifestyle.
    For this reason, Paulinus lingered on the strangeness of the group of men with
whom he had chosen to identify himself at Cimitile. His description is like the
negative of a photograph. From its dark patches, we can print out the sharp bril-
liance of wealth as it was usually displayed by persons of Paulinus’s background.
He and his fellow monks no longer lived in great villas. Instead, they gathered
in cramped cells that overlooked the shrine of Felix at Cimitile. They were not
shielded from the world by an entourage of dependents. They lived in close con-
tact with the drab masses of the poor gathered in the hostel-­portico below.36
When they traveled, they no longer used great coaches. Many walked all the way.
This is what the monk Victor did when he carried letters between Paulinus in
southern Italy and Sulpicius Severus in Aquitaine, covering hundreds of miles
every year on foot like “a two legged post horse.”37 They wore strikingly simple
dress, dark, coarse, and drained of all color—­the antithesis to the brilliant poly-
chromy of the dress of the late Roman upper classes. Their hair was roughly cut.
It was more like the scalped hair of a Roman convict than the oiled ringlets of
a late Roman nobleman.38 They ate plain food with a minimum of wine from
earthenware and wooden vessels: no silver was to be seen. (Paulinus knew all too
well what silverware meant as an assertion of wealth on the tables of his peers: he
was more resolute in excluding it than was Augustine, who retained silver spoons
at the bishop’s table in Hippo.) Cooks of peasant stock provided “rustic” food:
“beans pounded with millet, in order that I might learn more quickly to lay aside
the refined choosiness of a senator.”39
    “All of us have pallid faces.”40 Paulinus and his fellow monks showed their diet
in their gait. They adopted the grave, slow movements of those for whom plenti-
ful food was no longer available as a source of energy to fuel the firm tread—­
the proud incessus—­of the nobleman. Above all, they were enveloped in the dull
smell of the underbathed. This was the sure mark of poverty in the ancient world.

                                        220
                      the renunciation of wealth


It always carried with it a disquieting reminder of the ultimate victory of the
stench of death. This was the exact opposite of the sweet, buoyant smell of life
carried by the bodies of the rich as they emerged well washed and well perfumed
from the magic, energizing world of their private bathhouses.
    For Paulinus, it was utterly appropriate that this dim, unscented company
should have come to be assembled around the tomb of Saint Felix. Felix had
been a bishop of Nola toward the end of the third century. As Paulinus portrayed
him in the annual poems he composed to celebrate the saint’s festival, Felix was
the mirror image of Paulinus. He had been the son of a rich immigrant to Nola.
Felix had not even been a martyr; he had faced torture as a priest, but he died in
his bed as a bishop, a poor man. He had surrendered his share of the family prop-
erty to a greedy brother. He ended up cultivating a rented garden. Felix was what
Paulinus wished to be. For Felix had lived “that form of life which was the image
of that which the Lord Christ had lived on earth: once a rich man but now
poor.”41


                                     Abjectio

                         The Imitation of Christ

Paulinus’s notion of poverty as anti-­wealth was so cogent to his like-­minded con-
temporaries because its distinguishing marks were grounded in intimate identi-
fication with the person of Christ.42 He rooted his identity and that of his friends
in the drama of a High God come down to earth. As he wrote to Sulpicius
Severus in 400:
   Let us remember that we are the limbs of Him Who conquered when con-
   demned, Who prevailed by yielding, Who rose again to glory by falling
   into death, Who has ensured that we will rise up in resurrection because of
   the headlong drop of his Crucifixion. . . . This is our God and there shall be
   no other in comparison to Him (Baruch 3:36).43
    But what Christ was this? The Christ of Paulinus was very much the Christ of
a particular generation. One might even say that He was a Christ whose image
in Christian devotion was calculated to resonate with Christians of a particular
class faced by a particular theological dilemma. Let us look at this more closely.
    The figure of Christ that had emerged in the piety of intransigent Nicene
Christians in the Latin West was unusually charged with paradox. The victory
of their party had heightened a tension in attitudes toward the person of Christ.
The Gospel accounts had shown Christ to have been at times weak and helpless.
Yet, for the Nicene party, He was also God. He was not some secondary figure

                                        221
                                  chapter 13


whose weaknesses were what one might expect from a being who was not truly
divine, as the Nicene ultras believed (often incorrectly) that the Arians had im-
plied. Thus, Nicene Christians faced an acute tension between the idea of Christ
as an unprepossessing human being and the idea of Christ Who was also the
“fullness of the Divinity.” The answer to this imaginative dilemma was given by
Ambrose of Milan and then by Paulinus, who followed Ambrose: God Himself
had decided “for us and for our salvation” to expose Himself wholeheartedly, in
Christ, to the fullness of human weakness.44
    It is important to seize the specifically late Roman nuance of this solution.
The Christ of Ambrose and of Paulinus was by no means the humanized Christ
of later medieval and modern piety. He was very much a late Roman Christ. His
humility was all the more stunning because it was based upon a conscious act of
self-­effacement on the part of the majestic God whom He continued to be. The
splendor of God had dimmed itself in an awesome gesture of condescension. If,
in the late Roman social imagination, power and wealth were things that had to
be asserted in order to exist, then no abjectio, no “stepping down,” could be more
stunning than the “stepping down” by which God Himself had abandoned, for a
time, His assertion of power. Christ, as God, had been the aristocrat of aristo-
crats, the wealthiest of the wealthy. Yet out of His immense goodness and of His
own free will, He had renounced this wealth. He had veiled the éclat of His di-
vinity in the drab colors of the human condition. But this éclat was still there. In
the words of a hymn composed by Ambrose, which made its way into the liturgy
of the Latin churches: Christ emerged from His human birth like “a giant of two-­
fold nature.”45 He confronted the human race as a God and a poor man in one.
    The Christ of Paulinus was “poor” because He was a God who had hidden his
splendor through an act of mighty self-­effacement. “Humility” and “humble” are
words to which Paulinus returns incessantly when speaking of Christ. And by
“humble” Paulinus meant a posture to the world that was defined in more sharply
social terms than can be conveyed by the sentimental modern associations of
the word: to be humilis in the later Roman empire was to be, quite bluntly,
“unimportant.”46
    In this sense, Paulinus’s Christ was very much the Christ of the great marble
sarcophagi in which the Christian aristocrats of Rome, Spain, and southern Gaul
were buried at this time. In them, Christ appeared as a hauntingly muted figure.
He was far removed from the destitution and blatant poverty of a later medieval
Man of Sorrows. Rather, he stood with dignity before Pilate in a simple, well-­
folded robe. Yet it was precisely the total reticence of Christ’s stance that would
have weighed heavily with a late antique viewer. This was not the figure of an
ancient philosopher, complete with bristling beard and exposed torso, which ad-
vertised the philosopher’s active courage and sharp mind.47 Christ was not like
this. He was dressed in a plain robe that made no social assertion whatsoever. His

                                       222
                       the renunciation of wealth


glory rendered nondescript by His simple clothes, he stood before a Pilate whose
throne and dress were overburdened with emblems that represented the un-
tamed pride of a ruler of this world.48 This was the quiet God who had stepped
down to earth in Christ.
    It was an ominous contrast. It also meant that, like Christ, Paulinus and simi-
lar ascetics would not vanish from the earth. Like Christ, he would continue to
move among his fellows. Paulinus had no intention of becoming lost to the
world on a desert island, as had the monks who shocked Rutilius Namatianus
when he sailed past Capraria. Paulinus intended to stay around. Though sur-
rounded by monks who looked pointedly poor, his life at Cimitile was by no
means enclosed. It lay open to visitors from all over the West. And he did all this
in the very heart of traditional Roman Italy.49 Writing to Sulpicius Severus, Pau-
linus cited the current version of Isaiah 42:14: I have been silent, but surely I will
not always be silent. These were the words of God. As followers of Christ, His
poor could now echo these words: for “God is powerful, now, powerful to keep
silence in us also.”50 In such a way, a converted aristocrat and his circle, who had
carefully dismantled in themselves the strident denotators by which persons of
wealth, power, and status had stood out in the late Roman world, faced their
society as the bearers of a Christ equally shorn—­but only for the time being—­of
His majesty.




                                         223
                           Chapter 14
                           •••••
      Commercium spiritale: The spiritual exchange
       Paulinus of Nola and the Poetry of Wealth,
                       395–­408




    Marcus votum reddidit domno Felici sancto: Marcus has paid his vow
                         to the Lord Saint Felix

                        Wealth in a Votive Shrine

Between 395 and 408, Paulinus wrote a yearly poem for the festival of Saint Felix
of Nola. In these poems, he wished his readers to know that he had always been
destined to serve Saint Felix at his tomb. As a result, we tend to take very much
for granted Paulinus’s move to Campania and his taking up residence beside the
shrine of Felix at Cimitile—­the Cemetery—­on the outskirts of Nola. We assume
that, in arriving at Nola, in 395, Paulinus had realized his goal in life. This was “to
end his days at Nola, serving the altar of a village saint.”1 All that followed were
“idyllic years of pastoral.”2
   A series of outstanding recent studies of the life of Paulinus (by Dennis
Trout), of the networks created by his correspondence (by Sigrid Mratschek),
and of the spiritual content of his letters (by Catherine Conybeare)3 have shown
that this was not at all the case. They have recaptured the skill and the pertinacity
with which Paulinus established himself as a leading figure in southern Italy. His
correspondence ensured that his voice was heard by select groups of friends both
in Gaul and in Africa.
   This work has revealed very clearly how much of Paulinus the grandee sur-
vived in Paulinus the convert. Paulinus might dim his former status in a drastic act
of abjectio. He might strip away the marks of high status in order to imitate the
awesome condescension of Christ. But, for all this, he continued to enjoy the su-
preme privilege of a nobleman—­the freedom to do what he wished with his life.
   Nothing shows this more clearly than his attitude toward his own priesthood.
Ordinary persons, when ordained, were expected to remain with the commu-

                                         224
                           the poetry of wealth


nity that had chosen them. For at that time, the priesthood was not an ecclesi-
astical office that could be practiced anywhere, once conferred. Ordination was
ordination to a specific local Christian community and to that community only.
Priests ordained in one city were not encouraged to move to another.
    Paulinus blithely ignored this restriction. He was ordained at Barcelona, but
he left the city within a few months, taking his priesthood and his wealth with
him. As a result, Paulinus received a frigid reception from the bishop of Rome,
Siricius, when he arrived in Italy. Siricius had a high sense of the esprit de corps
of an urban clergy. They were to stay with their bishop, just as officials in the
imperial bureaucracy were supposed to stay in their department. Like officials,
they were expected to work their way up a clear ladder of promotion. Siricius
had no love of freelance clergymen with ascetic pretensions. Ten years before, in
386, he had helped drive Jerome out of Rome. Despite his spectacular renuncia-
tion, seen through the eyes of Siricius, Paulinus looked all too like the eccentric
Priscillian.4
    Even Paulinus’s monastic establishment in Nola would have struck contem-
poraries as a classic example of an unchurched, household Christianity. It was
largely a family affair. Paulinus may well have inherited a villa in the neighbor-
hood of the shrine of Felix; he turned this into a monastery building.5 But the
boundary between this establishment and the outside world was unclear. Thera-
sia, his wife, had accompanied him to Cimitile. We know nothing of her actions.
This may simply have been because her presence at the side of her husband was
taken for granted, as would have been the case in aristocratic circles. At a time
when clerical pens were busy all over the Mediterranean denouncing the dangers
of cohabitation between male and female ascetics among more commonplace
Christians, the nobleman Paulinus’s continent cohabitation with Therasia was
an open secret no one dared challenge.6
    We also know nothing of the role of the bishop of Nola. There is no evidence
that Paulinus served him as a priest. The bonding of an upper-­class clergyman
with the populus of a city, which had meant so much to Ambrose, appears to have
meant little to Paulinus. A former landowner to the last, his poems dealt not with
townsfolk but with peasants. Even when we make allowances for the limitations
of Paulinus’s writings as evidence (for each poem and letter was written for a
highly specific purpose), the omission of a wife, a bishop, and a city are signifi-
cant silences.
    At some time after 408, Paulinus became bishop of Nola. He steered his com-
munity through the Gothic invasion of 410–­11. At that time, Saint Felix was
said to have appeared on the walls of the city.7 Paulinus wrote yet another poem
of thanks to Felix. It spoke of the inhabitants of Nola set free at last to till the
neighboring fields as the Gothic army withdrew. He may have bought them off.8
In 419 he was brought in as arbitrator during a disputed papal election. When he

                                        225
                                   chapter 14


died, in 431, he died as a good bishop was expected to die, mourned by all the
citizens of Nola:
   For not only Christians, but even Jews and pagans, came together for the
   last rites of Lord Paulinus. . . . With a single voice, together with us, all be-
   wailed the patron, defender and guardian snatched from them by death.9
    But this last scene (from a text written in the 430s) merely shows how much
the world had changed since 395. By then a bishop was expected to be a local
figure and a patron of his city. In 395, however, Paulinus was not a “patron, de-
fender and guardian” to anyone anywhere. What would have struck contempo-
raries was the exact opposite. It was the freedom to move around enjoyed by
Paulinus as an aristocrat. He was not tied down to any city, to any church, or to
any conventional public role. He did it his way. And nowhere was this more ap-
parent than in the manner in which he chose to dispose of his wealth. He de-
cided that his wealth should go to building up the shrine of Saint Felix.
    Paulinus’s decision should not be taken for granted. Many options existed in
the minds of fourth-­century Christians when they thought of the way in which
their wealth could be used for pious purposes. As we have seen, when he an-
nounced his conversion Paulinus claimed to follow the outlines of the story of
the Rich Young Man. He had followed the command of Christ to sell all. But
there remained many ways in which to give to the poor. Not every rich convert
was expected to spend his or her money on the cult of a local saint, as Paulinus
would do.
    In order to justify his decision, Paulinus fell back on an ancient pattern of
pious giving that was already well-­known in Christian and Jewish circles. Pauli-
nus insisted on treating his wealth as a gift from God. This wealth had been pre-
served for him by Saint Felix at the time of his brother’s execution when he him-
self had faced the threat of confiscation: You [Felix] . . . removed the sword from
my throat and the treasury officials from my estate. You kept me and my posses-
sions in trust for Christ the Lord.”10 Preserved by God through Felix, Paulinus’s
wealth was given back to God by being spent on Felix. The income derived from
the sale of Paulinus and Therasia’s estates was not “scattered” among the poor in
the regions where these estates lay. It was not sent to distant monasteries in Egypt
and the Holy Land (as many Roman aristocrats had begun to do). It was not
spent on founding hospitals. Nor was it sent to the distant frontiers, so as to
ransom captives (as Ambrose had done). Rather, the wealth of Paulinus flowed,
slowly but surely, toward Cimitile. Much of this wealth was frozen in buildings
that made visible the splendor of saint Felix.
    Paulinus’s choice to see his wealth as votive wealth offered back to God was
characteristic of him. It was both grand and humble at the same time. In the first


                                         226
                           the poetry of wealth


place, to give in this way marked Paulinus’s actions off from those of the usual
urban benefactor. Unlike the urban benefactor, Paulinus did not give his wealth
from an unshakable height so as to prove his exalted standing. He gave so as to
show deep abasement. He insisted that his wealth was not his own; it lay in the
hands of God.
    Nor did these gifts spring from a previous relationship to any earthly place or
group. The upper-­class residents of Beneventum whose “undefeated hearts” had
impressed Symmachus when they rallied to repair their city after an earthquake
had done so out of a loyalty to their hometown that stretched back over gener­
ations. Symmachus himself had shown “the fine ardor of a Roman soul” as part
of the longstanding dialogue between his family and the Roman people. By con-
trast, Paulinus’s giving was tilted toward heaven. It was part of a timeless dialogue
between himself, God, and Saint Felix. No matter how impressive the shrine at
Cimitile may have been, the “people” whose “favor” Paulinus sought were invis-
ible people. They were God and his saints.
    And it was a dialogue that was open to all. As we have seen (in the case of the
mosaic panels in the basilica of Aquileia and in churches and synagogues else-
where), both in Judaism and in Christianity votive giving came in all sizes. It was
not only for the very wealthy.
    This had been particularly true of the shrine of Felix. Nola lay where two
zones met, where the fertile Terra di Lavoro behind Naples came close to the hill
villages of Samnium. For at least two generations before Paulinus brought his
wealth to the shrine, the tomb of Felix had been a center of considerable, low-­
profile religious activity. Large numbers of graffiti have been discovered at the
shrine, most of which take the form of mere scratches. They are the sign of crowds
of non-­literate pilgrims, anxious to leave their mark beside “the Lord Felix.”11
    An aura of sacred giving reached far into the surrounding countryside. Up in
the hills to the east ranged the great herds of pigs that supplied part of the an­
nona civica for the Roman people. Felix was believed to protect these herds. Prize
pigs were dedicated to him from as far away as Beneventum. Some were so fat
that it was a miracle in itself that they could make it to the shrine.12 On arrival,
they were slaughtered in fulfillment of vows made at home to Felix. The poor
would gather excitedly at the promise of yet another meal of votive pork.
    Paulinus lingered on these incidents in his poems. They added a bucolic
touch to his description of the cult of Felix. They also show that Paulinus was not
the only donor to the shrine. While his generosity was striking, it was not unique.
It followed a pattern of giving laid down by thousands of humbler persons with
whose piety he identified wholeheartedly.13 Though not couched in the lan-
guage of poetry, the graffiti at the shrine of Felix gave the same message as did
Paulinus:


                                        227
                                   chapter 14


   Marcus / votum reddidit / domno Felici s[anc]to.14
   (Marcus has repaid his vow to the Lord Saint Felix.)
   Let us see how Paulinus repaid his vow.


       Mea gesta . . . Felicisque manu: My deeds . . . by the hand of Felix

                         The Building of a Shrine

Archaeological studies of Cimitile—­best represented in the publications of Carlo
Ebanista and in the definitive monograph of Tomas Lehmann—­have taken us by
surprise.15 They show the speed and the ambition of Paulinus’s building plans.
Within seven years of Paulinus’s arrival, the modest shrine of Felix was trans-
formed. If ever wealth left its footprints on a site outside a city—­as it had done in
the late Roman villas of Spain and Aquitaine—­it was in Paulinus’s Basilica Nova
(New Basilica) and in the adjacent buildings that came to surround the tomb of
Felix. The new basilica measured 115 by 66 feet. It was larger than the reception
hall of all but the greatest late Roman villa. Its pavement (made up of sections
of multicolored marble) has been judged, by Tomas Lehmann, to be the most
exquisite example of opus sectile in its time.16 Marbles of eleven different colors
were gathered from all over the Roman world for the columns, for the pavement,
and for the casings of the shrine of Saint Felix itself. To gather together so much
precious stone implied not only great wealth but potentia—­the working of pa-
tronage networks and the claiming of privileges in a manner similar to that with
which Symmachus had assembled the wild animals and horses needed for his
son’s games. Paulinus seems to have had access to government deposits of col-
umns and unused blocks, as well as the use of government means of transport.17
   The new basilica ended in a triconch apse (a great apse rendered sinuous by
the inclusion, within its curve, of two side apses). It was a unique experiment
that echoed the solemn dining halls of contemporary villas. The former apse of
the old shrine of Felix was torn down to give a free view from the new basilica
into the tomb itself. Joining the two buildings lay a small but exquisite court-
yard. Everything that made a villa a place of splendor and delight was to be found
there in miniature. A covered portico made up of many-­colored columns shel-
tered a row of bright paintings. The entrance portico of the villa of Paulinus’s
ancestor at Burgus (Bourg, on the estuary of the Garonne) had contained similar
frescoes. These frescoes had shown the ancestors of the Pontii Paulini. In the
courtyard at Cimitile, by contrast, scenes from the Old Testament made plain
that Paulinus now viewed the saints of old as his true ancestors. Each painting was


                                         228
                           the poetry of wealth


accompanied by a poetic inscription, much as both Symmachus and Ausonius
had placed poems beneath portraits of their own fathers.18
    In the center of the courtyard were well-­kept gardens and fountains filled
with splashing water, which showed that Paulinus, like any other owner of a
Roman villa, had made himself lord of the region’s water. The recently discovered
fragment of an exquisite marble basin echoed in miniature the great basin for
ablutions that stood in the atrium of the shrine of Saint Peter at Rome.19
    Altogether, the rebuilt shrine at Cimitile was Paulinus’s dream villa. The
green lawns and the shaded garden paths that led to the church; the splashing
water of fountains in a little jewel of a courtyard; the solemn hall of the basilica,
sheathed in marble and lit by great candelabra that cast pools of light surrounded
by opulent shadows (as in the dining rooms of the rich)–­these were the signs of
late Roman villa architecture at its most luxurious.20
    Paulinus had drawn across the former, assertive brilliance of his aristocratic
persona an almost uncanny veil of dimness. But his buildings still spoke of the
splendor—­the éclat—­of great wealth. Altogether, we should not underestimate
what Kim Bowes has called “the audacity of his Nolan foundation.”21 We can
detect in all this splendor a “Spanish symptom.” Like the villas of Castille, Estra-
madura, and southern Portugal with their ambitious mausolea, the rebuilt shrine
of Felix was to be Paulinus’s monument and eventually his own mausoleum.
    The wealthy had always been aware of the adrenalin of social self-­assertion
that went into the act of building their villas. Only a decade or so earlier—­and
only thirty miles away from Nola, on the bay of Naples—­Symmachus had been
tempted by an architect’s plan for a new, curving portico that would mark the
entrance to one of his villas. He wrote of it to a friend with the coy reticence we
have learned (from the example of Ausonius) to expect when the rich spoke in
person about their own wealth. His friend must not “bring upon me the itch to
build . . . you are positively pushing me to act against my sense of restraint—­my
verecundia.”22
    By invoking verecundia, Symmachus invoked a precious Roman social virtue.
In an aristocrat, verecundia involved restraining the urge to make a splash, lest it
awaken the envy of peers and the suspicion of emperors who were always on the
lookout (in a time of frequent usurpations) for overmighty subjects.23
    No such reticence held back Paulinus. For he did not build for himself; he
built for God. He also encouraged his friend Sulpicius Severus, who had settled in
a villa at Primuliacum (somewhere between Narbonne and Aquitaine), to do the
same. At Primuliacum, Sulpicius Severus built two basilicas side by side joined
together by a baptistery. As at Cimitile, the walls of these buildings were covered
with images explained by inscriptions in verse. At Primuliacum, both Sulpicius
Severus and Paulinus were represented as founders. Their portraits (in mosaic or


                                        229
                                 chapter 14


fresco) flanked an image of the recently deceased Saint Martin. The essentially
private nature of the complex at Primuliacum could not have been more forcibly
expressed. This was Sulpicius’s own building, placed under the protection of his
very own saint. As in Nola, so in Primuliacum: no bishop played a role in the
building project.
   We know so much about the buildings at Primuliacum and at Cimitile be-
cause Paulinus advised his friend Severus on the decoration of the buildings
at Primuliacum. He also described to Severus and to other friends every step of
his own construction at the shrine of Felix.24 Yet, although Paulinus shone as a
builder, he was careful to present himself as humble in the sight of God. The
sensitive studies of Maria Kiely and of Gaëlle Herbert de la Portbarré-­Viard have
recently shown that Paulinus was like no other Latin Christian author before
him in drenching every detail of his new building in a torrent of mystic words.
The careful and often high-­handed process of building a new shrine was pre-
sented as echoing, step by step, what Paulinus wished God to do in rebuilding
his own dilapidated soul.25 In his poems, Paulinus presented himself as passive in
the hands of God, the Master Builder. God had worked on him just as he, Pauli-
nus, had worked on every detail of the shrine of Felix—­right down to the scruffy
vegetable garden once filled with debris and with old huts that he turned (to
the understandable annoyance of their occupants, whom he evicted without a
qualm) into well-­cut lawns to grace the inner courtyard of his shrine.26 Rebuilt
by God, Paulinus built for Felix. Describing the buildings to a visiting bishop,
Paulinus spoke of his building activities as: Mea gesta . . . Felicisque manu: “My
deeds . . . by the hand of Felix.”27
   We sense in such a remark a total absence of the inhibitions that were im-
posed on secular noblemen by the centuries-­long discipline of an aristocratic
peer group. Symmachus had to pretend to be embarrassed by spending so much
money on the porticoes of his villa. Not so Paulinus. We are dealing with a phe-
nomenon that accounts in no small part for the vividness of the age: the fierce
sense of agency that was released when a convert such as Paulinus stepped clear
of the restraint imposed by his peer group and placed himself and his wealth in
the hands of God. He could build as extravagantly as he wished for Felix.


                Commercium spiritale: The spiritual exchange

Settled in Nola with his wealth dedicated to the Lord Felix, Paulinus was free to
linger in his letters and poems on the subsequent, otherworldly destiny of his
riches. It needed a poet such as Paulinus to rise to such a theme. In speaking of
the transfer of wealth from earth to heaven, he had to break the imaginative bar-
riers imposed by common sense.28 He had to describe the joining of two incom-

                                       230
                           the poetry of wealth


mensurables. Wealth and heaven, instinctively thought of as utter opposites, had
to be shown to be continuous.
    When speaking the language of poetic paradox, Paulinus deliberately swung
between the denigration of wealth in this world and intimations of the incom-
mensurable, unimagined glory associated with the same wealth once it was stored
in heaven. By writing in this way, he distilled the sensibility of an age. The ability
to contrast and then to connect opposites was deeply embedded in the late an-
tique aesthetic sense. Each dramatic image was expected to conjure up its antith-
esis. For an early Byzantine Christian, to hear of the dry and empty pit into which
Joseph had been lowered by his brothers was to “trigger” in a subliminal manner
the image of a baptismal pool, filled to the brim with living waters.29 For a pious
pagan to read of the most obscene, surreal actions of the gods of ancient mythol-
ogy was to be reminded—­by an instinctive reversal of the mind—­of the exact
antithesis of such disturbing images: it was to catch an echo from the very dome
of heaven of the gods in their transcendent glory.30
    Paulinus did the same. Opposites changed into each other as if by magic. The
labile “slime” of wealth on earth became solid treasure in heaven. “Brittle stones”
formed a staircase of the mind that reached beyond the stars.31 In his poems on
wealth and heaven, Paulinus emerged as the Wordsworth of his times:
   The song would speak
   Of that interminable building reared
   By observation of affinities
   In objects where no brotherhood exists
   To passive minds.32
   But in the case of Paulinus, lest anyone think that “that interminable build-
ing” was no more than the creation of a poet’s fancy, they needed only to enter
the new basilica of Cimitile. In its scented depths, where the golden roof waved
like a great sea in the flickering light of innumerable oil lamps, they could see
with their own eyes that a drop of imagined treasure had, indeed, fallen back
from heaven to earth in the unearthly beauty of a Christian shrine.33
   The message was clear. Wealth—­“worldly” wealth, wealth that stood for all
that was most brittle in this world, most unspiritual, most stubbornly rebellious
to the will of God, and most heavy with death—­could be transmuted through
the act of pious giving into all that was most glittering and glorious in an eternal
world beyond the stars. This was what Paulinus told his friend Severus, in the
summer of 404, as they discussed the building of their respective shrines in Italy
and Aquitaine: “Videte commercium spiritale—­look and see, we have here an ex-
change—­an exchange taking place in the very world of the spirit.”34
   The notion of commercium spiritale (or spirituale) was central to the thought
world of Paulinus. In order to recapture the imaginative weight of such a notion

                                         231
                                  chapter 14


we must remember that, in Latin usage, the word commercium—­from which our
own word “commerce” is derived—­did not carry with it the brash and calculat-
ing overtones that “commerce” and “exchange” now evoke. Rather, the word
commercium evoked any form of profitable bonding. It conjured up the idea
of fruitful reciprocity. More generally (to use the well-­chosen words of Carole
Newlands in her study of Statius’s Silvae), commercium implied “a harmony
within duality.”35
   Thus, the word commercium came to Paulinus already charged with expecta-
tions of “harmony within duality.” Such harmony pointed to a world redeemed.
Paulinus used the word in relation to pious giving. But the notion of a spiritual
exchange through pious giving was only a special case. Behind the commercium
by which earthly wealth flowed upward to heaven lay the decisive joining of
heaven and earth brought about by the coming of Christ. The incarnation of
Christ had been the foundational act of “exchange.” It had rendered possible and
thinkable all other forms of contact between God and humanity. Paulinus wrote
this to Ausonius as early as 394: “God has clothed himself in us, entering into
eternal links of exchange between mankind and God.”36
   In the words of Catherine Conybeare, through the Incarnation of Christ
“each nature—­man and God—­laid down its essential unlikeness.”37 For late an-
tique persons, the stark contrast between human and divine, between material
and spiritual, between body and soul, and between the heavy, turbulent earth
and the serenity of the star-­filled world beyond the moon had been fixed compo-
nents in their imaginative universe. No joining could have been more improb­
able and no paradox more audacious than to bring these antitheses together in
such a way that God joined humankind and base, earthly wealth joined the dis-
tant purity of the heavens.
   Paulinus wrote to make gloriously transparent to the imagination of his read-
ers the invisible exchange by which their own wealth might make its way to
heaven:
   For this hope does not abruptly deprive us of our possessions. If it prevails
   and faith conquers, it changes for the better and transforms our wealth
   according to God’s law, making it no longer brittle but eternal, removing it
   from earth and setting it in heaven.38


          Spiritual Exchange and the Care of the Poor: Rome, 396

It is in this paradox-­laden language of exchange that Paulinus described the rela-
tions between rich and poor. In order to do justice to this theme he seized upon
a memorable occasion in Rome. In 396 the Christian senator Pammachius gave


                                       232
                           the poetry of wealth


a lavish feast to the poor of Rome on the anniversary of the death of his wife,
Paulina.39 The entire courtyard of the basilica of Saint Peter’s at Rome was filled
with tables. There was nothing new about this practice; Christians had always
celebrated the memory of their dead with banqueting. Now Christian aristocrats
offered yet bigger and better feasts. Only a few years previously, the great Petro-
nius Probus had died. The great Anician had received an ostentatious Christian
burial in a large mausoleum that abutted the apse of the basilica of Saint Peter’s.
This mausoleum included a mensa—­a table for the feasting of the poor on the
day of the commemoration of Probus’s death—­that was so grand that it was later
believed to have been the mensa set up by Saint Peter himself.40
    One should add that not everyone in Rome was enchanted by that occasion.
Symmachus refused to attend Probus’s funeral. His frank view of the great Chris-
tian senator was that
   it is a law of courtesy that, for those for whom one has had little esteem
   and from whom one has been distant, one can offer not the testimony of
   grief, but, at least, the polite gesture of keeping one’s opinion to oneself.41
    But Christians were duly impressed. An aristocrat such as Probus set a new
standard of magnificence for the traditional memorial banquet. In celebrating
the memory of his wife, Pammachius could not hope to outshine Probus. But
the literary brilliance of his friend Paulinus made up for what the occasion lacked
in material splendor. Paulinus turned a routine act of Christian piety into a high
moment of commercium. By feeding the poor on the occasion of his wife’s death,
Pammachius caused the incommensurable worlds of heaven and earth to come
together.
    In doing this, Paulinus placed his own, poetic stamp on a well-­established
Christian practice. Like any other Early Christian memorial occasion, Pamma-
chius’s banquet had been given for the refrigerium—­the refreshing—­of the soul
of Paulina. On such occasions the living and the dead had always been thought
to be joined to each other through a pious feast. Paulinus, however, made clear
exactly how this joining happened. The feeding of the poor made the invisible
event in heaven visible on earth. By laying on the banquet, Pammachius “formed
anew the blood-­drained bodies of the needy.”42 But this was not simply an act of
charity, carried out on earth. It was an action that mirrored heaven on earth. The
pink flush of good cheer that crept over the diners as they ate and drank “dou-
bled” with satisfactory exactness the unimaginable refreshment of Paulina’s soul
in the other world.
   For Christ’s hand poured over her the gifts which you expended on the
   poor, as in the blink of an eye (1 Corinthians 15:51–­52) that earthly food
   was transformed into heavenly nourishment. All the money which you


                                        233
                                   chapter 14


   cheerfully gave, pouring it from your laden hands into the twin palms of
   the recipients, was deposited in the bosom of a rejoicing Lord by angels
   who intercepted it in flight, to be restored to you [in Heaven].43

    It is revealing that Paulinus (by writing “in the blink of an eye”) seems to have
almost instinctively applied to the process of the transformation of Pammachi-
us’s wealth into treasure in heaven the phrase with which Saint Paul described
the onset of the greatest transformation of all—­the final climax of the commer­
cium between God and humanity: the resurrection of the dead. By being turned
into alms for the poor, dead wealth had been redeemed and brought to life.
    As Paulinus presented it to Pammachius, the refrigerium of Paulina was an
event shot through with the dizzying paradox of a joining of heaven and earth.
But we should also note that the splendid memorial banquet was a very staid
occasion. The poor of the church sat in orderly rows, filling the courtyard outside
the great, gold-­roofed basilica.44 They held out both hands to receive their gifts
of coin, straight from the right hand of Pammachius. Their thankful prayers re-
sounded over the city like the well-­organized acclamations that echoed in the
Circus Maximus and the Colosseum.

   What a good, tumultuous roar to shake the City. . . . O Rome, you would
   not need to fear the threats made against you in the Apocalypse, if your
   senators always gave games such as yours, Pammachius.45

    In Paulinus’s opinion, Pammachius had provided a Christian answer to the
spectacles for which Symmachus was already making preparations and which he
would eventually lavish on the Roman people in honor of the praetorship of his
son, Memmius in 401.
    We must keep a sense of proportion when faced by these daring comparisons.
There was no chance that Pammachius’s feeding of the poor could be regarded as
in any way a real replacement for the great games of Rome. What mattered for
Pammachius was not the overall size of the ceremony nor the extent of his out-
lays: compared with 2,000 pounds of gold (which was sufficient to support
130,000 recipients of the annona for a year) spent on crocodiles, gladiators, and
silk robes for star charioteers, Pammachius’s banquet for the poor was a trivial
matter. But we should not underestimate the social message of Paulinus’s de-
scription of the banquet. Pammachius had not scattered alms to a heaving sea
of faceless beggars. Rather, he had brought together in miniature the twin com-
ponents of a stable civic order—­a rich giver was brought face-­to-­face with an
orderly and grateful populus, even if this populus was no more than the Christian
poor.
    It was for this reason that Paulinus described Pammachius as having offered
a munus—­a show—­to the poor that was met by the acclaim of the poor. In so

                                        234
                           the poetry of wealth


doing, Paulinus sketched out unwittingly the future of Christian Rome. A cen-
tury later, as we shall see (in chapter 27), the poor of the church protected by the
pope came to be promoted to a position resembling that of the old plebs Ro­
mana. It is an evolution Pammachius could not have dreamed of in practice. But
the art of Paulinus—­with its daring comparison with the games of Rome—­had
made it thinkable.46


                  Rich and Poor at the Shrine of Saint Felix

Apart from his letter to Pammachius, Paulinus’s vision of the proper relation
between rich and poor is best seen in the orderly architecture of the shrine of
Felix. At Cimitile, Paulinus was constantly in contact with the poor. He met
them, first and foremost, as pilgrims who gathered at Cimitile on the feast day
of Felix that occurred in January. This was a period of high unemployment and
hunger in the plains of Campania and in the hills of Samnium. He fed those who
came to the shrine as pilgrims on that occasion with open-­handed generosity. He
provided them with warmth and wine.47
    But Paulinus also met the poor as a permanent mass of destitute persons. It is
important to stress this fact. The most poignant Christian discourse on the poor
had been generated in the great cities of the eastern Mediterranean. In Antioch
and Constantinople, the rich were urged by a preacher such as John Chrysostom
to look over the edge of a social precipice into a swirling and anonymous crowd
of beggars, buffoons, and homeless immigrants gathered around them in a great
city.
    But in the Roman world, rural poverty was just as grim and as widespread as
was poverty in the cities. This was true of Paulinus’s Campania. It was a piebald
province. Vivid villas and intensively cultivated estates (such as those owned by
Symmachus) alternated with agrarian “rust belts”—­ugly swathes of deeply im-
poverished land. For all its exquisite buildings, the shrine of Felix was far from
being an idyllic retreat. It may also have become the human rubbish tip of the
region, to which the poor made their way in search of the food and shelter the
shrine provided.48 One of Paulinus’s last actions before his death was to pay a
quite substantial sum (forty solidi) to cloth merchants, which he had owed them
for clothes for the poor.49
    Faced by such misery, what Paulinus advocated was the notion of a mystical
symbiosis between rich and poor. The architecture of the shrine itself was inter-
preted in light of this symbiosis. Paulinus and his monks lived in the upper stories
of the courtyard. Their cells looked down directly on to the shrine of Felix. The
poor gathered in the porticoes and in the enclosed spaces of the hostel on ground
level. For Paulinus, this was not simply a device of social segregation. It was a

                                        235
                                   chapter 14


deeply satisfying concretization of his notion of exchange. He had given the
poor material things—­sustenance and a roof over their heads. They would offer
in return the ethereal essence of their prayers.50 God Himself had allowed this
exchange to happen. For, in a spectacular act of amnesty (like that of a Roman
emperor), “He had extorted from His own omnipotent sense of justice” the con-
cession that the rich would not be excluded from the Kingdom. They were not
condemned to be forever camels. By pious giving (to the saints and to the poor)
they might bypass the terrible, cramped eye of the needle. They were allowed by
God to use their earthly treasure so as to purchase heaven through giving to the
poor.51
   Ultimately, the story of the Rich Young Man (which had haunted so many of
his ascetic contemporaries) did not obsess Paulinus as much as did the story of
Dives and Lazarus. This was Christ’s story of the rich man and the beggar who
lay at his gate, as told in Luke 16:19–­31. Again and again in his works Paulinus
returned to the terrible vicissitudo—­the flip-­flop—­by which the miserable Laza-
rus went to heaven and the happy rich man, feasting among his friends in the
full éclat of a nobleman, had gone to hell. He feared that this could happen to
him: that the scarlet robe that drew all eyes would, in the other world, burst in
an instant into a sheet of flame. Yet, Paulinus insists, if Dives had only stopped to
look at Lazarus and pressed some alms into his hands he would not have been in
hell.52
   Once again, Paulinus did no more than put his own, distinctive stamp on
traditional ideas shared in a more wordless manner by Jews and Christians. A
story in the Babylonian Talmud tells how the Roman governor Turnus Rufus
once challenged the rabbis:
   “If your God loves the poor, why does He not support them?” The rabbi
   Meier replied: “So that through them [by giving alms] we [the rich] may be
   saved from the punishment of Gehinnom.”53
    We may have the inscriptions Paulinus placed on the low marble screen
around the tomb of Felix. They take the form of citations from the Bible.54 The
command to sell all and give to the poor is not among them. But they did urge
almsgiving: Lock up your alms in the bosom of the poor and it [the alms them-
selves, not the poor] will pray for you (Eccl. 29:5). Last but not least, the inscrip-
tions copied out Paul’s citation from an otherwise unknown saying of Jesus: It is
more blessed to give than to receive (Acts 20:35).55 Though known in the world at
large and to later ages as the prime example of the total renunciation of wealth,
in his letters, poems, and activities at the shrine of Felix Paulinus emerges, rather,
as an advocate of the flow of wealth between heaven and earth and between rich
and poor.


                                         236
                           the poetry of wealth


            Divisionem cum Deo facito: Go part shares with God

         Christian Landowners and the Use of Wealth

For wealth to flow in this way, it had to be endowed with a certain imaginative
solidity. In the long run, Paulinus’s persistent emphasis on the transferability of
wealth from earth to heaven laid down a highway in the mind by which real
wealth could be set to work by real persons to build a real Christian future. Let
us end by seeing how Paulinus opened the door to this process. To do this we
should follow the outlines of what Dennis Trout has acutely characterized as
Paulinus’s “Salvation Economics.”56
    Some time around 400, a ship of Paulinus that carried money to support his
building projects—­specifically named by him as argentum illud sacri commercii—­
had landed during a storm on the beach of an estate owned by his friend Jovius.57
Jovius was represented by Paulinus as having thought that the safe landing of the
ship had been no more than a matter of chance. By thinking in this manner, Jo-
vius implicitly denied that wealth could play a providential role in the sacred
exchange between God and humanity. For he believed that God Himself had
had no hand in the creation of this wealth in the first place. Wealth was not a gift
of God; it was a gift of fortune. It did not, therefore, need to be given back in
gratitude to God.58
    We only know Jovius through Paulinus’s presentation of his attitude. But he
is an entirely credible late fourth-­century aristocrat. He was a man of the mun­
dus, much as Ausonius had been. He had no difficultly in believing in the exis-
tence of God. The providence of a One High God might rule supreme in heaven,
but this providence did not necessarily extend downward into the sublunary
world far below the heavens. For the world below the moon was a messy place
touched only indirectly, if at all, by the hand of God. It was ruled either by
chance or by the complex interactions of the planets. Or it had been left to the
ministrations of lesser powers—­to gods and angels, many of whom still bore the
accustomed faces of the gods of ancient paganism. As we have seen, these lesser
powers still mattered. They stood between humanity and a still distant God who
was relegated, even by Christians, to the higher reaches of the heavens.
    We must always remember that Paulinus and Jovius still lived in a profoundly
polytheist society. Respect for the lower gods clung like a benign ground mist
over large tracts of the countryside. The mosaics and statue collections of the
great villas of Aquitaine and Spain showed a preference for themes taken from the
myth of Dionysos. These themes celebrated the effortless renewal of nature—­of
the rich plough lands and of the vineyards from which the wealth of the villa
owners was drawn. In this mystique of abundance, wealth was thought to nestle,


                                       237
                                  chapter 14


as it were, in the bosom of a natural world endowed with an energy all its own,
tended since time immemorial by a multitude of invisible nurturing powers.59
    Paulinus wrote to Jovius knowing that such beliefs were widespread. He did
not in any way encourage Jovius to abandon his wealth. It was sufficient that Jo-
vius should know that this wealth did not come from nature but from God:
   Divisionem cum Deo facito: Go part shares with God for your possessions,
   and render to the Supreme Father thanks for the gift that has been loaned
   to you by Him. . . . You and your household can keep all that you possess,
   provided that you take good care to declare that God is the donor of these
   things as well.60
   In 400 ad this was a less banal comment than we might suppose. What Pau-
linus implied was that Jovius did not owe his wealth to the abundance of nature,
miraculously fostered by the little gods of the countryside. Rather, the provi-
dence of the One God reached down in a great arc through every level of Roman
society to touch the fields and those who owned them.
    In proposing this view of wealth, Paulinus followed a wider shift in Christian
attitudes toward society in general and the imperial system in particular. What
has been aptly called a “ministerial” theory of the imperial power had been devel-
oped in the late fourth-­century West, largely under the influence of Saint Am-
brose. In this ministerial theory, the imperial power was demystified. The em-
peror was no longer bathed in a quasi-­divine aura in such a way that the image of
the emperor wavered between that of a god and an ordinary mortal. The emperor
was an ordinary human being. He was expected to behave as a pious Christian.
But he was no less powerful for that. The brute weight of the imperial system was
enthusiastically accepted provided that it was used for a higher aim—­the defense
and extension of the Christian faith. In this ministerial view, the emperor was
thought of as acting as the servant of God, to whom he owed directly the gift of
empire.61
   What Paulinus proposed to Jovius was, in effect, a ministerial theory of landed
power, a notion that did not come naturally to landowners at this time. To think
that their wealth lay in the hands of a single, all-­powerful God, to whom they
were accountable for its use, was a novel idea. Far away, on the banks of the Nile,
the great Egyptian abbot Shenoute of Atripe was told quite bluntly by Gessios—­a
largely imagined pagan interlocutor, the equivalent of Paulinus’s Jovius—­that
he should mind his own business. Gessios told Shenoute that he had received his
wealth from his own father, not from God. He owed God nothing and the church
even less.62
   Paulinus’s answer to persons such as Jovius was both daringly counterfactual
and basically safe. Their wealth was not their own; it came from God. But they
could keep it as long as they followed the will of God. From the imaginative point

                                       238
                           the poetry of wealth


of view, nature was stripped of its ancient mystique of abundance. It was the will
of God alone—­and not the semi-­divine energy of nature—­that caused the har-
vests to flourish every year. Nature was desacralized and cut down to size—­so
that it might remain firmly in the hands of pious human owners.
    This message was not unwelcome to the landowners. Indeed, they may have
been subliminally prepared for it by aspects of the art of their own mosaics. In an
acute analysis of the mosaics of the villas of this period, Lambert Schneider drew
attention (in his book Die Domäne als Weltbild ) to a notable feature of late
Roman mosaics. In many of these, nature itself was shown, as it were, pulled into
the orbit of the great. No product of the wild or of the cultivated land was shown
in its own right. All of nature was presented as if it existed only so as to be “of-
fered up” to the dominus, the owner of the estate—­preferably by ranks of neatly
dressed and deferential peasants. The numinous bounty of the land was undeni-
able. But it had, as it were, been tilted toward human owners. It existed only to
be given to the lords of the land.63
    We need only to go forward for a century, and to the eastern Mediterranean,
to find vivid visual evidence for this change of emphasis. In the votive mosaics of
churches of the fifth and sixth centuries, which have survived in large numbers in
Israel, Syria, and Jordan, we can see that this sharply “vertical” view of the natural
world (as existing for the landowner alone) was transposed to a higher plane.
God was now seen as the dominus—­the great landowner—­and it is now the do­
mini themselves—­the local landowners—­who are shown as if they were obedient
peasants bearing to Him the produce of their estates. They are shown offering
baskets of first fruits, close to the altar to which their offerings would have been
brought during the Eucharistic liturgy. They were proud yet deferential figures.
They were what Paulinus saw himself to be and what he wished Jovius to be: they
were “sharecroppers” of the Lord. They held their lands under God. Their wealth
came from God so that part of it might be sent on to heaven by being used for
the purposes of God through the support of His poor and through the endow-
ment of His churches.64
    Such, in general outline and effect, was the message of Paulinus to the wealthy.
What is remarkable is that we only know of it for little more than thirteen
years—­from the first great poems to Ausonius to the last surviving poem for the
feast day of Felix, delivered in 408. Yet Paulinus lived until 431. He continued to
write works that have not come down to us. The reason for the sudden silence is
revealing. Paulinus did not preserve his own letters, as Symmachus had done and
as Augustine would do, piling up copies on the shelves of the bishop’s library of
Hippo. An Aquitanian gentleman to the last, he lived for his friends and he wrote
for his friends. It was his friends in Aquitaine who appear to have kept copies of
these letters and poems. As Catherine Conybeare has pointed out, these letters
were written as “meditative texts” to nourish the souls of small groups of com-

                                         239
                                  chapter 14


mitted Christians, many of whom were landowners as he himself had been.65
And it must be confessed, a little Paulinus goes a long way. By 408 his friends
may have felt that they had received enough of this rich diet. But it was precisely
among circles of leisured, landed Christians that the poetry of wealth proposed
by Paulinus continued to work, molding the imagination for centuries to come.
    Paulinus ensured that the debate on Christian wealth now took place among
truly wealthy persons. For some years even before Paulinus had settled in Nola
and Augustine had settled in Hippo, this debate had already flared up in Rome
itself. In Rome, the debate on wealth increasingly looked eastward across the sea,
toward an imagined Outremer—­to the ascetic settlements of Egypt and the Holy
Land. The acrimony and drama of the debate was sharpened by the intervention
of persons who wished to act in Rome as ascetic mentors of the rich. They were
not always popular. To see why this was so, we must go back for almost a century
to describe Christian Rome from the days of Constantine onward. For the devel-
opments of that time formed the backdrop to the differing groups of upper-­class
Christians, some of whom supported and some of whom rejected the industrious
and unforgettable Jerome.




                                       240
                          Chapter 15
                          •••••
     Propter magnificentiam urbis Romae: By reason
       of the magnificence of the city of Rome
            The Roman Rich and Their Clergy,
         from Constantine to Damasus, 312–­384


          A spectacle as beautiful as a stage painting: Rome in 370

                 Palaces, Suburbium, and Churches

In the fourth century, Rome was still a stupendous city. A traveler who entered
Rome from the south through the Appian Gate would take an hour of brisk
walking through a landscape of continuous stone and brick before finally exiting
the city at its northern end through the Salarian Gate. The same traveler could
have walked through Trier in twenty minutes. The traveler would have passed
through monumental areas that were calculated to leave the visitor stunned.1 On
all sides of the monumental center, a population of over half a million was
squeezed into high, rickety buildings in the valleys that led up from the Tiber
toward the hills. Compared with the chaos below, the hills that ringed the east-
ern horizon “presented to the eye a spectacle as beautiful as a stage-­painting.”2
Crowned by green gardens, in whose depths luxurious palaces might be glimpsed,
the hills of Rome were where the residential aristocracy of Rome were to be
found. It was the world of the noble domus—­of palatial building complexes,
many of which were centuries old.3
    The other pole of the life of the rich of Rome was the suburbium. Residences
in the suburbium were the equivalent of the villas that ringed the cities in other
provinces. The suburbium was a “quasi city.”4 It was an almost unbroken exten-
sion of Rome itself, a landscape partly dedicated to the dead and partly more
than usually alive. The tombs of generations of Romans stretched along the Ap-
pian Way (as along all the other roads into the city). Burial grounds increasingly
identified with Christians (such as the funerary area now visited by tourists as
the catacombs of San Sebastiano) lay a little to one side of the main basalt road.
But in between places given over to the dead, the land bloomed. It was a zone of

                                       241
                                  chapter 15


palatial villas, intensive garden agriculture (largely dependent on slave labor),
and artisanal industries that served the city.5
   It was in the suburbium that the rich of Rome found a place where they could
breathe in the summer months, while a pall of death (largely due to the falci-
parum malaria that had held the Tiber valley in its grip for centuries) hung over
the city.6 Symmachus had five villas in the suburbium.
   It was in the suburbium also that villas given over to spiritual otium were to be
found, like those we have met in the Cassiciacum of Augustine and in the Span-
ish villas to which Paulinus of Nola had retired before his conversion. These were
favored by the Christian rich as much as by their pagan colleagues. From the
350s onward, the pious Christian widow Marcella regularly left her palace on
the Aventine for an estate in the suburbium. Jerome wrote to her there in 385.
He imagined her happy among fresh lettuces as she looked back (in traditional
Roman fashion) on the vanities of the city that lay only an hour’s walk from her
farm: “Let Rome have its riots, let savage carnage rage in the arena, let the citi-
zenry go wild, let the Senate of First Ladies continue to exchange daily visits.”7
Sheltered in the quiet harbor of her suburban residence, Marcella was free to read
the Psalms among the twittering birds.
   Through the correspondence of Jerome and other documents, we know a lot
about individual rich Christians in Rome from the 380s onward. But what was
recognizably Christian in this gigantic cityscape around the year 350? The an-
swer is surprising to modern persons: next to nothing. Entering Rome proper, the
traveler would have entered a city almost totally empty of Christian monuments.
At most, twenty-­five churches lay scattered in the midst of an urban fabric made
up of fourteen thousand housing blocks. What churches there were merged with
the surrounding buildings. At best, they looked like modest town houses, such
as were owned by the lesser nobility—­a reception hall surrounded by a few sub-
sidiary buildings entered from a courtyard. In a city of half a million, the exist-
ing churches of Rome provided room for only twenty thousand worshipers. To
eyes accustomed to a traditional city, Christianity was invisible within the walls
of Rome.8
   This could not be said of the suburbium. In that area, a Christian donor had
already left the footprint of vast wealth upon the land. That donor was Constan-
tine. It was by building spectacular Christian shrines and mausolea connected
with Christian sites on the edge of Rome that Constantine made clear his con-
version to Christianity in 312.
   Constantine founded two major basilicas: Saint Peter’s on the Vatican Hill
and the basilica in the Lateran gardens that stretched across the hills on the
southeast side of Rome (now known as San Giovanni in Laterano). To these
two churches alone he gave spectacular liturgical vessels, candelabra, and altars—­
almost 500 pounds of gold and 12,760 pounds of silver. He endowed the Roman

                                       242
                     the roman rich and their clergy




                         Map 3. Christian Rome, 300–­500 ad
 Note the largely peripheral nature of the church buildings erected by Constantine, and the
  slow growth of churches within the city. The hills marked on the map were the principal
                           places of residence for the aristocracy.




church with a substantial revenue of around 25,000 solidi (roughly a quarter of
the annual income of Symmachus). But most of this revenue was earmarked for
the support of the basilicas that he himself had founded. Over 4,000 solidi a year
(four times the estimated revenue of Ausonius’s “little estate”) went to maintain-
ing the lights of the Lateran basilica and of its neighboring baptistery.9
   These imperial churches were votive monuments. They proclaimed Constan-
tine’s victories over his rivals. The splendid basilica he established at the Lateran
was built over the barracks of the crack troops of Maxentius, the rival he had
defeated in 312. It flanked the palace where Constantine held court when he
resided in the city. This palace had a private chapel (now known as Santa Croce
in Gerusalemme).10 Though given to the bishop of Rome to act as his cathedral,

                                           243
                                   chapter 15


the Lateran basilica was a church built for the greater glory of Constantine and
not for the greater glory of the local Christians.
    The vast shrine over the tomb of Saint Peter in the graveyard area on the Vati-
can Hill is traditionally associated with Constantine. He may only have begun
the building. It was left to his pious sons, and especially to Constantius II, to
complete and dedicate what at the time was a frankly imperial monument built
to demonstrate the piety of Christian emperors.11
    The footprint of imperial wealth was even more clear in the suburbium proper.
Imperial mausolea appeared close to the tomb of Saint Agnes (Sant’Agnese, on
the Via Nomentana) and to the tombs of Peter and Marcellinus (SS Pietro e
Marcellino, on the Via Labicana). These mausolea were devoted to the memory
of female members of Constantine’s own family. The mausoleum of Constan-
tine’s sister, Constantina, beside the catacomb of S. Agnese is the present-­day
church of Santa Costanza. But it was not founded as a church. Its vault was deco-
rated with merry cherubs treading the wine harvest. A cheerfully secular mauso-
leum built for a great princess, it later became known to some as “the Tomb of
Bacchus.”12
    Such buildings were both spectacular and highly personalized. The huge tower
of the mausoleum of Constantine’s mother, Helena (now known as Tor Pignat-
tara), dwarfed the neighboring underground chamber that held the tombs of
Saints Peter and Marcellinus. It was a building of uncanny grandeur. An altar
made of two hundred pounds of silver stood beneath a dome that hung over
seventy feet above the floor. Offerings for the soul of Helena would have been
laid on this altar. The Eucharistic furnishings of the altar included a solid gold
plate of thirty-­five pounds and three heavy gold chalices studded with jewels
(each of which weighed ten pounds). Four immense silver candelabra, each weigh-
ing two hundred pounds, along with twenty other smaller silver chandeliers, filled
the mausoleum with light. Hundreds of pounds of nard, balsam, and spices mixed
in the oil of the lamps filled the entire building with an unearthly perfume.13
    Constantine gave nothing like this to any of the churches attended by the
average Christians of Rome. A typical urban benefactor (if on an imperial scale),
Constantine gave the Christians large spaces in which “his” people could assemble
in hitherto undreamed-­of splendor. This was a sufficient gift. The great basilicas
were particularly well suited to a Christianity that was a largely “festal” religion.
The average believer did not necessarily go to church regularly. But he or she was
certain to turn out for the great festivals of the year—­Easter and feast days of the
martyrs. Constantine’s buildings on the edge of Rome were perfectly adapted to
such grand occasions. But within Rome itself, apart from a few token gifts, Con-
stantine’s generosity did not extend to the local churches.
    The disparity between the wealth lavished by Constantine on the edges of
Rome and the modest establishment of the Roman church inside the city was

                                        244
                    the roman rich and their clergy


typical of the age of Constantine and of his immediate successors. It was the sign
of a transitional age marked by the strange alliance between an exuberant em-
peror and a religious institution still characterized by its mediocritas, without
real wealth of its own and devoid of traditional social status. The church still had
a long way to go before its own resources matched those of rich laypersons. The
history of the growth of the wealth of the Christian churches of Rome (and of
the conflicts that went with this growth) does not begin with Constantine. It
begins, effectively, in the last decades of the fourth century. As we shall see, it was
not only a history of the bishop of Rome and his clergy but also of the richer
members of the Christian laity.


                     Constituit titulum: He set up a titulus

              Private and Ecclesiastical Endowment
                     in the Churches of Rome

There is a tendency to allow the huge sums lavished by Constantine on his own
churches at Rome to cause us to underestimate the wealth that the church of
Rome itself may have brought with it into the Constantinian age. This could
have been considerable. But it was wealth derived in the old manner. It did not
come from single great patrons; it came from the gifts of a large number of basi-
cally low-­profile persons. When Silvester, the bishop of Rome at the time of Con-
stantine, founded his own church, he endowed it with a revenue of 413 solidi
(one-­tenth of the annual revenue set aside for the lighting of the Lateran basilica
alone) along with a mere 55 pounds of silver plate and one small gold dish.14
What we witness in the course of the fourth century is the slow build-­up of the
wealth of the churches within Rome itself through the gifts of private persons,
clerical and lay alike. In this slow and largely hidden process, the last quarter of
the fourth century was far more decisive for the ultimate fate of Christianity in
Rome than was the spectacular but limited intervention of Constantine.
   Given its long-­term importance, the accretion of wealth by the Roman
churches was a strangely silent process. The historian can trace it only through
fragments that are as tantalizing as they are vivid. The most elusive issue of all
concerns the finances of the individual churches of Rome. Many churches in the
city bore a distinctive name. They were called tituli—­“titular churches.” To the
historian, the term has all the opacity of a technical term whose meaning was
taken for granted by contemporaries. They felt that the term required no expla-
nation, leaving us to guess what exactly it meant in the context of a church foun-
dation. In Roman law, the word titulus was used of property acquired through a
legal transfer that guaranteed full title to the new owner. In reality, it was a word

                                         245
                                   chapter 15


that veiled a complex scenario. We have only one glimpse of the foundation of a
titular church. Sometime in the pontificate of Innocent (401/2–­417), an aristo-
cratic lady Vestina (an illustris femina—­the daughter or widow of a high official)
built a church to the Milanese martyrs Gervasius and Protasius. (The church is
now known as San Vitale on the Quirinal Hill.) The building of the church was
organized by three clergymen close to Innocent.
   This woman had directed in the text of her will that the basilica should be
   constructed from the sale of her ornaments and pearls at an expert esti-
   mate. When the basilica was completed, Innocent set up in it a titulus in
   Rome (titulum Romae constituit) from the properties assigned by the il-
   lustrious woman.
    The revenue for the titulus came from urban real estate—­from a bakery, a
bath, and a toll gate—­and from a scatter of estates in Etruria and Campania. The
total revenue was 1,016 solidi (the equivalent of the estimated revenue of Auso-
nius’s family estate). Preserved in the archives of the Roman church, the record
of Vestina’s titulus offers a precious glimpse of a church founded by lay initiative
through the sale of spectacular items of personal adornment. Furthermore, the
maintenance of the church and the payment of the clergy were financed by the
gift of revenues from Vestina’s country estates and from a still-­buoyant urban
economy.15 A century later, the priests connected with the church built by Ves-
tina still spoke of themselves as priests of the titulus Vestinae. In this way, the
name of the lay donor who had built the church and provided its revenue re-
mained as important as that of the name of the saints to which it had been
dedicated.
    Between 366 and 432, ten such tituli were founded. In 499 there were priests
for at least twenty-­nine tituli. Though they were by no means the only churches
founded at this time, the “titular” churches emerged as the spine of the parochial
system of Rome. In some way or other, each one bore the mark of private wealth
provided by laypersons. It was through such churches that Christianity moved,
in the course of the fourth and early fifth centuries, from a state of virtual invisi-
bility around the year 350 to being a religion whose presence was felt throughout
the city. The churches were little specks of splendor that echoed, if on a smaller
scale, the proud houses on the hills. It was in such churches that the city of Rome
found not its Constantine but its many little Paulinuses.16
    Indeed, one friend of Paulinus may well have founded a titulus of his own.
Pammachius, whom we met in the last chapter being praised by Paulinus for
placing his treasure in heaven by feasting the poor of Rome in 396, may be the
same person who turned a house halfway up the Clivus Scauri, which ascends the
Caelian Hill above the Colosseum, into a church that was known as the titulus
Pammachii (present-­day Santi Giovanni e Paolo). Vast marble columns, bearing

                                         246
                    the roman rich and their clergy


initials at their base that marked them as having come from imperial storehouses,
framed the narthex. Long poems explained the scenes of Old Testament events
that were placed on the walls. The inscription at the entrance was frank about
what the converted house of Pammachius now offered: the splendor of the en-
trance alone “shows how great a God dwells within.”17
    Whether the founder of this titulus was Paulinus’s friend or another Pamma-
chius, the message was as clear in Rome as it was in Nola. By the late fourth and
early fifth centuries, the footprint of real wealth could now be seen in Christian
churches all over the city. This change is barely documented in any literary
source. Yet it is probably the most decisive step of all in the rise of Christianity in
Rome. The rich decided to put their money into Christian churches. But what
did this mean for the organization of the Christian communities? And who ex-
actly were these rich?
    The predominant scholarly opinion about the tituli is that proposed by Charles
Pietri, the great historian of Christian Rome. He saw the titular churches as de-
riving their wealth from permanent, lay foundations. Each church had its own
finances, based on its original lay endowment. As a result, the titular churches
of Rome were not like parish churches in a modern centralized diocese, directly
dependent on their bishop. They were more like medieval chantry chapels or
their modern equivalents, the comfortably endowed colleges of Oxford and Cam-
bridge.18 Following Pietri, it was possible to imagine an entire cast of lay patrons
standing in the shadows behind each titular church. Loyalty to donors based on
ancient notions of patronage and of respect for the rights exercised by civic bene-
factors over their foundations could be thought to have ensured that these
churches enjoyed a rare measure of independence from the bishop of Rome. A
“whisper of tensions” can be assumed to have surrounded the relations between
the bishop of Rome and the priests and patrons of the new tituli.19 It has been the
peculiar delight of modern historians of Christian Rome to unveil these lay pa-
trons. Many scholars claim to be able to see the hand of rival Roman families at
work in the ecclesiastical conflicts of the city and in the formation of legends
attached to particular churches.20
    Other scholars differ from Pietri precisely as to the degree of autonomy en-
joyed by the tituli. Julia Hillner has argued cogently against the notion of a per-
manent endowment that maintained the interests of the donor and his or her
family. She points out that foundations of this kind were rare in Roman practice.
It was more trouble than it was worth for a family to retain its interest in a long-­
term foundation. Urban benefactors preferred to be known for single, one-­off
donations. These were the sort of gifts that reaped immediate glory. As a result,
the family of the donor need not be imagined to have become a permanent pres-
ence in the titular church they had founded. What was remembered, in the name
attached to the titulus, was the outstanding gift that had made the church possible

                                         247
                                   chapter 15


in the first place. In the hectic conditions of late fourth-­century Rome, many
Christian families competed as equals. The splash of a new church building com-
bined with a gift of revenues reaped quite sufficient glory. There was no need to
tie a neighborhood church to any one particular family for generations to come.21
    The great unknown in these scholarly debates is who exactly were the donors.
For the degree to which laypersons could act as independent patrons of the
churches they had founded depends on what we think of their resources and
their social status. This is something we do not know for certain. Therefore, let
us look at the social structure of the residents of fourth-­century Rome so as to
cast some light on this question.


                     The Church and the New Aristocracy

It was the singular merit of Charles Pietri to have made plain that the period that
began with the pontificate of Damasus (366–­84) amounted to nothing less than
a “second establishment” of the Church of Rome.22 Pietri’s erudition and sure
historical instinct linked the flow of wealth into the ordinary churches of Rome
to the activity of pious lay aristocrats, not to the bishop and his clergy. In Pietri’s
words, the late fourth century and first decade of the fifth were the belle époque,
“the golden days” of an aristocratie évergète—­an aristocracy that continued, for
the benefit of the Christian churches of Rome, the long-­established habits clas-
sical euergetism.23
    Yet Pietri himself warned that “the word ‘aristocracy’ should not delude us.”24
“Aristocracy” meant many things in fourth-­century Rome. Not all aristocrats in
Rome were aristocrats as Symmachus would have wished them to be or as mod-
ern scholars (following the views of Symmachus) seem to expect them to be. By
looking only at the cream of the nobility of Rome, we have tended to turn the
exuberant mega-­city in which they lived into a singularly rarefied and rigid place.
This is not what fourth-­century Rome was like.
    Rather than being members of the inner circles of the nobiles, the Christian
rich were, with a few exceptions, “new” men. Socially and culturally, Rome was
not the sole preserve of the great noble families who claimed to run the city. It
was a microcosm of post-­Constantinian society as a whole. A large proportion
of its well-­to-­do residents were not noble in the exclusive sense that Symmachus
upheld. They were often dependent for their income on careers as state servants.
They derived their status from a frankly imperial system of honors. In this they
were no different from their provincial cousins in Bordeaux or Timgad.25 They
did not enjoy the towering prestige or the overwhelming economic advantages
in the city that Symmachus and his peers enjoyed. But they were there. They
bore the coveted title of clarissimus. Already in the reign of Constantine, we find

                                         248
                   the roman rich and their clergy


the names of minor senators from the provinces carved on the seats of the
Colosseum.26
    It is notoriously difficult to calibrate the wealth and social presence of these
groups who gathered on the middle slopes of a social pyramid that reached its
highest pitch in Rome in noblemen such as Symmachus and Petronius Probus.
They are a largely invisible class. But recent archaeological discoveries have made
it easier to seize their wealth and horizons. Fourth-­century Rome has been re-
vealed to be dotted with small town houses. They were not as grand as were the
palaces of the nobles. Often forced into a crowded urban fabric without the spa-
cious gardens and forum-­like courtyards of the truly noble, they nonetheless
flaunted whatever signs of wealth and status that were within the means of their
owners. The houses had éclat. They were all sheathed in polychrome marble. But
the quality of the marble varied greatly. The lack of spread associated with a true
noble domus had to be compensated for by the grandeur of a single, apsed recep-
tion hall.27 In at least four cases, the reception hall and courtyard of such houses
were eventually converted into Christian churches. For what the rich could offer
to the church in Rome was the inestimable gift of real estate in a crowded city.28
    Placed between the riotous “People of Rome” and a proud core of nobiles who
considered themselves “the most noble persons in the human race,” the new rich
of Rome added a further, potentially unpredictable element to the social texture
of the city. They remind us of the classes in Rome and Italy who had fastened on
the luxuries and cultivated lifestyles of the Greek East in the last centuries of the
republic. In the words of Andrew Wallace-­Hadrill (in his aptly entitled book,
Rome’s Cultural Revolution): “Luxury . . . comes into its own . . . in the dynamic
situation where there is expansion, new money and new social groups contest-
ing claims to prominence.”29 If, instead of “luxury” we read the founding or em-
bellishment of churches, the patronage of vivid intellectuals, and zealous en-
gagement in theological controversies, then we can understand a little better the
dynamism that drove many rich Christians in Rome in the fourth century.
    As we have seen, one of the characteristics of Christianity was that it tended
to reach down the social scale so as to incorporate “wealthy urban classes below
that of the senatorial aristocracy.”30 As Julia Hillner has shown (in an article that
is refreshingly free of the sociological stereotypes that tend to focus our atten-
tion on only the upper nobility of Rome), these classes could include the priests
of the tituli themselves and even members of the upper reaches of the trade as-
sociations of the city. Such persons had an interest in what Andrew Wallace-­
Hadrill calls “sub-­luxury”: “Down-­market imitations which nevertheless serve to
maintain distinctions at a lower level.”31
    Thus we find a situation in Rome in which members of the upper reaches of
the senatorial class, such as the “illustrious” lady Vestina and Pammachius (if the
founder of the titular church is, indeed, the same person as the friend of Paulinus),

                                        249
                                  chapter 15


were outnumbered by a larger and more open group of persons. Such persons
wished to stand out from their peers and from their fellow Christians who were
lower down the social scale. They did this by placing their money and their en-
ergy at the disposal of the churches of Rome and by engaging in the excitements
associated with Christian controversies.
    The epigraphy and archaeology of the catacombs of Rome enable us to follow
the silent massing of a distinctive class around the new religion. The age of Con-
stantine had been a time in which well-­to-­do Christians began to monumental-
ize themselves with carved sarcophagi in good marble. In doing this, they acted
in much the same way as provincial landowners as far away as distant Britain had
acted when they monumentalized their villas by providing them with mosaic
floors. Sarcophagi belonged to the world of “sub-­luxury”; they cost around fif-
teen solidi. Seventy sarcophagi from Rome showed owners who bore the title of
vir clarissimus and femina clarissima. They were all “senators.” But they have re-
mained mere names to us. Only two out of that seventy could count as nobiles
who had held traditional high offices.32
    The development and grouping of these sarcophagi follows a significant curve
in the course of the fourth and early fifth centuries. In the 320s and 330s impres-
sive groups of family tombs were placed in the corridors of the catacombs. By the
end of the century, however, family mausolea had come to be constructed around
the shrines of the suburbium. They were often placed close to the burial sites of
martyrs, in a manner that implied special privileges. Put bluntly: they made plain
to all that holy ground was, first and foremost, the ground of the rich. Many of
these mausolea and large burial chambers within the catacombs were sheathed in
the same bright marble as were the town houses in the city.33 We know that some
of those who built these tombs were connected with the imperial administration.
The delightful Cubiculum Leonis in the catacomb of Domitilla belonged to Leo,
an official of the annona—­a government office whose bureaucrats had plagued
Symmachus when he was Prefect of the City.34
    It is among such people, and not in the great noble palaces that crowned the
hills of Rome, that we should look to find the supposed “aristocratic” benefac-
tors who were most responsible for the new wealth of the church of Rome in the
age of Damasus and beyond. Let us look, therefore, at Damasus himself.


             Ostentatio rerum urbanarum: The swank of city life

                      The Age of Damasus, 366–­8 4

We have long realized that Damasus was a crucial figure in the development of
the Roman church. But it remains difficult to place Damasus on the social map

                                       250
                   the roman rich and their clergy


of Rome. His relations with the aristocracy are far from clear. It may well be that
Damasus did not wish to be exposed to the patronage of the higher levels of the
aristocracy. Rather, he turned to the lower levels of the aristocracy. He sought
out the new families brought to the fore by the Constantinian system. This was
not only because such persons were more likely to be Christian than was the
inner core of pagan noble families who claimed to represent the “true” Rome.
An alliance with less important aristocrats offered the bishop and his clergy a
way to keep open a space for themselves within the city.
    It is worthwhile emphasizing this fact. Damasus has usually been presented as
an assiduous courtier of the upper nobility. He is treated as a man noted for his
aristocratic pretensions. We tend to like him for this. In the fine words of André
Piganiol, Damasus was fastueux et mondain—­“given to display and a lover of
fashionable society”: “In his struggle against the State, Ambrose has been com-
pared to Gregory VII. It is to a pope of the Renaissance that we must liken the
great Damasus.”35
    It has proved agreeable for modern persons to imagine that the Catholicism
of fourth-­century Rome could be represented by so urbane a prelate as Damasus,
so very different from the angular Ambrose. Furthermore, the idea that a natural
alliance between pope and aristocracy was initiated by Damasus fits all too well
into the conventional, triumphant narrative of the Christianization of Rome. It
is often said that the popes absorbed the city of Rome swiftly and without con-
flict and that they did so by reaching an accommodation with the nobility and
with the ancient traditions of the Senate. We like to imagine that high senators
and urbane priests were brought together through a gentlemanly process of so-
cial osmosis in such a way as to ensure that the best of the classical heritage of
Rome was passed on to future ages by the Catholic Church. It has proved com-
forting to think that the Rome of the Senate morphed effortlessly into the Rome
of the popes in this manner.
    Yet there is little support for this amiable narrative. Damasus himself was no
Borgia. He was the son of a priest, who had worked his way up in the service of
the church of Rome. When he founded his own church (San Damaso in Lucina,
in the Campus Martius, near the Cancellaria) all that he did was widen his fa-
ther’s house by adding a nave to either side. He offered to it silver vessels that
weighed, in all, one hundred pounds and provided it with a revenue of four hun-
dred solidi, which came partly from an estate in a town forty miles away and partly
from the revenues of an adjacent bath. This was a comfortable but hardly breath-
taking endowment.36
    In any case, Damasus was once bit twice shy in his relations with the higher
levels of the Christian nobility. His election had been challenged, in 366, by a
rival candidate, Ursinus. On one occasion, 137 deaths resulted from a fierce clash
of partisans in a crowded basilica. The divisions caused by this disputed election

                                       251
                                   chapter 15


lasted for the rest of his life. Rita Lizzi Testa has argued ingeniously that his rival
Ursinus may have been supported by a particularly intransigent party of aristo-
crats, some of whom were of higher status than most other Christians. After 366,
Damasus was in no mood to forgive the high-­minded noblemen and women who
had helped prolong the opposition of his rival. Nor did he want to be unduly
beholden to those who had supported him at this time.37
    The interest of Damasus does not lie in his reputed flirtation with the Roman
aristocracy. What was decisive was the skill with which he pushed forward the
clergy of Rome (with himself at their head) as an effective Third Estate.38 He
stood for a clerical option. This is not surprising. We should always remember
that Damasus came to power as an old man. Born in 300 and the son of a priest,
the memories of his family reached back before the days of Constantine to the
Great Persecution. He was a generation older than Ambrose and a full half cen-
tury older than either Augustine or Paulinus. He had lived his life in the service
of the church. His heroes were the martyrs of Rome and not its nobles.39
    But he knew how to reach out to accommodate the new rich. We have already
met the little girl Proiecta. Her marriage casket (which was part of what is known
as the Esquiline Treasure in the British Museum, from the place of its discovery
in a palace on the Esquiline Hill) had presented her preparations as a bride under
the protection, still, of the numinous beauty of Venus. Proiecta received an epi-
taph from Damasus when she died—­perhaps no more than a few years after her
marriage. It was a touching poem that spoke of Proiecta as already in heaven, able
to bring comfort to her grieving loved ones through her prayers as if she were
a saint.40 It is a poignant glimpse of an upper-­class marriage for which the only
surviving evidence is a silver marriage casket and the fragment of a tomb. But the
marriage itself is revealing. Proiecta was the daughter of Florus, a successful im-
perial servant. She married Turcius Secundus, an aging representative of a noble
family. For Florus, his daughter’s marriage was an upward alliance similar to that
which Ausonius had achieved by marrying into the old nobility of Bordeaux.
Damasus favored such persons.41
    It was into this world of family piety focused on the dead and widely shared
by all levels of the Christian community that Damasus discreetly introduced
himself, his deacons, and his priests. In order to do this, he turned to the cities
of the dead that covered the suburbium. He filled the catacombs outside Rome
with large plaques of marble, which described the stories of the martyrs in Ver-
gilian verse and were elegantly inscribed by a master calligrapher. The verses were
written with condensed, almost incantatory power.42 They were intended to be
read as the “signatures” of the bishop of Rome, placed by Damasus on sites that
lay outside Rome in the calm of a countryside traditionally dominated by the
emperors and the aristocracy. Through these inscriptions, which would have been


                                         252
                   the roman rich and their clergy


read by many pilgrims as well as by Romans visiting their dead, Damasus ensured
that the bishop of Rome would not be forgotten in the suburbium of Rome.43
    In writing these verses, Damasus did not nurse the illusion (dear to modern
scholars of classical inclination) that by writing Vergilian verse he might some-
how swing the mighty Senate to the Christian cause. His aims were more clearly
focused. He wrote to express the solidarity and the separate identity of the
Christian community. They were a “holy people,” an “assembly of saints”; and it
was the martyrs (not the emperors, and not the aristocracy) who kept them holy,
with the help of their bishop and clergy. Roman Christians shared together the
glory of being an undivided, elect group. They were the church of Rome—­the
church of the greatest city in the world. Damasus was their head, and Rome itself
was the head of the empire. With or without the Senate and the great profane
city that stretched all around their churches, to be a united holy people chosen
by God in a world capital was glory enough for Damasus and his flock.44
    Damasus’s basically inward-­looking vision struck a chord in a substantial sec-
tion of the lesser aristocracy and of the newly rich residents of Rome. Here we
are dealing with one of the most delicate issues in the study of the fourth century.
The Christian churches were sought out as environments that were perceived
to be appropriate for persons whose worldview had been formed through their
social experience as particpants in an imperial system. Let us look at how this
happened.
    The mere clarissimi and clarissimae whom we meet on the Christian sarcoph-
agi of Rome looked to the court and to the imperial militia rather than to the
Senate as the arbiters of taste. We should not underestimate the cumulative
imaginative consequences of this fact. Looking at the sarcophagi of Rome (as
elsewhere), we can see how Christian devotion was expressed through images
taken directly from the court and the army. These citations from contemporary
life gave sharp focus to the ancient sense that Christians were soldiers in the army
of the Lord and servants of Christ, their emperor.45 By the end of the century,
the imperial overtones on these sarcophagi had become even more pronounced.
While pagan aristocrats of the third century had shown themselves sitting or
standing face-­to-­face with the Muses, the Christian sarcophagi of the late fourth
century show the deceased as small figures, bowing before Christ, their emperor.
They are shown in the same pose as courtiers when they bowed to “adore” the
emperor by kissing the hem of his great purple robe.46
    Often drawn from the imperial militia themselves (as soldiers and bureaucrats),
the lesser aristocracy wished to look up to a clergy that had the same hierarchical
quality as the imperial service from which they themselves derived their wealth
and status. Hence the clergy emerged as a Third Estate in Rome with the tacit
consent of members of a minor aristocracy that was the late Roman equivalent


                                        253
                                   chapter 15


of a noblesse de robe. Clergy and laity alike wanted a religion in the image of the
society in which they lived—­hierarchical, strenuous, and loyal, though shorn of
the abrasive qualities with which hierarchy was normally displayed in the world
outside the churches.
   They were prepared to pay for such a church. By the end of the life of Dama-
sus, the financial muscle generated by their giving was visible to the highest cir-
cles in Rome. Writing in around 390 (that is, a generation after the events he
described), Ammianus Marcellinus left a vivid account of the manner in which
the disputed election of Damasus in 366 had disrupted the peace of the city.
He ended with a memorable judgment. Such violent behavior was only to be
expected:
   Considering the ostentatious luxury of life in the City [considerans osten­
   tationem rerum urbanarum: the sheer swank of life in Rome] it is only
   natural that those who are ambitious should engage in the most strenuous
   competition to obtain their goal. Once they have reached it [as bishop of
   Rome] they are assured of rich gifts from ladies of quality; they can ride in
   carriages, dress splendidly, and outdo kings in the lavishness of their table.47
What we forget about this passage is that it does not describe the effortless entry
of Damasus into high society. Far from it. It treats the bishop of Rome as an up-
start. Such was the view of a writer loyal to the values of an older Rome for whom
a man such as Damasus was a troubling anomaly.
   Ammianus reflected the reactions of the true nobles of Rome as they looked
over the edge of their high world to survey the undignified skirmishes of those
who had gathered at their feet. A new Rome was emerging through an alliance
between rich new families from the lower nobility and the Christian clergy. The
wealth and prestige of the bishop of Rome derived in large part from this alli-
ance. When the great pagan Prefect of the City, Praetextatus (one of Symmachus’s
closest friends), was approached by Damasus on one occasion, he met the bishop’s
suggestion that he should become a Christian with the quip: “Make me bishop
of Rome, and I will instantly become a Christian.”48
   This was not only the view of pagans. Many Christians also had been pushed
to one side by Damasus. They thought much the same of him as did Ammianus.
He was accused by his ecclesiastical enemies of being an auriscalpius matrona­
rum, usually translated as “ear tickler of ladies of quality.” But, for Romans, the
sexual innuendo was not nearly as vicious as was the financial slur. Damasus was
the ear pick (the Q-­tip) of the ladies. He wielded his little scoop with the adroit-
ness of a beautician removing the surplus wax that built up in their ears. This was
how the bishop of Rome was thought to skim off the surplus wealth of the Chris-
tian rich.49


                                         254
                   the roman rich and their clergy


       Officia et in se habent gloriam: Offices in themselves have glory

    Hierarchy and Society in the World of Ambrosiaster

Damasus emerges as so forceful and so contested a figure that we often forget that
his principal achievement had been to ensure that a low-­profile but tenacious
body of men rallied behind him. This was the clergy of Rome. We are fortunate
to be able to look into the mind of one such clergyman of the time of Damasus.
He was a “stubbornly anonymous” writer who is known to us, somewhat con-
temptuously (since the days of Erasmus), as Ambrosiaster—­the Would-­Be Am-
brose. He wrote commentaries on the Epistles of Saint Paul and a set of Answers
to Questions on the Old and New Testaments. These writings give us a clear sense
of the moral and social horizons of a well-­educated Roman priest, in constant
dialogue with lay questioners.50
    In the first place, as Sophie Lunn-­Rockcliffe has shown in her recent study,
Ambrosiaster was an out-­and-­out monarchist.51 Firm, unitary rule was the ideal
of his society. He explained that Adam had to be created alone, so as to be a
unique symbol of the sovereignty of God: “So that, in the person of one man,
one God should be seen to have retained the authority of single rule, to the con-
fusion of the Devil.”52 As the inheritor of Adam’s function as single ruler of the
world, the emperor (and not the Christian bishop) bore “the Image of God” on
earth.53
    Furthermore, Roman law was of crucial importance to Ambrosiaster. And
this was not classical law, nor was it the law preserved by the Senate as an aspect
of the “liberty” of Rome. It was the authoritarian law of the Roman state. Am-
brosiaster believed that the alternative to firm government was potentia, the
naked graft and violence of the super-­rich. Without imperial laws, “the powerful
would not be able to be endured, nor would there be any freedom.”54 When
Ambrosiaster discussed Paul’s doctrine of obedience to the “powers that be,” he
did not think of criminals. He had in mind those “who sin by their potentia.”
Such persons thought that they could evade the law with impunity in order to
oppress the poor. (One thinks of the encounter in Rome between Augustine’s
friend Alypius and the corrupt and powerful senator whose demands he refused.
Alypius was acting as a lawyer at that time. He would have read Ambrosiaster’s
words on the function of law as a check on the corrupt actions of the great with
considerable pleasure.)55
    For Ambrosiaster, hierarchy was both necessary and glorious. As in the mili­
tia of the palace, so with the clergy; the office itself conferred dignity on its
holder: “Offices in themselves have glory . . . and the honor of a position renders
its holder glorious.”56


                                       255
                                  chapter 15


   Altogether, Ambrosiaster thought of the church on the model of the imperial
bureaucracy. When he criticized the pretensions of the deacons of Rome he did
so because he recognized in them the power of a clique of top bureaucrats en-
sconced at the head of an extensive clerical militia. In his opinion, the power of
the deacons of Rome was a result of the sheer size of Rome: it had grown propter
magnificentiam Urbis Romae, because of the “magnificence of the city of Rome,
which is seen to be the head of all cities.”57 His enthusiasm for Rome was trans-
parent. But it was not for the Rome of the Senate.
   Clergymen such as Ambrosiaster served Rome well. They were well aware
that they lived in an unmanageable and potentially dangerous city. Like Sym-
machus, they carefully noted whenever food shortages and famines occurred in
any part of the world because these shortfalls would directly affect the food sup-
ply of Rome.58 Ultimately, what the clergy of Rome prayed for at every liturgy
was what every well-­to-­do resident of Rome (Symmachus included) desired:
“That public joy may prevail, helped by an abundance of supplies and by the re-
moval of all upheaval and sedition.”59


   Gratus nobilibus . . . officio sanctus: Popular with the nobles . . . holy by
                                 reason of his office

                The Roman Clergy in Their Epitaphs

In many ways Damasus was like Ambrose. He laid the ground course for the fu-
ture build-­up of Christianity in Rome. That ground course was so solid that it
passed unnoticed in subsequent years. But the two men had acted in very differ-
ent ways. While Ambrose created bonds with the entire populus of Milan, Dama-
sus did not reach out to the Roman people as a whole. Already marked out, in
the 380s, as a man from an older generation, the prospect of the conversion of
Rome as a whole lay beyond the imaginative horizon of Damasus. His principal
appeal was to the ideal of a unified Christian congregation. He reached out only
to the People of God already gathered within the Christian churches of the city
and to their leaders—­the Roman clergy. His principal concern was to build up
the strength of his own profession. Those who welcomed him most were fellow
clergymen such as Ambrosiaster.
   We meet clergymen like Ambrosiaster in the inscriptions of the Roman cata-
combs of the late fourth and early fifth centuries. The epitaphs on the tombs of
individual priests and deacons show a group of persons who had begun to make
their own a code of living as self-­conscious as that of any other of the profes-
sional groups who jostled each other in Rome—­lawyers, doctors, bureaucrats,
and soldiers.

                                       256
                   the roman rich and their clergy


    They were a basically stolid group of men. They accepted the social order. The
first evidence that we have for the titulus of San Clemente is a slave collar marked
with the Christogram: “Catch me for I have fled and return me to Victor the
acolyte at the Lord’s House of Clemens.”60
    It is notable that the clergy’s care of the poor of Rome was not charged with
any great urgency or pathos. Ambrosiaster spoke of the duty of Christians to
support the “needy who appear in public.” He simply assumed that these poor
were regularly fed and clothed out of church funds. By contrast, real glamour
surrounded the “holy poor.” These were persons like himself. They were discreet
clergymen and pious Christians of modest means. He insisted that the rich had
been nominated by God to act as nothing less than the legal “guardians” of such
persons. They were responsible for their financial well-­being. Altogether, his
commentary on Paul’s frequent references to the poor among the saints amounted
to an exhortation to the rich to support their local clergy.61 Some priests were
praised as “friends of the poor.” But rather than representing “the emergence of
a new humanitarian urge,” the title may have been little more than an aspect of
their professional persona as clergymen.62
    This fact should be stressed. Clerical “love of the poor” was a matter of rou-
tine. It was not expected to lead to heroic mixing with the destitute; such actions
were reserved for individual laypersons of extreme piety. Pammachius the friend
of Paulinus of Nola was one such person. In 396 Jerome praised Pammachius
and his collaborator, the lady Furia, for their hands-­on care of the foul-­smelling
and diseased poor in the charitable hospital they had established in the Port of
Ostia. This heroic condescension to the poor was evoked by Jerome through a
verse taken from the sixth book of the Aeneid. It was a veritable descent into the
Underworld.63
    We do not know whether the noble patrons whom Jerome addressed actually
did this. But we do know that such dramatic behavior was not demanded of the
clergy. What was expected from them was a more general benevolence. To take
one example: The deacon Dionysius continued to practice as a doctor. As befit-
ted the practitioner of an ars honesta (a skill appropriate to a gentleman), Diony-
sius “scorned sordid gain . . . and often, with a generous right hand, fostered the
work of saving pity by helping men of slender means.”64 In doing this, Dionysius
did little more than what the emperor Valentinian I had insisted that doctors
who drew public salaries should do in Rome: “They should prefer to minister to
the poor in an honorable manner, rather than shamefully attend only on the
rich.”65 Eventually Dionysius’s skill and good nature served him well. He sur-
vived captivity among the Goths after the sack of the city in 410 by acting as their
doctor.
    Altogether, the values of the clergy, as we read them on their tombstones of
this and later times, were those of prudent but proud men, enrolled in the militia

                                        257
                                  chapter 15


of God. They were anxious to appear to be beholden to no one. The deacon Tig-
ridas was spoken of as “popular with the nobles.” (He may have been a successful
fund-­raiser.) But his epitaph also made plain that he met the nobles as an equal.
He was “holy by reason of his office.”66 The epitaph of the priest Sissinius was
more stern: “Content with his own, he ignored the palaces of the rich.”67
   One can imagine the disquiet of such persons when, in 382, the old Damasus—­
then in his eighties—­was solicited to extend his patronage to a total outsider, to
a priest-­monk from Dalmatia recently arrived from the East—­Eusebius Hiero-
nymus, known to us as Saint Jerome. Strenuously learned, a passionate advocate
of the new asceticism, and abrasive as only an expert could be, Jerome soon
showed that he was not a man to “ignore the palaces of the rich.”




                                       258
                          Chapter 16
                          •••••
      “To Sing The Lord’s Song in a Strange Land”
                    Jerome in Rome, 382–­385




    Ingentis est otii, laboris et sumptuum: Matters that require profound
                      leisure, hard work, and much money

                     Jerome as an Expert in Rome

Damasus knew how to act as a patron of the arts. He liked to summon experts
and put them to work. He wanted the best. The exquisite lettering for the verses
he wrote for the tombs of the martyrs in the catacombs had been designed by
one such expert—­Furius Dionysius Filocalus.
    Filocalus worked for noblemen and women. On one occasion, he composed
and executed an inscription for a bathhouse set up by the elder Melania, a Span-
iard and a wealthy relative by marriage of Paulinus of Nola, on one of her estates
in north Africa. He was one of those figures who fit awkwardly into the oversim-
plified image of the society of Rome to which we are accustomed. He was not
a nobilis, nor was he a mere artisan. As Alan Cameron describes him, with char-
acteristic good sense: “He was a man of respectable (if not aristocratic) origins
and comfortable means who simply chose to spend his time doing what he did so
well.”1
    Filocalus’s most famous work was a spectacular illustrated Calendar for the
year 354, made for a certain Valentinus.2 The Calendar of 354 was very much a
product of a new Rome, many of whose upper-­class residents were poised be-
tween their civic duties and the demands of the new religion. It combined with-
out a trace of embarrassment lavish pictures of traditional Roman feasts and of
the gods associated with them with a list of the bishops of Rome and of the dates
of the feasts of the martyrs.3 The expense and skill that went into such a produc-
tion ensured that a calligrapher such as Filocalus was valued as the Benvenuto
Cellini of his age.

                                       259
                                  chapter 16


    When he arrived in Rome, in 382, Jerome presented himself to Damasus as
yet another Filocalus. He claimed to be a man of formidable expertise, whose
service would add luster to the pope. Like Filocalus, he was prepared to work for
the bishop of Rome “on matters that require profound leisure, hard work and
much money.”4
    Jerome was born in 341 in Stridon, a small city that has entirely vanished. It
probably lay near the imperial high road that led from the Danube frontier to
Aquileia. Like Augustine, Jerome had grown up in a town of the hinterland. But,
unlike Augustine, Jerome had rich parents. He was sent straight to Rome. There
he acquired a remarkable literary culture. He had no intention of using this cul-
ture to pursue a career as unglamorous as that of a teacher, as Augustine had done.
He may have been independently wealthy. We know that he and his brother,
Paulinianus, owned estates around Stridon.
    By 368 (around age twenty-­seven) Jerome was at Trier. He arrived there only
a few years after Ausonius had entered the court of Valentinian I and a year be-
fore Symmachus arrived on his senatorial mission. On the edge of a formidable
bureaucracy, he busied himself copying Christian manuscripts. Wellborn, well
educated, with a zest for expertise and a gift for languages, Jerome would have
made an excellent imperial agent, traveling on delicate missions throughout the
Greek and Latin parts of the empire. But an administrative career was not excit-
ing enough for Jerome. Ecclesiastical politics offered access to an even wider
world than service in the bureaucracy would have done.
    Within a few years, the excitements of the anti-­Arian dissidence swept Jerome
from Trier to Antioch. He eventually settled outside Antioch in 375, on the es-
tate of a remarkable patron, Evagrius of Antioch. Evagrius was a restless soul. He
had been a failure as a provincial governor, so he switched to the church. He
spent time in Italy as a follower of the ultra-­Nicene bishop Eusebius of Vercelli.
He translated into Latin Athanasius’s famous Life of Anthony. But in the 370s
very few Latin Christians were attracted to the monastic life in its own right.
They usually went East to pitch in in favor of the Nicene Creed. This is what Je-
rome did, by following the eccentric Evagrius back to Antioch.5
    At almost exactly the same time (in 373), the great Roman widow Melania
the Elder made her way to the East.6 Melania may have been as wealthy as her
younger in-­law Paulinus of Nola. But she belonged to a generation unaccustomed
to spectacular renunciations. She never formally renounced her wealth, nor did
she vanish suddenly from Rome. Her later admirers claimed that she had always
longed to go to the Holy Places. In fact, she took her time about moving to Pal-
estine. Widowed in 362, she had been content to reside in Rome for over a decade
until she saw her son Publicola properly enrolled in the Senate. Furthermore,
when she came to the eastern Mediterranean, Melania did not come only as a
pilgrim. She came as the supporter of an ecclesiastical faction. She set sail from

                                       260
                               jerome in rome


Rome bearing funds to support the Nicene cause. She did not go straight to
Jerusalem. She arrived in Alexandria with a ship loaded with gold and silver to
help the monks of the Nile Delta, whose lay support had been cut off by the
repressive measures of the pro-­Arian emperor Valens. Going on to Palestine, she
helped feed three thousand Egyptian monks in exile. Her funds tipped the bal-
ance in favor of the anti-­Arian party among the monasteries and hermitages of
northern Egypt.7
    Jerome also came to the East as an activist and not only as a seeker of monks.
But, above all, he came so as to make himself an expert. In his later letters Jerome
spoke dramatically of his life in a monastic cell, perched in “the vast desert that
stretches along the frontier between the Roman and the barbarian world.” In
fact, he continued to live like a scholar. He was never far from great libraries. He
settled on an estate of Evagrius, called Maronia, in the territory of Chalcis only
thirty miles east of Antioch. This estate was more like a place of learned otium
than the hermit’s cave in the broiling desert that Jerome later described to Roman
readers.8 As Megan Williams has made abundantly clear in her fine study of Je-
rome as a scholar, “His attraction seems to have been to the ascetic idea rather
than to the ascetic life.”9
    But there was nothing idle about Jerome’s otium. He read ferociously. He
stretched his linguistic capacities beyond that of even the most ambitious Latin
clergyman. Not only did he learn Greek, but he went on to make a beginning on
Hebrew. It was with these hard skills in hand that Jerome arrived in Rome in 382.
    Jerome knew that Damasus needed experts. He was quick to present himself
as indispensable as a translator and a critic of texts. He produced for Damasus
a more up-­to-­date Latin version of the Gospels. He went back to the original
Greek. It was the beginning of the monumental project from which the Latin
“Vulgate” grew.10 We must remember, however, that the fame of Jerome’s Vulgate
dates only from the early middle ages. At the time, the venture struck most Latin
clergymen as a dangerous and unnecessary tampering with a holy text. Faced
with these suspicions, Jerome reacted by setting himself up as the scourge of the
half educated. Unlike the amateurs who criticized him, he claimed to offer the
hard stuff—­study of the Scriptures based on unremitting toil and on the mastery
of difficult languages.
    Jerome needed to stress his unique expertise. For he was presenting Damasus
with an expensive project. He demanded access to costly books and to expensive
professional stenographers. To heighten his profile as an expert, he talked down
as many as possible of his contemporaries. He pointed out that Ambrose had
plagiarized a Greek author (the famous Alexandrian exegete Didymus the Blind)
when writing on the Holy Ghost. He claimed that the bishop of Milan had bor-
rowed from Greek authors so as to dress himself up “like a crow in borrowed
feathers.”11 Those who criticized his retranslation of the New Testament were dis-

                                        261
                                  chapter 16


missed as “two legged asses.” We now know that one of these “two legged asses”
was none other than the Roman clergyman known to us as Ambrosiaster!12 This
was not an attitude calculated to make him popular with the clergy of Rome.
   In Rome, Jerome rose with Damasus and fell with Damasus. The moment his
patron died, on December 11, 384, Damasus’s successor, the new bishop Siricius,
sent Jerome back to Antioch where he had originally been ordained as a priest.13
(As we have seen, Siricius later snubbed Paulinus of Nola in 395 for having de-
serted Barcelona where he had been made a priest.) Siricius was very much the
product of a clergy that had been pushed forward as a Third Estate by Damasus.
This clergy had produced careful and basically conservative writers like Am­
brosiaster. They had no use for self-­promoting outsiders such as Jerome. In the
summer of 385, Jerome left Rome never to return. As he wrote bitterly to the
nun Asella: “Fool that I was to think that I could sing the Lord’s song in a strange
land.”14


    “The Palace of Holy Paula”: Jerome and the Noblewomen of Rome

In the months before he left Rome, Jerome protested that his relations with
noble ladies had been the true cause of his downfall:
   Before I came to know the palace of holy Paula, all Rome was enthusiastic
   for me. In the judgment of almost all, I was worthy of the rank of highest
   bishop. My stylish pen gave voice to Damasus himself.15
   This was a preposterous claim. But it puts in perspective Jerome’s relations
with a circle of remarkable Roman women between the years 382 and 385. It
was the male, self-­consciously clerical world that had gathered around the aging
Damasus that had made and then broken Jerome. Anxious to carve out a niche
for himself in the clergy, women had been of secondary interest to him. He cer-
tainly did not come to Rome only to act as the mentor of Paula and her circle.
Nor did these noblewomen seek him out. He wished himself upon them by his
brilliant letters.16 To begin with, Jerome may have approached Paula and other
devout ladies as a fallback to his main career in the service of Damasus.
   But the moment Damasus died, the protection offered by his patronage was
removed. Jerome was fair game to his enemies. The issues raised by Jerome’s rela-
tions with noblewomen emerged immediately. He became the object of sexual
innuendos. In just these years, the drama of Priscillian was unfolding in distant
Spain. As the fate of Priscillian showed, accusations of inappropriate relations
with noblewomen could be a matter of life or death. This was especially the case
when they were combined with issues of financial support. For his enemies, Je-


                                        262
                                 jerome in rome


rome’s activities fit all too well into the classic stereotype of the charismatic fund-­
raiser of dubious morals: “The chink of coin in the hand . . . the conversation
laced with innuendo . . . the eye [that] leered lustfully.”17
    Faced by this potentially lethal accusation, Jerome’s nerve did not desert him.
He decided that assertion was the best form of defense. Far from distancing him-
self from accusations of relations with women, he decided that if he had to leave
Rome he would be known to have done so not because he had been chased out
by his male colleagues in the clergy but because he had preached a heroic brand
of eastern asceticism in the palaces of noble ladies. He immediately published a
series of letters he had written while at Rome to two leading ladies. One was
the sixty-­year-­old widow Marcella, who lived in a palace on the Aventine when
she was not living in pious retirement on her estate in the suburbium of Rome.
The other was the forty-­year-­old widow Paula, who would soon follow him to
the Holy Land. These remarkable letters have ensured that the two women and
those around them are “the most recognizable faces of the female monastic
movement in the late fourth century.”18 The letters to Marcella and Paula made
Jerome famous at the time and in all future ages because they raised what for
fourth-­century Romans were the ever-­interesting and closely related issues of sex
and money.
    First, let us deal with sex. In the spring of 384, Jerome wrote his Letter 22 to
Paula about the ascetic grooming of her twenty-­year-­old daughter, Iulia Eu-
stochium. This letter was a brilliantly contrived amalgam of ascetic idées reçues.
In it, Jerome made a bid to become a presence in the houses of the rich.19 He
achieved this effect through the insistent physicality of his ascetic advice. The
letter echoed in reverse the meticulous attention to diet and to the care of the
body that Romans had long expected of the skilled house doctors who haunted
the palaces of the wealthy. Ancient doctors had written so as to encourage a
healthy warmth to blow through the bodies of the young. This would lead the
girl to nurture the capacity for sexual delight on which (according to ancient
medical theory that linked female orgasm with conception) her chances of fertil-
ity depended. With hot and healthy bodies, the young couple could set to with
appropriate vigor to found a family. Jerome now stepped in as the house doctor
of asceticism. He gave advice as to how to put the energizing process into reverse.
He urged Paula to “freeze” the sexual urge in Eustochium. She would do this
through long fasts and vigils, through an austere diet, and through total absti-
nence from wine.20
    At the same time, Paula was insistently reminded by Jerome that this was an
asceticism now practiced by aristocrats. The body of Eustochium was recogniz-
ably the body of a noble girl. The sheen of wealth lay on her skin. It penetrated
her entire physical being.


                                         263
                                  chapter 16


   Born of noble pedigree, always surrounded by delights, always laid in
   feather beds, you claim that you can not abstain from wine and from the
   more succulent of foods.21

   Furthermore, Eustochium’s body was intensely private. It was a corpusculum,
a “hot little body.22 It was shielded from the world by the majesty of a late Roman
house whose long corridors and doorways, veiled by silken curtains, led to the
shrine-­like intimacy of the cubiculum—­the inner room. The inner room did not
function exclusively as a bedroom, as in a modern house. It was a guarded place,
set aside for intimate conversation, for Christian worship, or (for the unregen-
erate majority of the rich whose erotic mosaics we have seen in villas all over the
empire) for the vigorous joys of love.23
   Jerome’s emphasis on the cubiculum deserves our attention for it contained a
challenge to contemporary values. Jerome did not aim to create monasteries out-
side the home. Instead, he wished his correspondents to turn their entire palaces
into ascetic fortresses, closed against the outside world. Nothing could have
been more contrary to Roman habits. A noble palace had always been a partly
public place. Its spacious courtyards and reception halls were supposed to be
open to the world at large. It was in these great, open spaces quite as much as in
the Forum that the ruling class of Rome conducted the business of the city. To
extend to the palace as a whole the sense of intimate seclusion associated with a
woman’s bedroom was to slam the door in the face of the wider world. It was to
create a more than usually charged notion of the “private.”
   In Jerome’s writings, the bedroom absorbed the palace. He presented it as a
garden of spiritual delights given over to the reading of the Scriptures. In Chris-
tian circles, meditation on the Scriptures was expected to be an experience as
erotic and as tantalizing as anything that could be found in the works of Plato
and Plotinus when they wrote on the thrilling beauty of the One. It involved a
search for ecstasy. At this time, Jerome translated Origen’s Commentary on the
Song of Songs. This great love poem from the days of the ancient kings of Is-
rael was read by Origen and other Christians as a guide to seekers of spiritual
sweetness.
   For Origen, the “touch” of the Bridegroom on the body of the beloved was a
moment of intellectual frisson, which occurred during the reading of the Scrip-
tures.24 A contemporary of Plotinus, Origen and his Greek readers took such
moments of mystical awakening for granted. But Jerome was more colorful than
Origen. When he wrote of Eustochium experiencing such thrills, as a noble girl
with a hot little body, enclosed within the cubiculum of a noble house, no reader
(fourth century or modern) could have avoided thinking that the verse—­and
may He touch your belly—­referred to something more charged, perhaps, than the
chaste excitement of a professor in his library.25

                                       264
                               jerome in rome


    We moderns have become strangely prudish in our attitudes toward ecstasy
and intellectual frissons. We conclude that such passages reveal in Jerome “his
consummate sense of style, and his dirty mind.”26 But, as we have already seen in
the case of Augustine, late antique persons were less troubled than we are by the
language of spiritual delight. They would have noticed something more disturb-
ing. In Jerome’s program, the spiritual exercises of Eustochium cut her off from
the public life of the churches. Jerome advised Paula to keep Eustochium at home.
She was not to visit the great shrines of Christian Rome. She was to avoid the
crowded gatherings associated with the feasts of the martyrs. Rather, the martyrs
were to visit her.
    This was unusually drastic advice. Nighttime vigils in honor of the martyrs
(where the great basilicas of the suburbium shone in the dark like giant lanterns)
were the high point of the life of the Christian community of Rome. It was not
for nothing that the rich needed a list of feasts of the martyrs such as that pro-
vided by Filocalus in his famous Calendar. By being present at these gatherings,
the Christian rich established relations with the poor and with their fellow be-
lievers that echoed, in miniature, the ancient dialogue between the nobles and
the people of Rome.27 For rich and pious families to be urged to withdraw from
such occasions was a danger sign. Jerome’s high-­pitched advocacy of total ascetic
seclusion in upper-­class circles aimed to create a world of elect souls who felt
themselves superior to the average Christian. It threatened to undermine the
unity of the Christians of Rome as a single “holy people” that Damasus and those
around him had worked so hard to maintain.
    There is a cloying physicality and an insistence on private space in Jerome’s
writings that rivet our attention. He expected that this would be the reaction
of his readers. A superabundant modern literature on Jerome and women shows
that he succeeded.28 But the purpose of letters such as Letter 22 was not simply
to close the bodies and the houses of noble virgins and widows against the perils
of sex. It was to ensure that these widows and their virgin daughters closed the
doors of their palaces against an outside world that was eager less for their bodies
than for their money.


      Nudos amat eremus: The desert loves those stripped to the bone

                    Jerome on Wealth and Poverty

On the subject of money, Jerome felt entitled to write with more than usual ve-
hemence. He claimed to have come to Rome from Syria as a self-­professed Old
Desert Hand. In fact, he knew very little about the Christian Middle East. His
experience had been limited to Syria alone. In particular, his notion of poverty

                                        265
                                   chapter 16


showed the clear marks of Syrian piety at its most unflinching. This was a notion
of poverty based on identification with the imagined absolute poverty of Christ.
    The Syrian ideal of poverty was more radical than that adopted by other as-
cetics in other regions. It involved a total emptying of the social self. Applied to
Christ and to his followers—­the monks—­the word msarrqûtâ (from srq—­to
strip) conjured up to Syrian ears something more awesome than the abjectio of
Christ on which (as we have seen) the piety of persons such as Paulinus had
concentrated.29 For Paulinus, abjectio was associated with the manner in which
Christ had “stooped to conquer” by becoming a humble human being. It had
involved Paulinus and his monks in a studied dimming down of the current se-
miotics of wealth in upper-­class society. The pale, ill-­shorn, and roughly dressed
monks who gathered around Paulinus at Cimitile were a sight to make one think.
But behind them always lay the shadow of an epic stepping down. Just as Christ,
for all the deliberate eclipse of his éclat, had been and, indeed, still was God (and
all the more God for being silent), so Paulinus’s monks remained aristocrats,
even when they were pointedly humbled.
    In Syria the notion of the self-­depletion of the monk went further. To follow
Christ’s self-­emptying meant more than a toning down of the marks of power
and wealth. It meant a total whiteout of the social person. On occasions, it even
led to the erasure of the boundary between humanity and the animal world.
Some Syrian monks were known as “grazers.” In full view of an admiring laity,
groups of monks moved like herds of animals, eating the wild herbs and grasses
of the mountains that overlooked prosperous cities.30 They sat on the edge of vil-
lages, sheltering in the bottom of dry cisterns with no roof above their heads but
the sky itself.31 The monks of Syria had not simply humbled themselves within
society. They had stepped outside society itself. Their very presence mocked the
world. In this, they were the direct heirs of the Cynics.32
    With the enthusiasm of a foreigner, Jerome saw these distinctive holy men
through the lens of a long classical tradition. He acclaimed them as the Cynics
of his time. They seemed to him to live lives as stripped bare of material objects
as was the hard rock of the empty cisterns in which they squatted. In his earliest
manifesto for the ascetic life, he coined the vivid phrase Nudos amat eremus:
“The desert loves those stripped to the bone.”33
    Jerome had developed this stark vision early. When still in Syria (in 379), he
wrote the vivid Vita Pauli—­Life of Paul the Hermit. He presented Paul the her-
mit as a standing reproach to the conscience of the rich.34
   Those of you, whose estates are so far flung that you do not know where
   they are, who sheathe your palaces in marble, who string your villas, one
   after another, estate by estate—­what was ever lacking, I ask you, to that old
   man? You drink from jeweled cups, he from a natural stream. You sew gold


                                        266
                                 jerome in rome


   thread into your robes, he wore clothes that not even the most exploited
   of your slaves would wear. . . . Covered with the meanest dirt, Paul lies at
   rest, sure to rise again in glory. The stones of carefully constructed tombs
   rest on you, with all your riches—­sure to burn in Hell.35
    It was a merciless message to bring from northern Syria to the Christian rich
of Rome. Over the years, the contrast between gross wealth and stark poverty
was advanced by Jerome in a series of dramatic antitheses that gathered cumula-
tive momentum—­wealth was to poverty as Dives was to the shivering Lazarus,
as the Jewish Patriarchs of the Old Testament, comfortably ensconced in mate-
rial goods, were to the penniless Apostles, as married sex was to pure virginity,
ultimately as Christ was to “the world.”36 The thought of the naked Christ, iden-
tified with the shivering poor, was what enabled Jerome to act as the superego of
his patrons. Writing to Paula about the great illuminated Bibles that had begun
to be produced for rich Christians, Jerome wrote: “The parchment page is dyed
deep in purple, the letters are a trickle of gold, the bound volumes are dressed in
gems—­and the naked Christ lies dying at the gate.”37
    Once he had established himself in Rome, however, Jerome’s ominous sense of
the contrast between wealth and destitution was applied to a different task than
the care of the poor. It enabled him to become a consummate satirist.38 Address-
ing the Christian rich of Rome, Jerome stepped with ease into a time-­honored
literary stance. He, Jerome the monk, was the poor man faced with the foibles of
the rich. Like the poet and satirist Martial before him, Jerome invoked the ideal
of poverty “almost always to achieve a distance from wealth.” As Greg Woolf has
written recently of Martial: “the affectation of poverty gives [him] a perspective,
a kind of license. . . . [It] marks out the moral gulf that . . . separates [him from the
rich].”39
    Indeed, what Jerome wrote about upper-­class Roman society had the deli-
cious triviality of great satire. His unfailing pen picked on the vivid minutiae of
the day-­to-­day life of the fashionable rich. We are told that pagans flocked to
make copies of his Letter 22 to Eustochium.40 It was an album of wicked carica-
tures of persons whom they would have recognized. Jerome showed “The First
Lady of Rome” (possibly Faltonia Proba, the wife of none other than Petronius
Probus) as she paraded through the courtyard of Saint Peter’s, surrounded by her
entourage of eunuchs. Once she punched a beggar with her own hands when he
came back to ask for more than one coin.41 He also described a Roman clergy-
man with well-­oiled ringlets and pretty sandals hurrying from one fashionable
gathering to another. Once arrived, the clergyman would pass the chamber pot
to an elderly donor. He would kiss the old man’s head while holding out his hands,
not to administer the priest’s blessing but to grab the customary “tip” given by
the rich to clients at their salutatio.42


                                          267
                                    chapter 16


    Waspish though it might be, all this was safe stuff. Jerome was untouched by
the fierce populism that drove Ambrose in Milan to preach at just this time on
the avarice and violence of the rich. If anything, what Jerome wrote was reassur-
ing for Christian Roman readers. Jerome did not treat Rome as a doomed city,
irrevocably tainted by centuries of idolatry. These fears were still present in the
370s and 380s. The staid Ambrosiaster had written constantly against the pagan-
ism of the nobiles who held the cultural high ground in the city.43 A decade later,
when he wrote to Pammachius, Paulinus of Nola would speak of Rome as a city
that still lay under the threat of the Apocalypse. The Rome that Paulinus saw was
still Babylon—­the great, doomed city of the Apocalypse.44 Jerome’s shimmering
word pictures banished these dark thoughts. A reader of Jerome was not expected
to see a doomed city. All that was wrong with Rome was the piquant misbehav-
ior of Christians in fashionable society.45


                 Discite superbiam sanctam: Learn a holy pride

          Marriage Strategies in the Circles of Jerome

But fashionable society, as Jerome and every other Roman knew very well, was
not only about dining, sex, and soirées. It was about a relentless round of sociabil-
ity driven by the marriage market. The dinner parties Jerome urged Eustochium
and her mother to shun were like the London Season in eighteenth-­century En-
gland. They were places where heiresses were put on show and where the “Senate
House of Ladies” met to discuss the merits of potential brides. For this reason,
we should step back for a moment to look carefully at the women who received
Jerome’s ascetic admonitions to avoid such occasions.46
    Jerome’s letters to Marcella and Paula give us a precious glimpse of two noble-
women and of the extensive network of relatives, in-­laws, and dependents who
gathered around them. But we must remember that it is a glimpse through a
mere crack in the wall compared with what we could (but may never) know
about upper-­class society in Rome as a whole. The two groups were interrelated;
Pammachius was the link between them. Pammachius was a cousin of Marcella.
He married (perhaps at this time) Paulina, the second daughter of Paula (and
the elder sister of Eustochium). This was the Paulina whose memorial banquet
would be described by Paulinus of Nola in 396. Pammachius had been a fellow
student with Jerome in the 360s. He may have provided Jerome with an entry to
the houses of both women. We may well be looking at a grouping of families that
had already opted to be inward looking. Both Marcella and Paula seem to have
been concerned to maintain shared religious traditions through a more than
usually careful choice of friends and in-­laws. Elective affinities as fellow Christians

                                         268
                               jerome in rome


may always have weighed with them more than did more crudely dynastic con-
siderations in their choice of spouses and in-­laws.
   There was good reason for this. As we have seen, the resident aristocracy of
Rome was far from monolithic. It was as multilayered as that of the provinces.
Families securely established in the inner circle of the nobiles constantly looked
down the social ladder in search of marriage partners that they might absorb
so as to make use of the new wealth and the political skills such persons had ob-
tained through making their careers in the fourth-­century imperial system. We
saw this happening in the series of upward marriages by which Ausonius and his
relatives had established themselves among the older noble families of Bordeaux.
(As we saw, a similar upward marriage may have linked the family of Proiecta to
her husband’s family, the noble Roman family of the Turcii.) To older families,
a downward marriage represented an infusion of talent and new money.
   Paula seems to have belonged to a family that had recently brought provincial
wealth into Rome. Her father, Rogatus, was said to be descended from Agamem-
non. One might smile at this claim. But Christian provincial families in Greece
already claimed Homeric ancestors: a lady buried at Demetrias, near Volos,
claimed descent from “the family of Achilles.”47 More to the point, Paula owned
the entire city of Actium (near modern Preveza in Greece) on the coast of Epi-
rus.48 Her mother was supposedly descended from the Scipios and the Gracchi.
An air of old nobility, partly evaporated, may have clung to Paula through her
mother. But her mother’s family had evidently been glad to take aboard the re-
sources of an enterprising Greek.49
   Marcella found herself in a similar position. She had once been the target of a
downward marriage, planned by a member of the high nobility. When widowed
after a few months, in the early 360s, her mother offered her to an outstanding
figure, Naeratius Cerealis. Cerealis had been a consul. He came from a family
that had long dominated Samnium and had even established relations with the
emperor through a marriage to “royals” of the dynasty of Constantine. But at
the moment when he approached Marcella, Cerealis was down on his luck. He
had been tainted with a failed rebellion against Constantius II.50 He may have
sought, at this moment, to bolster his uncertain position by marrying downward
into a rich family. Marcella did not accept him. Even if she had not wished to
remain a widow so as to be a pious Christian, she might in any case have rejected
Cerealis—­a failed grandee—­as a bad investment.
   Altogether, both Paula and Marcella seem to have come from families who
were placed in an awkward position. They were above the average clarissimi and
clarissimae whose sarcophagi litter the catacombs of Rome. But they were still
marginal to the inner core of the nobility of Rome. The nobles looked on rich
provincials such as the family of Rogatus and his daughter Paula in a manner not
unlike the English and French nobility of the late nineteenth century when they

                                       269
                                    chapter 16


considered marrying the daughters of American industrialists. It was a situation
that gave the families of “new” men considerable leverage, provided that they
could offer virgins and widows to potential noble spouses.
    Furthermore, widows could be very rich; they had rights in their father’s in-
heritance. The sooner they were remarried the better. Virgins, also, were not en-
couraged to remain virgins for long. They were to be placed briskly on the mar-
riage market so as to widen the social and political outreach of an up-­and-­coming
family.51 In a world dependent in this way on the circulation of its women,
­Jerome made constant propaganda for widowhood and virginity as immobile,
 consecrated states. By idealizing perpetual virginity and by praising perpetual
 widowhood, Jerome did nothing less than threaten to freeze two vital moving
 parts in the structure of the Roman aristocracy. He wrote to Paula about Eu-
 stochium in his notorious Letter 22: “Learn in these matters a holy pride of
 birth. Know that you are better than them.”52 This memorable phrase was im-
 mediately taken up by other ascetic writers. It has usually been interpreted as a
 general exaltation of an elitist form of Christianity. In fact (as is so often the case
 with Jerome), it was bitterly precise. Eustochium was to avoid the salons of mar-
 ried ladies where the business of the marriage market of Rome was conducted. For
 Eustochium, marriage was to be avoided. More than that: in Jerome’s opinion, for
 an elect soul such as Eustochium, marriage itself was the ultimate mésalliance.


        “Let the patrician set thunder against me”: Ascetic Vocations
                           and the Flow of Wealth

Jerome, of course, expected the aristocracy of Rome to be suitably shocked by his
proposal. Writing ten years later, in 396, to the lady Furia (a relative by marriage
of Paula—­we are in a very small world), he told her that the moment he touched
on the themes of virginity and widowhood, he could expect outrage in high places:
   I am fully aware that I am now putting my hand in the fire. Let the nobles
   rise up against me, let the Patrician Set thunder against me—­call me a
   sorcerer, a seducer, a person to be bundled off to the end of the world.53
   But we must remember that if Jerome was skilled in manipulating his own
persona, he was equally skilled at caricaturing the attitudes of his opponents. He
liked to have someone to hate him. But if we look carefully at the families whom
Jerome addressed, one is surprised, if anything, by the flexibility and lack of
sexual panic with which the male members of the Christian rich handled their
daughters and widows. This reflects a certain sense (which is not unusual in
upwardly mobile families) that not all strategies for advancement had to pass
through the marriage bed. We are not dealing with a city entirely dominated by

                                         270
                               jerome in rome


a closed caste of nobles whose women were valued only as the human clamps
that linked together vast blocks of hereditary property. The Anicii might con-
solidate their legendary wealth through marrying a succession of cousins. Lesser
families could afford more diverse strategies, which left room for a fair number
of mavericks who were simply content to drop out of the marriage market. Am-
brose is an example of this kind. He and his brother remained celibate. His sister,
Marcellina, became a “virgin of the church” as early as 355. Nobody seems to
have minded.54
    Furthermore, Romans (pagans and Christians alike) were by no means as
shocked by the notion of virginity as Jerome expected them to be. But they val-
ued a different sort of virginity from that propounded by Jerome. They valued a
“votive” virginity, safely linked to the home and validated by the local church.
Decades before Jerome brought his newfangled ascetic expertise from the East
to Rome (indeed, in as early as the 340s), the father of the nun Asella—­whom
Jerome came to know in Rome—­dreamed before her birth that “a virgin had
been presented to him in a phial of shining glass, more pure than any mirror.”55
    Asella was marked out from birth as a household virgin. Her virginity and her
regular prayers ensured the supernatural protection of a family which, at that
time, included both pagans and Christians. In the transitional religious world of
the mid-­fourth century, the Vestal Virgins were still widely respected. There was
nothing strange or particularly shocking about Asella’s role as a joining point
between heaven and the house in a family where half of the members were still
pagan. If virgins such as the Vestals were good for the Roman state, a virgin—­
even a Christian virgin—­in the family could be good for a Roman clan.56
    What concerned contemporaries was that these individual vocations should
not block the movement of property from one generation to the next. This prob-
lem was solved in differing ways. By the time Jerome met them, both Marcella
and Paula had already arranged with their kin (at some time in the 370s) to di-
vert the principal resources of the family in such a way that the tide of wealth
flowed around them to the next generation. This flow of wealth was not blocked
by the decision of the two women not to remarry. Marcella retained her inheri-
tance. But she had to buy out her mother by surrendering her jewelry and furni-
ture.57 As we saw in the case of the church founded by the illustrious lady Vestina
through the sale of her jewelry, this would have amounted to no small sum. Jew-
els were not only valuable; they were seen as heirlooms heavy with a sense of heri-
tage. A later law (issued in Milan in 390) made clear what was at stake. The law
declared that such jewels were “the embellishments of a sumptuous home.” They
were not to be sold off for the benefit of the clergy and the faceless poor.58
    Unlike Marcella, Paula simply allowed her own inheritance to bypass her. It
went to her son, Toxotius, who remained in Rome to carry on the family, while
she herself soon joined Jerome in the Holy Land. Yet she was never without money

                                       271
                                   chapter 16


when she started to build a monastery, a hostel, a defensive tower, and a large li-
brary for Jerome in Bethlehem.59 In all these cases, it was the vertical link between
the generations that mattered. Older women, as widows, negotiated successfully
for their own freedom and for the interests of their own children, either to pro-
tect them as virgins or to endow them for a future marriage.
    Altogether, it is important for the historian to avoid seeing fourth-­century
Rome in the melodramatic broken light of Jerome’s letters. What was not at stake,
at this time, was the fate of entire dynasties or the potential dilapidation of entire
fortunes. As John Curran has noted, even among Christian families touched by
asceticism, “the careful management of property” was the rule.60
    Jerome’s intervention in Roman affairs was limited in its impact to a few fam-
ilies. But the tensions this intervention raised were real and affected a far wider
circle of Christians. In Rome, the arrival and departure of Jerome had coincided
with a new development. The 380s saw an increased religious and cultural strati-
fication within the Roman community. As we saw, this development can be traced
on the ground in the emergence of ever more prominent family mausolea close
to martyr’s shrines in the catacombs. Social stratification undermined the Roman
Christian ideal of an undivided “holy people.” Nowhere was this social stratifica-
tion shown more blatantly than by increased cultural stratification. Certain fami-
lies went out of their way to distance themselves from their peers in their zeal and
in their scholarly pursuits. It was to these families that Jerome had gravitated.
    This was not a matter that involved only the relations of a few reclusive âmes
d’élite with their chosen gurus. Ascetic piety such as that advocated by Jerome
cost money. It involved the transfer of large sums to monastic settlements in
Egypt and the Holy Land. It also involved the considerable expense connected
with high scholarship—­the assembling of libraries and the production of books.
There was a danger that, compared with these new enterprises, supporting the
local churches of Christian Rome might come to seem to lack glamour. The
wealth of rich and pious persons might vanish to distant regions. It might be
expended on the theological vendettas of expatriate scholars rather than dis-
bursed in the courtyards of the churches of Rome. Whether this actually hap-
pened is a different matter. But in the 390s and 400s, the thought that it could
happen was enough to raise alarm. The possibility added a note of tension to the
affairs of Rome and (of course) provided the ever-­ready pen of Jerome with ma-
terial for yet more letters and pamphlets. In this case, however, what was at stake
for Jerome was not sex and money. It was the cost of cultural endeavors and the
rival networks of patronage on which such endeavors depended.




                                         272
                          Chapter 17
                          •••••
                 Between Rome and Jerusalem
      Women, Patronage, and Learning, 385–­412




    “I have found what my soul has sought after”: Women and Learning
                                in Rome

We must never underestimate the fierce intellectualism of many upper-­class Ro-
mans. This intellectual commitment had long roots. In advocating monasticism
and intensive meditation on the Scriptures, Jerome claimed to have brought to
Rome an exciting novelty from the East. In fact, he had many pagan predeces-
sors. Those to whose palaces he came could look back to at least one and a half
centuries of teach-­ins conducted by spiritual mentors from the eastern provinces.
   When the great Neo-­Platonic philosopher Plotinus came from Egypt to
Rome around 243 he found himself at the center of a whole circle of zealous
Romans. Women were prominent among them.
   Several women were greatly attached to him amongst them Gemina, in
   whose house he lived, and her daughter, called Gemina, too, after the
   mother, and Amphiclea, the wife of Ariston . . . all three devoted them-
   selves assiduously to philosophy.1
   Jerome ministered to persons who came from roughly the same social niche
as did those who had listened to Plotinus. The study circles around Plotinus were
not drawn from the very top level of the nobiles but from the new aristocracy
that had begun to emerge in the course of the military crisis of the third century.
The pagan sarcophagi of the age of Plotinus frequently showed the deceased in the
company of philosophers and the Muses. Some of the most impressive of these
were commissioned by members of the new service aristocracy of soldiers and
administrators. These persons were the sociological equivalents (in the third
century) of the newly created clarissimi and clarissimae of the fourth century. In
both the age of Plotinus and in the age of Jerome, we are dealing with men and

                                       273
                                  chapter 17


women for whom the search for nobility included the cultivation of a true no-
bility of the mind. In this area, at least, they could rival or outshine the better-­
established families of Rome. Hence the patronage of scholars and of religious
guides was of more than usual importance for them.2
    Despite his suffocating emphasis on physical asceticism, Jerome was the heir
of the great spiritual mentors of the third century. But he did not look back to
the pagan Plotinus. He looked back to the Christian Origen. Like Plotinus and
Origen, Jerome moved in circles that expected women to be as intellectually en-
gaged as men. What he offered them was a study of the Scriptures that was as
endlessly thrilling as the mystical quest for the One had been in Neo-­Platonic
circles.
    It is important to do justice to this aspect of the activity of Jerome. At first
sight it seems incongruous. The scholarly labor of Jerome emphasized the need
to seize the literal meaning of the Scriptures gained by translation from the origi-
nal languages. This might seem to us to distance the Bible from mystical endeav-
ors. But this is a modern view, based on a modern preference for what we call an
“objective” and “historical” study of the Bible. For Jerome and those whom he
taught, it was the exact opposite. The entire Bible was thought of as an encoded
message from God. To learn Greek and then Hebrew was to advance yet further
in cracking this code. It was to learn how to pierce through secondary layers of
imprecise or misleading translations. Once these layers had been removed, it was
possible to glimpse the hidden Sun of the Wisdom of God that blazed in the
very depths of the Scriptures: I have found what my soul has sought after. I shall
hold Him and shall not let Him go (Song of Songs 3:4).3 Even the crushing ascetic
regimes Jerome propounded for his charges were linked to that endeavor. For
only a body whose own sensuality had fallen silent would thrill with a purified
and sharpened sensibility to the mystic joys hinted at in the text of the Bible.4
    Jerome belonged to a generation of great women readers. They were driven by
a search for the inner meaning of the Scriptures that was at one and the same
time scholarly and mystical. Melania the Elder was believed to have read three
million lines of Origen and two and a half million lines of more recent authors.
She had read a body of Christian literature (mainly devoted to commentaries on
the Scriptures) that was three hundred times larger than Homer’s Iliad: “And she
did not read them once only and in an offhand way, but she worked on them,
dredging through each work seven or eight times.”5 Her granddaughter, Melania
the Younger, was no different. Once settled on her estate in Africa, in 411, Mela-
nia began to read and to copy. She read through the Old and New Testaments
four times a year. She made copies of the Scriptures with her own hands.

   Often, when she was sitting in silence or writing, her mother would enter
   the room. Unless she had completed her work or her reading, she would

                                        274
                   women, patronage, and learning


   not answer or ask her mother anything. Realizing this, her mother would
   withdraw, respecting her silence, with wonder and reverence.6


                         Bene nummatus: Well loaded

                 Rufinus, Jerome, and Their Patrons

Such biblical reading (like the philosophical inquiries of an earlier age) seemed
to be a peculiarly weight-­free and otherworldly exercise. But it assumed a world
cluttered with books. In Roman times, the philosopher had always been a man
of simple life and heavy bookshelves. A third-­century sarcophagus in Cagliari
(Sardinia) shows one such philosopher. Dressed in a simple robe, he sits gestur-
ing from an open scroll to a disciple who is also holding a scroll. Behind him is a
huge locked cupboard on which a further sixteen scrolls are piled. The first dis-
coverer of the sarcophagus thought that it represented a philosophical discourse
on the vanity of wealth. It was no such thing. The locked cupboard and the scrolls
were the wealth of the philosopher. Though dedicated to elevating thoughts, the
cultural world of the philosopher, and of his successor the Christian exegete and
spiritual mentor, was far from financially weight free.7
    Modern persons in a world glutted with cheap books forget that the tradi-
tion of learned, contemplative reading propounded by Jerome represented a pro-
digious investment of money. Each copy of the Gospels alone cost as much as a
marble sarcophagus. The setting up of a library stocked with texts of the Holy
Scriptures and with their commentaries (not to mention other Christian writ-
ings) left a footprint of real wealth. It was an act of monumentalization that was
as costly as the building or redecoration of a villa.8
    The age of Plotinus and Origen (in the mid-­third century) and the age of Je-
rome (in the late fourth and early fifth centuries) were not only ages of mystical
endeavor. They were ages of the book. Anthony Grafton and Megan Williams
have recently shown that behind the proliferation of Christian libraries lay a
revolution in book production. At just this time, the no-­nonsense codex (the
direct ancestor of the bound book) replaced the scroll. These codices quickened
the pace of scholarship and led to ever greater accumulations of books. The li-
braries owned by some Christian scholars were overwhelming. The library cre-
ated in the 240s by Origen at Caesarea Maritima in Palestine (and later preserved
by the bishops of Caesarea) was “one of the greatest single monuments of Roman
scholarship.”9
    Jerome expected his spiritual charges to set up such libraries and to help him
do the same. It is, indeed, one of the great paradoxes of the Christian culture of
this time (elegantly explored by Megan Williams in her recent study The Monk

                                       275
                                  chapter 17


and the Book) that a monk such as Jerome both claimed to be an advocate of total
poverty and at the same time spent his life in the shadow of great libraries. He
was tied irrevocably to wealthy persons who paid for the libraries on which his lit-
erary endeavors depended. In Antioch he had depended on the library of Evagrius.
In Rome he had sought out the patronage of Damasus. From 385 (when he left
Rome) until his death (around 420) he lived in Bethlehem, drawing on a library
in a monastery built, endowed, and even fortified for him by the Roman widow
Paula. Altogether, this was a thoroughly incongruous situation. But Jerome would
not have been Jerome if he had not been able to mask, through ingenious rhe-
torical flourishes, the paradox inherent in his combination of a monastic persona
committed (as we saw) to a doctrine of extreme poverty with that of a scholar
tied to expensive books.10
    Jerome, however, was merciless when confronted with enemies who did not
veil their dependence on wealthy patrons as successfully as he did. We can see
this in his relations with Rufinus of Aquileia, a former friend who ended up as
Jerome’s most deadly enemy. Rufinus was a mirror image of Jerome. Like Jerome,
he was both a monastic scholar and a dependent of the rich. He had traveled
with Melania the Elder to Alexandria in 373 and went on with her to Jerusalem.
He returned to Italy in late 397 and remained in the environment of Rome (al-
most certainly settled in one of the villas of Melania) except for a short visit to
Aquileia. He died in Sicily in 412 as a refugee from the Goths. He had fled to
Sicily in the company of Melania’s granddaughter, Melania the Younger, and of
her husband, Pinianus. He had been able to live a life of learning for almost forty
years because of the patronage of one very rich lady and her relatives.11
    Rufinus did not reach out into Hebrew as Jerome had done. Instead he was
content to channel the wisdom of the Greek East into the Latin world. He trans-
lated the Rule and Homilies of Basil of Caesarea, as well as the Bible commentar-
ies of the great Origen. To his eventual misfortune, he also translated Origen’s
On First Principles. This was the great Alexandrian’s most challenging work. In it,
Origen had defended the freedom of the will and the justice of God in terms of
a vast cosmic drama that involved him in risqué speculations on the preexistence
of the soul.12 Rufinus found himself declared guilty by association for having
translated such daring views. But he was not deterred by accusations of heresy.
Nor were those who patronized him. Rufinus was needed. His role as a link be-
tween Rome and the Holy Land was just as important as was that played by Je-
rome. One of his admirers once dreamed of a ship coming into port bearing a
precious cargo from the East: it was yet another translation from the Greek by
the indispensable Rufinus!13
    Rufinus could not have engaged in his monumental work of translation with-
out the funding and protection provided by Melania the Elder. Melania’s foun-
dation of a monastery on the Mount of Olives and her prolonged residence there

                                        276
                   women, patronage, and learning


(374–­99) marked a new departure. Previously, aristocrats had traveled to the
Holy Land and back as pilgrims. To decide to settle permanently in the Holy
Land and to found a monastic community just outside Jerusalem involved an
entirely new set of financial outlays. Frequent visitors had to be housed. Monas-
tic communities in both Egypt and the Holy Land had to be kept in funds. This
was no small burden. For, although the monastic communities of Egypt claimed
to be self-­supporting, they rarely succeeded in surviving without substantial gifts
from rich foreigners such as Melania.14 Above all, long residence in Jerusalem
exposed Melania and her protégé Rufinus to the theological rancors of the east-
ern clergy.
    In 397 a quarrel exploded between Rufinus (with Melania) and Jerome (with
Paula) over the proper use of the works of Origen. This controversy need not
concern us. What it did do, however, was unleash a stream of innuendoes that
began in the Holy Land but soon echoed throughout Italy. These had nothing
to do with sex and everything to do with money. Writing to rally support in
Rome, Jerome claimed that Rufinus was bene nummatus, “well loaded.” He was
indecently well funded by the rich Melania. Supported by a rich patron, Rufinus
plodded comfortably through life with the ridiculous pomposity and slowness
of a tortoise. He was not a real scholar or a real monk. His work lacked the wiry
vigor of a true ascetic. Unlike Jerome’s own incessant labor, there was no sudor—
­no sweat—­behind it.15
    Rufinus answered in kind. He accused Jerome of having broken his vow never
to have anything to do with pagan literature. He claimed that Jerome had em-
ployed Latin calligraphers in Rufinus’s own monastery to make copies of the works
of Cicero. He had paid top prices for these heathen classics. Rufinus vouched for
it: he had seen the folded sheets before they were cut and bound.16 These were
trivial accusations in themselves, but they take us into the workshops of two
great monasteries, in each of which book production played a major role. They
also reveal the dilemma of both Jerome and Rufinus. Both were Christian monks
and scholars. And both depended on resources only rich patrons could provide.
    If anything, part of Jerome’s personal bitterness toward Rufinus was due to
the fact that Melania the Elder had managed her affairs better than had Paula.
Unlike Paula, Melania never sold up her estates or allowed them to slip past her
to her children. Instead, she managed them carefully in such a way as to provide
a steady flow of funds to the Holy Land for decades on end. When she suddenly
returned to Italy, in 399, it was said that she had done so in order to protect Ru-
finus (who had preceded her by two years). But she may also have returned so as
to mobilize the income of her estates and raise further funds by campaigning for
the ascetic life among her relatives, many of whom were friends and relatives of
Paulinus of Nola.17 Going up against a formidable network that included persons
such as Paulinus of Nola, Jerome and Paula were outclassed.

                                        277
                                    chapter 17


    The imbalance between the resources of Jerome and Rufinus showed in many
ways. For instance, Rufinus mocked Jerome’s continued involvement with pagan
classical literature. He himself had deliberately adopted a style of anodyne sim-
plicity. It was a style consonant with his humble persona as a Christian monk
untouched by worldly rhetoric.18 But Rufinus, with the financial backing of Me-
lania the Elder, could afford to be simple. He was well funded. He did not have
to show off so as to raise funds.
    Jerome, by contrast, was tied to Paula. She was a less provident and less
wealthy patroness than was Melania. For this reason, Jerome always had to look
around for other, supplementary donors to his monastery and its library. Held
hostage by the perilous state of the finances of his monastery, Jerome was forced
to appear to wealthy Christians in Italy, Spain, and Gaul perpetually dressed, as
it were, in his Sunday best. He had to shine as a literary genius. If rich donors
were to send him funds, he had to send them letters and prefaces written in scin-
tillating Latin, filled with echoes of classical authors.19
    The solidity of Melania’s endowment is shown in the sinister last years of the
life of Rufinus.20 After 403 the peace of Italy ended. Gothic armies marched back
and forth across northern Italy and eventually crossed the Apennines to close in
on Rome. But Rufinus stayed at it, doggedly translating into Latin in his slow,
uncharismatic manner the great commentaries of Origen on the books of the
Old Testament:
   What place is there for the pen, when enemy arms are feared; what place
   for reading, when the eyes are filled with the destruction of town and coun-
   tryside; where flight must brave the perils of the sea, lest exile itself be still
   beset by fear?21
    Rufinus wrote these words in 411 as he and Pinianus (the ascetic husband of
Melania the Younger) looked out across the straits of Messina from the safety
of a Sicilian villa as flames engulfed Rhegium (Reggio di Calabria, on the Italian
side of the straits), torched by the Visigoths. A man who had grown up in the last
generation of the Constantinian epoch was looking out on a scene that reminds
us, rather, of the war-­torn Italy of Cassiodorus and the Northumbria of the Ven-
erable Bede. And, like Cassiodorus and Bede, only one thing was certain—­scripta
manent: in dangerous times books, at least, would survive, housed in libraries
supported by massed wealth.
    It is worthwhile stepping back to see what was at stake in this remarkable his-
tory of two scholars and their Roman patronesses. Megan Williams puts the mat-
ter clearly. The Origenist Controversy, which swept through the monasteries of
Egypt and Palestine and led to a falling-­out between the supporters of Rufinus
and of Jerome in Rome, was about one thing: “The right of monks to be intel-
lectuals and of intellectuals to be monks.”22

                                         278
                   women, patronage, and learning


    Although they look to us like modern scholars (in their enthusiasms, in their
expertise, and in their hatreds), we should not forget what an extraordinary phe-
nomenon Jerome and Rufinus represented in their own time. Both were clergy-
men; but neither belonged to a bishop. Damasus had patronized Jerome; he had
not taken him on his clerical staff. Furthermore, when he arrived in Bethlehem,
Jerome assembled his library in a gravity-­free zone. It was housed in an indepen-
dent monastery, founded by a noble patroness and intermittently supported by
further donations from admiring readers. It may not have been as great as the
vast library of Origen at Caesarea, which boasted the eight hundred works of
the master and the forty vast tomes that contained Origen’s famous Hexapla—­
variant translations of the Old Testament, set beside the Hebrew in six columns.
But, by the fourth century, it had become a bishop’s library, supported by the
wealth of the church and controlled by the ecclesiastical establishment.23
    By contrast, the library of Jerome owed nothing to the local church and its
bishop. It was as well stocked and as autonomous as was the private library of any
senator.24 We need only compare Jerome with Augustine to appreciate the sig-
nificance of Jerome’s freedom. Returning to Africa in 388, Augustine had tried
to go it alone without a single, rich patron. He had managed to do this for just
three years. Without a Paula or a Melania to support it, Augustine’s monastery
and the intellectual life that it had fostered was sucked inexorably into the orbit
of the Catholic Church. From the moment of his ordination as a priest and then
as a bishop in Hippo, Augustine, for all his formidable originality, was a bishop
and spokesman of the church of Africa first and an intellectual second. Augustine
adapted wholeheartedly to his role as a bishop among bishops. But one wonders
what the course of Latin theology might have been like if Augustine had re-
mained a freelance scholar protected by a noble patron in the way that Jerome
and Rufinus had been.
    In the years between the return of Rufinus in 397 and his death in 412, the
Christians of Rome witnessed a flexing of the muscles of aristocratic patronage
of a kind they had not experienced before. Despite ecclesiastical condemnations
of his alleged “Origenist” tendencies, Rufinus went untouched. He continued to
work. The conditions of late Roman book production ensured that his writings
were protected. His books circulated along lines laid down by patronage net-
works and by alliances between friends and relatives. The friends of Melania the
Elder and the friends of her friends made themselves responsible for the expen-
sive task of copying and passing on to others the bulky manuscripts of the works
of Rufinus. Jerome complained that he could not even get copies of these works
so as to challenge them.25
    Altogether, loyalty to Rufinus and distrust of Jerome became an axis along
which sections of the Christian nobility of Rome were divided. Paulinus of Nola
rallied instantly to the side of Melania, to whom he was probably related through

                                       279
                                   chapter 17


his wife, Therasia. With Melania the Elder came her granddaughter Melania the
Younger and her husband, Pinianus. Paulinus welcomed an entire new genera-
tion of would-­be ascetics and admirers of Rufinus to the shrine of Saint Felix at
Cimitile. In Rome, Jerome found himself frozen out by the rallying against him
of an entire network of relatives, friends, and clients of Melania the Elder.26


            ”The Poor among the Saints”: Jerome and Vigilantius

In itself, the Origenist Controversy between Jerome and Rufinus was a storm in
a teacup. It was deemed to be a querelle de moines, a theological debate best left
to monks.27 Nor is it possible to quantify the amount of money that went from
Rome and elsewhere in the West to the Holy Land. What matters is that this
flow happened in a society that had come to watch with ever-­greater suspicion
the activities of charismatic fund-­raisers in the Christian churches.
    The fear of rival fund-­raisers had always been present in Rome. A generation
previously, the election of Damasus had given rise to divisions in which rich lay
Christians had been involved. After this experience, Damasus had determined
that if money was given to Christian causes in Rome, it should be given directly
to himself alone as the bishop of Rome. He wished to be recognized as the sole
representative of the Christian churches in the city. He wished to ensure that
wealth would not be given to individual priests and holy men. As early as 370, he
obtained from the emperor Valentinian I a ruling that
   Ecclesiastics . . . and those men who wish to be called by the name of “Con-
   tinents” [that is, monks] shall not visit the homes of widows and females
   under guardianship . . . [in order to receive legacies].28
   The edict was to be read aloud in the churches of Rome. It has usually been
interpreted as an imperial rebuke delivered to Damasus for his activities as a
fund-­raiser and as an “ear tickler of ladies of quality.” It was no such thing.29 It
was a preemptive strike, by the bishop, against potential rivals for funds. By
obtaining this edict, Damasus attempted to ensure that, in Rome, no clergyman
or monk would be given money or legacies for ventures of their own. All dona-
tions must go to the bishop, so as to become part of the wealth of the Roman
church.
   As we have seen, Jerome trod a thin line in his own dealings with ladies such
as Paula. He mercilessly caricatured monks and clergymen who fawned on the
rich for money. But, to outsiders, it looked very much as if he was doing just
what these spongers had been doing. He protested vehemently on his departure:
“Whose money did I accept? What gifts, small or great, did I not spurn? Did the
money of anyone clink in my hand?”30

                                        280
                    women, patronage, and learning


    The suspicions remained. Funds continued to flow out of Rome and the West
toward the Holy Places and the monasteries of Egypt. Rome could afford this
drain. But in the provinces propaganda for the ascetic movement and the foster-
ing of pilgrimage to the Holy Land threatened to undermine the finances of the
less well-­endowed local churches. In the years before 406, the issue exploded.
The monasteries around Jerusalem came under attack. They were accused of hav-
ing diverted the wealth of rich Christians away from their local churches through
soliciting overseas donations to the Holy Land.
    It is revealing that these criticisms arose in southern Gaul, a region that had
recently witnessed the rise and fall of Priscillian and the abrupt transfer of the
fortune of Paulinus out of Gaul and Spain to Italy. Local clergymen resented the
drain of gifts that were made by the rich to support ascetics, especially ascetics
settled at the far end of the Mediterranean. They preached that the local rich
should use their wealth to give to the local poor and to the local churches. They
had been inspired by Vigilantius, a monk from Saint-­Martory, in the diocese of
Saint Bertrand-­de-­Comminges, on the slopes of what is now the French side of
the Pyrenees.31
    Vigilantius was a dangerous critic. He had traveled both to the Holy Land
and to Nola. He had known both Paulinus of Nola and Jerome. He had been
impressed by neither, but for different reasons in each case. His acquaintance
with Paulinus and his circle had made him aware of the gentle violence great
wealth could bring to bear on traditional Christian piety. This led him to con-
front directly the issue of the cult of the saints. Could the saints be thought of as
both in heaven and still on earth? Was the worship that they received on earth
misplaced and reminiscent of paganism? Vigilantius found the cult of saints, such
as Paulinus had promoted at the shrine of Saint Felix at Cimitile, disquieting.
The splendor of such shrines made the saints seem still “present” on earth. But
the saints were not on earth; they were with God, in heaven. They were bathed
“in the Light of the Lamb.” They did not linger on earth at their shrines. To wor-
ship them in the ostentatious manner that Paulinus had promoted amounted to
a return to paganism.
   Under the pretext of religion we see a ritual that is practically pagan being
   introduced into the churches. While the sun is shining, piles of candles are
   lit. . . . Great honor do people of this sort offer to the most blessed martyrs,
   who (so they think) need to be illuminated by cheap little candles, when
   the Lamb Himself, Who sits on the throne, illumines them. [cf. Revela-
   tion 21:23, 22:5]32
   Vigilantius’s protest was the only frontal attack on the cult of saints to appear
in Latin Christianity. Though he appears to have made no direct mention of it,
his arguments were very much directed against the splendor of shrines such as

                                         281
                                 chapter 17


Paulinus had built in Cimitile and Fundi, with their shimmering mosaics, altars
sheathed in imperial purple, and vast candelabra in which oil lamps burned day
and night.
    It was Jerome, not Paulinus, who answered Vigilantius. His defense of the
cult of the saints was brisk. But he rose instantly to the issue of money. He de-
fended the monks of the Holy Places. He pointed out that they were like the
Jewish students of Torah, whose study in the Holy Land was supported by con-
tributions from synagogues all over the world.33 The monks were the “holy poor.”
They were the direct heirs of the poor among the saints in Jerusalem (Romans
15:26) for whose welfare Paul had organized so many collections.34
    Furthermore, in the parable of the Unjust Steward, Christ had encouraged the
rich to use the mammon of iniquity, to win friends who would welcome them into
eternal tabernacles (Luke 16:1–­9). Such “friends” were not to be found among the
ordinary poor:
   Surely these are not the poor, among whom burning lust still rules the ruin
   of a body wrapped in rags. . . . Alms are all they need. Rather, the rich
   should give their money to the “true” poor, who blush to receive and grieve
   when they do so, [so that the rich] may sow earthly goods and receive, in
   return, a spiritual reward.35
Only by giving to holy monks in the distant Holy Land—­and not to the faceless
and unsavory poor of their own region—­could the rich engage in a “spiritual
exchange” that was certain to place their treasure in heaven.


      “Be not proud. You also are a member of the Church”: Jovinian
                         against Jerome, 390–­94

In Rome itself, the alarm raised by Jerome had even deeper roots. It was not re-
lated only to the drain of funds from the local churches toward the Holy Land.
The diversion of funds to ventures outside Rome was seen, rather, as the symp-
tom of a more widespread development which troubled traditional Christians in
the city. Jerome’s elevation of widowhood and virginity awoke deep suspicion.
This was not because denial of the body was, in and of itself, repugnant to Ro-
mans. Nor (as we have seen) was it only because it withdrew women from the
marriage market and affected the transfer of property from one generation to the
next. Rather, it introduced a spiritual stratification within the Roman Christian
community that seemed to echo all too faithfully the growing social stratifica-
tion to which we have already alluded when discussing the appearance of splen-
did mausolea beside the Christian shrines of the suburbium.


                                      282
                   women, patronage, and learning


    Jerome’s ascetic propaganda seemed to challenge a central belief of the Roman
Christian community. This community did not wish to see its members as sharply
divided into separate grades. More than that: they did not wish to see these
grades laid down in terms of whether Christians were married or abandoned mar-
riage. Virginity and widowhood were all about sex; they were not about good
works and should not be used to claim a status that was automatically superior to
that of all other Christians.
    To claim a separate rank within a single baptized community solely on the
strength of one’s distance from sex caused very real disquiet among Roman
Christians. It marked the end of an older sense of the Christian community as a
place where differing groups—­aristocrats and plebeians—­could mingle as fellow
believers (indeed, as fellow “saints”) with a touch of countercultural insouci-
ance. Damasus, in his inscriptions, and Ambrosiaster, in his commentaries, had
repeatedly emphasized the fact that Christians were still special as a whole. They
formed a single “holy people.” Now Jerome and his ascetic supporters claimed
that within this single holy people, some were a lot holier than others.
    This was bad news for the married. Let us take one example. In 382 (the year
Jerome came to Rome) the lady Theodora was buried in the catacomb at the
church of Saint Agnes. In the words of her bereaved husband, Theodora had
been “an excellent observer of the [Christian] Law, a teacher of the faith. . . .
For this reason she now reigns amid the exquisite odors of Paradise.”36 Now it
seemed as if Jerome and his supporters had implied that, as a married woman,
the lady Theodora and persons like her had been no more than second-­class Chris-
tians. Only unmarried women—­widows and virgins such as Marcella, Paula, or
Eustochium—­could claim to be full observers of the Christian Law, to be teach-
ers of the faith, and to be certain of a place in Paradise.
    But it was not only bad news for the married. Not all the ascetics of Rome
were content with Jerome’s views. Rome must have had many Marcellas and not
a few Paulas. But Jerome had no use for them. For instance, he ignored the circle
around Marcellina, the sister of Ambrose. He treated other groups of virgins and
widows than his own as no more than “sham Christians.” But this, of course, was
by no means the case.
    We now know of one such dedicated virgin, of whose existence we could not
have guessed had we read only the works of Jerome. Ucceia was the wife of Vi-
ventius, a successful career bureaucrat from Pannonia who had been a popular
Prefect of the City in 363–­367—­no mean feat for an outsider from the Balkans.
In 389 Ucceia gave a marble sarcophagus for the burial of the consecrated Pan-
nonian virgin Maximilla. Ucceia did this “because of the friendship with which
we were joined together.” Maximilla was all that a dedicated virgin should be:
“Powerful to serve the covenants of Christ and to preserve her own vocation.”


                                       283
                                  chapter 17


Maximilla’s admirers could rest assured that they also would go to heaven “if the
mind recalls the one faith given equally to all.”37
    Owned by a leading government servant whose wife was linked by a spiritual
friendship to a pious virgin, the estate of Viventius in the suburbium would have
been little different from the retreat of Marcella or one of the domus visited by
Jerome. But Maximilla is a mere name to us. She had no Jerome to make her
famous. The sarcophagus in which she was placed, in 389, was discovered only
in the mid-­1930s, buried in the family mausoleum of Viventius beside the apse
of San Sebastiano on the Appian Way.38 The message of the inscription placed
on the sarcophagus was clear. For the circle around Maximilla, it was shared mem-
bership in the baptized community within a shared faith—­and not virginity
alone—­that offered entry into heaven.
    Between 390 and 394 (that is, only a few years after Jerome had left Rome in
385) the irritation caused by Jerome’s advocacy of the outright superiority of as-
cetics over all other Christians exploded in the discourses of the monk Jovinian.
Jovinian was an ascetic. But he was also a conservative upholder of the Roman
ideal of an undivided holy people.39
    Jovinian argued that those who claimed special merit for virgins and widows
were in danger of introducing a novel division into the Christian community of
Rome. It was a division that resembled the absolute superiority of the Elect over
the Auditors, which had distinguished the “Holy Church” of Mani. As we have
seen from the early years of Augustine, the division between Elect and Hearers
had been basic to the Manichaean movement. Manichaeism was alive and well in
Rome. The Elect were known. The reverence that the rank and file of the Man-
ichaean laity were expected to show to them—­on the strength of their uncanny
pallor and abstention from meat and wine—­was frequently remarked upon.
    Jerome expected his widows and virgins to be accused of being like the Man-
ichaean Elect because of their long fasts and pale faces. He dismissed this accusa-
tion as an ill-­informed slur. But, in fact, he expected such widows and virgins to
be surrounded by a reverence similar to that which the Auditors of the “Holy
Church” of Mani had bestowed on their Elect. This was precisely what Jovinian
feared—­the emergence of a binary system within the baptized community of
the faithful.
    This potential development was not without social consequences. As we have
seen, the families addressed by Jerome came from a precarious segment of Roman
upper-­class society. They needed to distinguish themselves from the rich plebe-
ians below them and from the haughty noble families above them. They had done
this in large part by switching the flow of wealth in the direction of religious
causes. The new exaltation of virginity would further affect this flow of wealth.
The two irrevocably different grades of Christians—­the sexless and the married—­


                                       284
                   women, patronage, and learning


might be joined by an ethereal spiritual exchange: as in Manichaeism, wealth
would go to the perfect and not to the poor.
    To avoid this situation, Jovinian invoked the ancient theme of the Church as
a single, undivided community of “saints,” rendered equal by baptism. His mes-
sage to virgins and widows was firm. Jerome quoted him as saying: “Do not be
proud. You belong to the same Church.”40
    Jovinian went too far. He was instantly condemned by clergymen who had
come to adopt celibacy as the mark of their own superior status within the Chris-
tian community. Siricius and Ambrose united against him. Within a holy people,
the clergy had every intention of being more holy than anyone else. But, despite
his failure to rally clerical opinion, Jovinian had touched a raw nerve. Once an
elite based on as elemental a principle as sex and its renunciation was allowed to
emerge within the Christian community, money would follow it. Money habitu-
ally spent in “good works” for the poor and for the endowment of local churches
would go instead to the support of a separate, revered group.
    The danger was real. The Manichaean Elect had usually been persons of low
social status, elevated by their abstinence alone. They could be supported at very
little expense by moderately well-­to-­do Hearers (as Augustine had done when he
was a young teacher). But the would-­be Elect of the Christian community of
Rome (its widows and virgins) were not like that. They included among their
members some of the richest women in the entire empire. They would not receive
money; they would give money. Where their money would go, nobody could
tell. The cases of Melania and Paula, as well as the careers of Rufinus and Jerome,
showed that it might go far beyond the seas—­and that it might be used, not to
support the local church, but to fund the rancors of freelance polymaths.
    The 390s, however, were still a quiet time. We, who know that the barbarian
invasions were about to begin, easily forget how peaceful Italy must have seemed
in those years. In Rome, the sheer “magnificence” of a vast city allowed poten-
tially conflicting factions to coexist without crisis. But important changes had
happened in this time of peace. In many ways, the vivid exchanges between Je-
rome and his enemies are misleading. They tend to mask the more silent and
more decisive developments. Let us end by indicating some of these.
    Slowly but surely, following the lead of Damasus, the Roman clergy consoli-
dated its position as a Third Estate in the city. At the same time, the upper nobil-
ity and the clergy drew closer. As bishop of Rome, Siricius (who had hounded
out Jerome in 385) gained a reputation for having protected nobles who sought
sanctuary in the church in times of civil war. Though implicated with usurpers
(first with Maximus in 388 and then with Eugenius in 394), they and their fam­
ilies received mercy from Theodosius I, through the intercession of Siricius, on
the understanding that they would become Christian.41 (Even Symmachus once


                                        285
                                  chapter 17


sought sanctuary in a Christian church, after he had been heavily involved with
Maximus, having praised the usurper in a panegyric. But, canny as ever, he made
sure not to flee to a church of the bishop of Rome. Instead, he sought sanctuary
in the separate, schismatic church of the Novatians.)42
    More decisive yet, leading Christian families began to take a more direct in-
terest in their local Christian communities. We can trace this development in the
case of the Anicii. The head of the family, Petronius Probus, had long been known
as a Christian. As we saw, he was buried around 390 in a magnificent mausoleum
that abutted the apse of the shrine of Saint Peter on the Vatican. He lay as near
as possible to the tomb of the saint.43 Statues erected in his honor by his sons
may even have stood close by.44 But Probus did not have the area to himself. The
graves of persons from the lesser nobility of service also clustered around the apse
of Saint Peter’s. Their presence emphasized the relative openness of Christian
burial even in this privileged location.45
    But this was precisely what Probus and his descendants would have wished.
The placing of his mausoleum in a place of shared worship ensured that Probus
remained in the public eye. Unlike many nobles, Probus was not buried in the
privacy of a suburban villa. His mausoleum and the statues around it stood out
among a cluster of graves in a place where the Christian people assembled in
large numbers. It remained a prominent monument. In the Renaissance, the tomb
was known as the Temple of Probus. When workmen opened the great marble
sarcophagus in 1452, they found in it the remains of gold filaments. A grandee
to the last, Probus had been buried in a robe of heavy gold cloth.
    But Probus himself had been baptized only on his deathbed. He belonged to
an earlier generation, still dominated by habits established at the court of Con-
stantine. The great patronized Christianity, but they did not necessarily take
part in the life of the local churches. In maintaining this distance they followed
the example of their emperor. Though acclaimed as the first Christian emperor,
Constantine was never seen in a Christian church outside his palace. Emperors
only began to attend church services in public after his death in 337.46
    In the late fourth century and the beginning of the fifth, the distance between
the upper nobility and the local churches began to close. We can see this change
in small details. In 408 a member of another branch of the Anicii, Anicius Auche-
nius Bassus, became consul. His consulship seems to have been celebrated in
Africa (where the Anicii owned large estates) with a terra cotta plaque—­possibly
the lid of a box—­in which a consul was shown flanked by the figures of Saints
Peter and Paul. This unprecedented merging of the civic mystique of the consul-
ate with the mystique of the twin patron saints venerated by the Christian com-
munity of Rome marked a new departure.47
    These developments showed that Jerome had become a little out-­of-­date. The
groups to whom he had appealed were less prominent than before. They had be-

                                        286
                   women, patronage, and learning


longed to the lesser aristocracy. They were now in danger of being overshadowed
by families of the super-­rich such as the Anicii. How long could such groups
maintain a superiority based on an appeal to “true” nobility derived from intel-
lectual activities and from superior spiritual prowess, as both Jerome and Rufi-
nus had urged them to do? They were in danger of being swamped by rich Chris-
tians who did not share their concerns.
   The silent majority of well-­to-­do Christians had rallied to the clergy and to
the ideal of membership in a well-­organized and undivided “holy people” that
went back to the days of Damasus. They were glad that their money counted
for something in the churches of Rome. With the possible exception of Pam-
machius, the surge in the foundation of titular churches in the late fourth and
early fifth centuries seems to have owed little or nothing to persons connected
with the circles addressed by Jerome and Rufinus. Compared with that surge of
wealth, accompanied by impressive buildings, the little study groups of persons
such as Marcella, Paula, and Melania seemed ever more peripheral to the life of
the church.
   Nonetheless, not a few Roman Christians remained determined to retain
their intellectual ambitions. They continued to seek an extra nobility of the spirit
by following mentors such as Jerome or Rufinus much as their ancestors had fol-
lowed pagan sages. Well educated, tenacious, and not dulled by the punctilious
routines of the inner circle of the nobility, they were the storm center from which
new controversies could easily blow up.
   But here also times had changed. As we have seen (in the case of the Origenist
Controversy between Jerome and Rufinus), the rancors of such groups had been
safely encapsulated. But after 403, with the increase of Gothic raiding into Italy,
the political situation worsened dramatically. The headstrong behavior of even a
few ascetic zealots threatened to have serious social and political repercussions,
especially if these hotheads came from the higher nobility. This happened after
406 when Melania the Younger and Pinianus—­both of them truly members of
the super-­rich—­decided to sell up their vast ancestral properties, as Paulinus had
done ten years before. But they did so now at a time of mounting crisis, as the
Visigoths of Alaric closed in on Rome.
   More dangerous yet, real nobiles might at last come to take a personal interest
in Christian theology. It was far from certain that they would invariably patron-
ize safe figures. In around 390 the British monk Pelagius came to Rome. He
moved in high circles. The circle around Melania and Rufinus seems to have wel-
comed him and to have provided him with intellectual ammunition.48 He wrote
a long letter defending his ideas to Paulinus of Nola.49 More significantly still,
Pelagius seems to have gained the respect of the Anicii. In 413 he was invited to
write a letter of spiritual exhortation for none other than the granddaughter of
Petronius Probus—­the would-­be virgin of the church, Demetrias.

                                        287
                                  chapter 17


    This was not surprising. Pelagius’s views on human nature found a ready echo
in the high circles in which he had moved in Rome. These views were robustly
aristocratic and optimistic. But when they were brought to Carthage in 410, by
aristocratic refugees from Rome who had fled to Africa after the Visigothic sack,
they came as a shock to the clergy of Carthage and to Augustine of Hippo. Until
then, neither region had paid much attention to the other. Two very different
Christianities, related to two very different churches and to their distinctive so-
cial contexts, had developed in Rome and in Africa. The two intellectual worlds
had been kept apart by the waters of the Mediterranean. Awareness of the differ-
ences between the Christianity of Rome and that of Africa was slow to develop.
Now, as refugees streamed into Carthage from Rome, the two traditions were
abruptly brought together with explosive effect. The beginning of the famous
Pelagian Controversy dates from this moment. It is to the double crisis associ-
ated with the renunciation of Melania the Younger and Pinianus (in around 406)
and with the opening phases of the Pelagian Controversy (between 411 and 414)
that we must now turn.




                                       288
                          Chapter 18
                          •••••
“The Eye of a Needle” and “The Treasure of the Soul”
    Renunciation, Nobility, and the Sack of Rome,
                     405–­413




       “Through a very narrow crack”: Melania and Pinianus, 405–­8

What is commonly known to us as the Pelagian Controversy has often been
treated as a theological event involving a fundamental clash of ideas between
Augustine of Hippo and the followers of Pelagius. In these two chapters, how-
ever, we will look at the controversy from a different angle. The Pelagian Contro-
versy was also an incident in the history of the Christian aristocracy of Rome. It
coincided with a crisis of wealth within this aristocracy, occurring at a time when
the Gothic invasion of Italy and the subsequent sack of Rome in 410 ensured
that Christian debates on wealth, renunciation, and nobility took place in an
atmosphere tinged with a sense of public peril. This chapter will sketch the devel-
opment of the crisis. The next will examine one of its products—­a strikingly
radical critique of wealth written at this time by a follower of Pelagius.
   Let us begin with a remarkable incident and its repercussions. In Rome in
around 404–­5, the possession of a vast family fortune had been sufficient to
cause nightmares to a young Christian couple. Valerius Pinianus (then twenty-­
four) and his twenty-­year-­old wife, Melania the Younger (named after her grand-
mother, Melania the Elder, the patroness of Rufinus), had retired to their villa in
the suburbium of Rome. Following the call of the ascetic life, they had begun to
divest themselves of their fortune:

   One night [Melania said] we went to sleep, greatly upset, and we saw our-
   selves, both of us, passing through a very narrow crack in a wall. We were
   gripped with panic by the cramped space, so that it seemed as if we were
   about to die. When we came through the pain of that place, we found
   huge relief and joy unspeakable.1


                                       291
                                   chapter 18


    The dream plainly referred to the words of Christ: It is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
(Matt. 19:24). But this was a dream with no camel and no needle. Instead, the
words of Christ were transformed into an experience of primal horror. The dream
relived with terrible intensity the constriction of the rich. The narrow crack was
not only the eye of a needle; it was an excruciatingly tight birth canal. Only
through the abrupt and total renunciation of their riches could the young couple
hope to be “reborn” and get to heaven.
    We know of this dream from the exceptionally vivid Life of Melania the
Younger, which has survived in two, closely related versions, one in Latin and
one in Greek. It was originally written in Jerusalem by the priest Gerontius in
452–­53—­that is, over a decade after Melania’s death in 439. It was based on
memories of Melania, as she looked back thirty years later to events of the early
400s. The excitement of these events still lingered in her memory. It is a glimpse
from a distant land of Rome in the last years of its magnificence.2
    Wealth was central to the Life of Melania the Younger. Reading it, we find
ourselves listening in to the truly wealthy as they mused on the nature of their
own riches. What Melania remembered most vividly was her villa on the Medi-
terranean coast, either of Campania or of Sicily:
   She said [to Gerontius]: “We had an extraordinary piece of property, and
   in it stood a bath that surpassed any in worldly splendor. On one side of it
   was the sea, and on the other, a forest with diverse vegetation, in which
   roamed wild boar, male deer and does and other forms of wild life. From
   the pool, the bathers could see, on one side, ships sailing in the breeze, and,
   on the other, wild animals in the wood. The Devil . . . set before me the
   multicolored marbles of the villa and its inestimable revenue. For the es-
   tate had sixty-­two settlements on it [the Latin version adds: with four hun-
   dred rural slaves] built around the bath.”3
In this villa, strange things happened:
   “And then, again,” she said, “we had collected an untold mass of gold to
   send away to the poor and to the saints—­45,000 gold coins in all. When I
   went into the reception hall [the apsed triclinium: the Latin has the more
   private inner “bedroom”], it seemed, through an illusion brought about by
   the inspiration of the Devil, that the entire house was made resplendent, as
   if on fire, through the sheer mass of shimmering coins.”4
   We are introduced to the life of the rich in all its details. For instance, the Life
of Melania was explicit about the manner in which clothes worn by the young
couple had acted as the blazon of their wealth. Renunciation of fine clothing was
presented as having meant more to them than did the renunciation of sex. Mela-

                                          292
           renunciation, nobility, and the sack of rome


nia told Gerontius of a conversation she had had with her husband. On his con-
version, Pinianus had opted for a simple cloak of good Cilician cloth. Home-
spun and solid though it was, the Cilician robe was not “beat up” enough to
satisfy Melania. She approached him tactfully, in a roundabout manner:
   “Tell me,” she asked, “from the time when we began to carry out our prom-
   ise to God, has your heart ever harbored a thought of lust towards me?”
       [To which Pinianus affirmed,] “From the time when we gave our word
   to God and entered on the chaste life, I have looked on you in the same
   way as I look on your holy mother Albina.”
    The trivial matter of sexual desire disposed of, Melania got to the main
point—­Pinianus’s dress: “‘Then be persuaded by me, as your spiritual mother
and sister, and give up those Cilician clothes.’” From then on, writes Gerontius,
Pinianus wore reach-­me-­downs from Antioch, made of undyed, coarse wool,
each of which cost less than a solidus.5 As for Melania herself, an extraordinary
anecdote shows how she remembered herself as a young girl. Her memory was of
a tender body, sheathed in splendor. The very contact of the embroidered panels
on her silken robe, rendered stiff and heavy with gold thread, would raise a bruise
on her delicate skin.6 Over the decades, all this would change. The last glimpse
we have of the couple is through the eyes of Peter the Iberian, a Georgian prince
turned monk. Peter had heard of Pinianus as a man well-­known in Jerusalem in
the 420s for wearing nothing but a robe made up of “crushed straw, humble and
worthless.”7
    Vivid though it is, the Life of Melania the Younger disappoints us on one cru-
cial point. With the benefit of hindsight, it takes for granted the motives of Pini-
anus and Melania in doing what they did. The Life never explains why they made
their great renunciation. In considering the motivations of the young couple we
should bear in mind that they had come close to Paulinus of Nola through Me-
lania’s grandmother, Melania the Elder. Melania the Elder was a Spaniard and
may well have been a relative of Therasia. Furthermore, Paulinus was also an en-
thusiastic supporter of Rufinus. These two figures—­Rufinus the intellectual and
Paulinus the former aristocrat—­may have been the source of the radical ideas on
which Pinianus and Melania acted. Each contributed in a different way.
    Rufinus accompanied Pinianus when the young couple fled to Sicily in 410.
He may have passed on to Pinianus his knowledge of the asceticism of the East,
with its emphasis on the ideal of the absolute poverty of monks.8 But the dra-
matic act of renunciation itself may have been prompted by Paulinus. Like the
renunciation of Paulinus—­but with greater drama—­the renunciation of Pinianus
and Melania was overshadowed by a sense of the coming of the end of the world.
There was an apocalyptic strain in the worldview of Paulinus. This may seem para-
doxical. His use of wealth at the shrine of Saint Felix seemed to radiate solidity.

                                        293
                                   chapter 18


But Paulinus built fast because he thought that he built under the shadow of the
end of time. He was a man whose Christian piety was driven by an acute sense of
the approach of the Last Judgment. As we saw, when he first came to Campania,
Paulinus gave a basilica to the Christians of Fundi. It was the first basilica in Italy
to show a scene of the Last Judgment in its apse. The mosaic was intended to
warn the Christians of Fundi that the end was near.9 When the senator Pamma-
chius commemorated the death of his wife through lavish almsgiving, Paulinus
wrote: “Rome, you would not need to fear those earnest threats of the Apocalypse
if the entertainments presented by your senators were always such as this!”10 Pau-
linus meant it. In the company of persons such as Paulinus, it was not impossible
for young Romans such as Pinianus and Melania to think that to throw away
their vast wealth might be a sacrifice that saved the great city from destruction.
Or, if their conversion and renunciation of wealth did not save Rome, at least
they would remove that wealth to heaven before Rome’s destruction came.
    We can only conjecture why Pinianus and Melania did what they did from
405 onward. But we do know when they did it. It could not have been at a worse
time. The social and political state of Italy ensured that their action had a reso-
nance far beyond what had been normal in more peaceful times. For, as we know,
the Apocalypse did not come to Rome. But Alaric, the king of the Visigoths, did.


       Rome under Siege: Pinianus, Melania, and the Senate, 408–­10

Alaric did not act against Rome out of barbaric bloodlust. He had no wish to
destroy Rome as the symbolic center of the Roman empire. He was like any other
Roman general in a time of civil war. He headed an army that needed bonuses.
He would raise the money that he needed through ransoms and through the sys-
tematic pillage of great cities. The spoils of Rome would make him the richest
general in the empire.11
   Having probed northern Italy a few years earlier, Alaric finally arrived outside
Rome in November 408. Throughout the next year, he systematically bled Rome.
At first, the Senate paid him ransom. They agreed to hand over 5,000 pounds of
gold, 30,000 pounds of silver, and 5,000 pounds of precious, oriental pepper (the
sign that Rome was still an unparalleled center of luxury).12 Huge sums, larger
than the dreamlike expenditures that great senators had laid out for the games,
made their way to the Gothic camp.
   Only in the following year did Alaric finally “sack” Rome. This meant, in ef-
fect, that he allowed his troops to enter Rome on August 24, 410, in order to
clean out the city. Far from being a bloodbath, the Visigothic sack of Rome was
a chillingly well-­conducted act of spoliation. The gilded statues of the Forum van-
ished. Huge loads of cash along with gold and silver plate left the city when the

                                         294
           renunciation, nobility, and the sack of rome


Visigoths marched out again only three days later. Their booty even included
(among many other pickings) the great silver dome placed by Constantine over
the baptismal basin adjoining the Lateran basilica—­a ton of solid silver.13 In 414,
when Ataulph, the brother-­in-­law of Alaric, celebrated his marriage, he could
afford to do it in Roman style:
   Along with other wedding gifts, Ataulph gave his bride fifty handsome
   youths dressed in silken clothes, each carrying in his hands two huge plat-
   ters of silver, one of which was full of gold and the other of priceless gems.
   These had come from Rome, having been taken as booty by the Goths in
   the sack of the city.14
   Whether for Alaric, who lusted for it, or for Pinianus and Melania, who
craved to be rid of it, great wealth such as only Rome could harbor was being
shaken loose in these years. What the young couple did with their fortune was
magnified by being set against the backdrop of unparalleled spoliations in north-
ern Italy and then in Rome. Whole fortunes vanished at that time. In the atmo-
sphere of mounting crisis that led up to the sack of 410, the decision of Pinianus
and Melania to dispose of their wealth was bound to have a wide impact. It hap-
pened at a moment when the upper-­class residents of Rome could no longer
tolerate eccentricity.
   The young couple’s decision was unexpected. But so was the nature of their
fortune. Their fellow Romans had not been prepared for the accident of trans-
mission by which two stupendous blocks of wealth, held by two well-­known
families of Rome, ended up in the hands of a young couple who had no heirs. As
we saw in our last chapters, this was not a contingency to which ascetics were
accustomed. In the 370s and 380s, the patterns of inheritance within rich Chris-
tian families had been manipulated in such a way as to ensure that the ascetic
renunciation of wealth and marriage by one member of the family did not affect
the flow of property to other heirs.
   With Pinianus and Melania things were different. Both were heirs to large
inheritances. Converted in their teens to the ascetic life, they ended up after a
few years of indecision determined not to have children.15 Pinianus once told
Gerontius that he had a yearly revenue of 120,000 solidi. Even if we allow for
exaggeration and lack of precision in her later, ascetic biographers, this was the
wealth of the super-­rich. Through her grandmother, Melania the Elder, Melania
the Younger was a member of a distinctive group of families whose wealth lay
both in Spain and in Italy, as had the wealth of Paulinus and Therasia. The couple
also had large estates in Sicily and Africa.16 Marcella, Paula, and the other families
around Jerome had nothing like this wealth.
   Of the two, Pinianus’s inheritance seems to have been the more beleaguered.
The vast palace of the Valerii sprawled in old-­fashioned grandeur across the top

                                         295
                                  chapter 18


of the Caelian Hill. A bronze lamp found on the site showed Saint Peter at the
tiller of the Ship of the Church, with an inscription that may refer to the bap-
tism of Pinianus’s father—­“ The Lord gives the Law to Valerius Severus.”17 But
Valerius Severus had died young, leaving Pinianus and his brother (also called
Severus) vulnerable. They were minors who stood in need of protection. It was
Symmachus (now in his sixties) who intervened to protect the heirs of a fellow
senator. He wrote to the Head of the Treasury that he should shield the sons of
Severus: “for unless they enjoy the help of good governors, they will fall victim to
spoliation and injustice.”18 Symmachus’s concern for the finances of his peers was
genuine. What he could not have foreseen (and did not live to see) was that the
young Pinianus would despoil himself in an act of self-­proscription quite as dras-
tic as that performed by Paulinus of Nola ten years previously.
    Altogether, the young couple represented an alliance of vast wealth with ec-
centricity not usually encountered even in late Roman Rome. As they were not
yet of age, they depended on the good will of their peers and on the support of
the imperial authorities to carry out their resolve. For that reason their renuncia-
tion immediately became a public matter, as would not have been the case with
ascetics whose conversion had taken place (as had that of Paulinus) when they
were fully grown up.
    Their first mistake was to start on the divestment of their properties in the
wrong place. In around 408, they began to sell up their estates in the suburbium of
Rome. As we have seen, the suburbium was prime land. It was devoted to inten-
sive agriculture for an urban market. For this reason, it was a land of slaves. Pini-
anus and Melania instantly manumitted eight thousand slaves. This measure was
high-­handed and extremely ill-­advised. Far from being overjoyed, the remaining
slaves refused their freedom. Those who remained tied to properties the couple
intended to sell were equally outraged. They did not wish to be handed over to
new owners. Pinianus’s brother Severus had to intervene. He offered to buy up
the remaining slaves at a cut price. The Life of Melania said that he had been
prompted to do this by the Devil. In fact, Severus may well have been attempting
to bring some order to the area by showing that he did not intend to allow long-­
established dependents of the family to be cut loose in this brutal fashion.19
    Severus did the right thing to intervene in this way. Loss of control over the
agrarian workforce was a serious matter. As we saw in our first chapter, the
super-­rich had always been absentee landowners on a massive scale; they felt lit-
tle responsibility toward their dependents. Distance and the complex admin­
istrative systems needed to extract and pass on rents attenuated their presence
on the land. An entire hierarchy of little lords stood between the super-­rich and
their slaves and tenants. Christian renunciation of the dramatic sort practiced by
Pinianus and Melania simply carried this heartless system to its logical extreme.
Through renunciation, absentee lords became something worse than absent. They

                                        296
           renunciation, nobility, and the sack of rome


vanished, leaving an entire region at a loss as to what would happen next. By sud-
denly manumitting their slaves and selling off their properties, the couple severed
what little remained of the vertical bonds between slaves, tenants, and owners
that had enabled late Roman landowners to run what had always been a cruel
and coercive system.
    Late Roman forms of landowning (with their scattered estates and thinly veiled
forms of forced labor) had worked as long as the landowners maintained at least
some presence on their estates through their agents. When this presence was sud-
denly withdrawn, through massive manumissions and sales to outsiders, the power
of landowners over the land was as seriously weakened as if a barbarian invasion
had passed through the countryside. Nobody knew what might happen next.
    As for the slaves of Pinianus and Melania, they protested for good reasons. A
high-­handed act of Christian piety would have thrown them on the labor market
at a time when they needed, above all, not freedom but protection. A cruel sys-
tem of forced labor, slavery at least offered the chance of being fed by one’s own-
ers in times of war. To free slaves in such numbers was to make plain that they
could no longer count on being protected in any way by their masters. Subse-
quent events proved the slaves right. Only a little later, in 409, crowds of slaves
streamed out of Rome to join the army of Alaric as it approached Rome. These
slaves may have been barbarian prisoners of war, many of whom were Goths.
They followed a “freedom trail” to the Gothic camp. But they may also have been
Roman household slaves who had been brutally cut loose. They were freed and
told to leave so that their masters would not have to feed them during the im-
pending siege.20
    The stability of the intensely cultivated countryside around Rome had always
been a major preoccupation of the resident nobility. They had feared runaway
slaves and brigands quite as much as they feared barbarians. But brigands and
runaway slaves had tended to head for the hills of Samnium and Lucania (the
modern Basilicata). Now the actions of Pinianus and Melania in the suburbium
brought large numbers of resentful slaves and dependent workers cut loose from
their former masters up to the very walls of the city.21
    Faced by the revolt of their slaves and by the opposition of their relatives to
the sale of family property, the young couple appealed directly to the imperial
court. In early 408 Melania went straight to Serena, the older first cousin of the
emperor Honorius and the wife of the generalissimo, Stilicho. At that time Stili-
cho was the power behind the throne.22 Serena was residing in Rome. Melania
asked Serena to make sure that the sale of her property went through without
delay. Serena solved the problem by obtaining an imperial edict that placed the
couple’s estates under a form of “positive proscription.” The edict ruled that the
estates of Pinianus and Melania were considered, technically, to have been con-
fiscated by the emperor. They became imperial property that could be sold off in

                                       297
                                  chapter 18


public auctions. The governors, official staffs, and town councils of every prov-
ince were made responsible for this sale. But the money thus raised would go to
Pinianus and Melania, not to the imperial fisc.23
    By means of this fiction, the wealth of Pinianus and Melania was made
to stand out as special, protected wealth. Technically, it belonged to the “divine”
properties of the emperor. But it was also viewed as belonging to a yet greater
Emperor. It was property given to Christ for His poor. The fact that it had been
sold in fulfillment of Christ’s command—­Go, sell all that you possess, and give to
the poor (Matt. 19:21)—­sheathed it with inviolability. Serena, Pinianus, and Me-
lania claimed that to interfere with the disposal of wealth dedicated in this man-
ner to the poor was “to rob the altars of God.”24
    Whose wealth was holy and whose wealth was not was still a hotly contested
matter in Rome. When the generalissimo Stilicho fell, at the end of 408 (blamed
for his disastrous mishandling of Alaric), Serena was condemned to death by the
Senate.25 She was strangled. Pagans said that this death was due to the vengeance
of the gods. Ten years previously, Serena had reached out and snatched the votive
necklace that still hung around the neck of the great statue of the Mother of the
Gods. She put the necklace around her own neck.
   And when an old lady, the last of the Vestal Virgins, reproached her to her
   face for such impiety, she abused her roundly and told her attendants to
   drive her away.26
There were many who believed that it was the fatal desecration of the goddess’s
necklace that drew the noose around Serena’s neck. To pagans, quite as much as
to Christians, some wealth was a lot holier than others. God or the gods stood by
to avenge those who attempted to divert it to other ends.
   Many members of the Senate may still have regretted the spoliation of the
temples: this had been true sacred wealth to them. They certainly had little sym-
pathy for the novel fiction that wealth could be made sacred and untouchable
through being kept for the poor. They needed the wealth of Pinianus and Mela-
nia to save the city. In the winter of 408–­9 Alaric blockaded Rome. The Roman
people began to starve. In the Circus Maximus they chanted to the prefect:
“Pone pretium carni humanae: Go, fix the price of human flesh.”27
   In order to survive, the Senate had to tax its own members. Faced with this un-
precedented emergency, the factionalism of the upper nobility exploded. Noble
families proved notably selfish. The family of the Anicii (represented by the sons
of Petronius Probus and by his widow, Faltonia Proba) were said by their ene-
mies to have blocked all schemes for a fair assessment. They did so “because they
controlled virtually all the city’s wealth.”28
   Because Pinianus and Melania had been tarnished by their association with
Serena and Stilicho, their wealth seemed easier game than that of the still-­

                                       298
           renunciation, nobility, and the sack of rome


powerful Anicii.29 In early 409, the Prefect of the City, Pompeianus, summoned
an early morning meeting of the Senate. He proposed that the properties of Pini-
anus and Melania be confiscated. They would contribute “to the resources of the
Roman state.” Then he went in procession to make this decision public from his
official throne (probably close by in the Forum): “Suddenly a riot of the people
flared up because of the shortage of bread. . . . He was dragged from his seat and
stoned to death in full sight of the whole city.”30 This was the only time in a cen-
tury of imagined perils that a Prefect of the City had actually been lynched. This
gruesome act of violence (told with relish by Gerontius) freed the young couple.
At last, their wealth was their own to throw away.


     “What city or country did not have a share of their good deeds?”:
                   The Dispersal of a Fortune, 410–­17

Once they found themselves free to dispose of their wealth, Pinianus and Mela-
nia proved to be less arbitrary and lightheaded in the distribution of their for-
tune than their ascetic biographers suggest and than many modern scholars as-
sume. Their renunciation of wealth was not an aimless bonfire of the vanities.31
It marked the entry into the politics of the church of a very wealthy couple deter-
mined to fund good causes of their own choosing.
    Their gifts were extensive. As Gerontius wrote: “What city or country did not
have a share of their good deeds?”32 The principal beneficiaries of these good
deeds were the monks, not the poor. It was the “holy poor”—­the poor among
the saints whose right to financial support Jerome had defended with such vehe-
mence only a few years earlier (in 406)—­who received cash gifts of thousands of
solidi: 35,000 solidi went to the monasteries of the East and only 10,000 to those
of the West. A further 10,000 went to monks established on offshore islands in
the Mediterranean. Innumerable little spurs of karst and lava, pushed up by the
tectonic plates of Europe and Africa, these islands had been places of grim exile
in classical times. Now, due to the support of the wealthy (who bought up whole
islands for the purpose), offshore islands became the potential moon stations of
a new, pan-­Mediterranean monasticism. Along the coast of Dalmatia alone there
are nine hundred little islands. Not all were mere rocks for shivering hermits.
Some offshore islands (such as Muline/Ugljan, off the northern coast of Croa-
tia) were the sites of substantial villas, where a monasticism based on aristocratic
notions of otium could easily develop, much as it had developed off the coast of
Italy (as we saw, at Capraria) and as it would soon develop at Lérins, off the coast
of southern Gaul.33
    These subsidies were not indiscriminate. The giving of Pinianus and Melania
was as focused as that of Melania the Elder had been. Just as Melania the Elder

                                        299
                                  chapter 18


had intervened (over thirty years previously) to strengthen the resistance of the
Nicene party among the monasteries of Egypt, so Melania the Younger lavished
money on the supporters of John Chrysostom, the contentious bishop of Con-
stantinople. These embittered dissidents had been scattered as exiles throughout
the eastern empire after their charismatic leader had been deposed in 404. By
giving to the “Johannites”—­the party of the supporters of John Chrysostom—­
Pinianus and Melania helped keep an ecclesiastical faction alive until its trium-
phal return to Constantinople in the last years of Melania’s life.34
    Last but not least, their luxury itself was consecrated. It became votive wealth.
The silverware and silken robes of Melania were donated to churches. The pass-
ing of secular opulence into the opulence of churches through such gifts was a
privileged moment in the alchemy of wealth. As with the shimmering buildings
of Paulinus at Cimitile, everyone could see, with satisfying precision, exactly how
treasure on earth became treasure in heaven35 in the form of the opulent veils and
silverware donated to the churches.
    As we will see, in a subsequent chapter, their flight from Rome was by no
means the end of the story for Pinianus and Melania. The couple fled to Sicily
and from there to Africa, where the economic impact of their presence proved to
be considerable. Only in 417 did they finally arrive in Jerusalem. Obsessed by
the imagined poverty of the first Christians, they put themselves on the poor roll
of the church of Jerusalem. This was by no means because they had run out of
money.36 Within a few years they were able to distribute large sums to the monks
of Egypt.37 They would later sponsor the construction of a series of buildings on
the Mount of Olives.38 Rather, their enrollment as members of the “poor of the
church” was a poignant attempt on their part to relive, in their own times, the
imagined life of the Apostolic Community of Jerusalem, where all Christians
were thought to have lived in poverty, fed from the common fund. Settled in the
Holy Places, the lives of these two former members of the super-­rich were ab-
sorbed into the great myth of the primal poverty of the Early Christians.


         From Rome to Carthage: Anician Ladies in Exile, 410–­13

Alaric had created the crisis that had made the renunciation of Pinianus and
Melania a matter of public urgency. He was also unwittingly responsible for the
Pelagian Controversy. The flight from Rome of so many leading residents of
Rome, along with their clients and spiritual mentors, brought about a situation
that in more peaceful times would never have occurred. Let us see how this
happened.
   Part of the Roman aristocracy withdrew to Carthage. It was a natural choice.
Protected by the sea and close to the huge estates they owned in the Medjerda

                                        300
           renunciation, nobility, and the sack of rome


valley and on the plateau of Numidia, Carthage could be for them a second
Rome in Africa. Nobody knew how long they would have to stay in Africa. It
was quite possible, in the alarming months of the winter of 410 and the spring
of 411, that Carthage might emerge as the sole remaining bastion of the western
empire, as barbarian armies marched unopposed throughout the provinces of
the northern Mediterranean. If that happened, the refugees would soon cease to
be passing strangers. They would become a heavy presence on the land and in the
local churches.
    The aristocracy brought their mentors with them. This meant that, after
410, the upholders of forms of Christianity that seemed quite natural in Rome
found themselves in a foreign land. At Carthage they were brought face-­to-­
face with the African clergy. From the African point of view, a disquieting
sense of “otherness” hovered around the views of many of the most vocal Chris-
tian intellectuals who had come from Rome. It was from this growing sense of
­otherness—­as Christian thinkers fostered in one great urban tradition brushed
 against the accepted wisdom of another—­that what we call the Pelagian Con-
 troversy exploded.39
    To understand how this could be so, we must change perspective slightly. So
far we have followed two young noble persons in the act of disposing of their
fortune, as recorded in the gripping narrative of Gerontius’s Life of Melania the
 Younger. But, as we saw in our last chapter, noble Christians had not only been
 encouraged to throw away their wealth. They had also been urged to use it as
 patrons of intellectual endeavors. Noble patrons expected their protégés to serve
 them as mentors—­like the house doctors and house philosophers of earlier times.
 In return, they would support their protégés. They would make them well-­known
 and protect them against the envy of their rivals. In Christian times, this meant
 that they would stand between their protégés and accusations of heresy. In their
 role of patrons of Christian scholars and Christian spiritual guides, great lay
 families considered themselves to be as much the judges of the limits of ortho-
 doxy in their region as were the bishops and clergy. The protection Melania the
 Elder and her friends and relatives extended to Rufinus showed the extent to
 which Christian intellectual activity in Rome remained rooted in the domus—­in
 the town houses of the wealthy and in the patronage the owners of these houses
 exercised—­quite as much as in the churches.40
    The position of the Christian nobility as the patrons of spiritual guides ex-
 plains an event that seems surprising to those who, like ourselves, know about
 the eventual course of the Pelagian Controversy. In the years immediately after
 410, the greatest Christian family of all—­the Anician family of Petronius Probus
 himself—­turned to the British monk Pelagius (soon to become notorious as the
 opponent of Saint Augustine) for spiritual advice.41 They did this because Pela-
 gius had established himself in Rome as a spiritual mentor with a style all his own.

                                        301
                                   chapter 18


   Pelagius may have come to Rome from southern Britain in around 390. He
had made a reputation for himself as a commentator on the Epistles of Saint
Paul and as an ardent proponent of the perfect life. It was his mission “to set
alight and to stir up frozen souls, made sluggish and inert, by means of Chris-
tian exhortations.”42
   There was nothing lukewarm or even particularly “liberal”—­in a cozy mod-
ern sense—­about Pelagius. He remained a layperson and shied away from the
use of the originally Greek word “monk” (the “m-­word,” which Jerome had bran-
dished with gusto on every occasion so as to shock and thrill his readers):

   I want you to be called a Christian, not a monk, and to possess the virtue
   of your own personal claim to praise rather than a foreign name which is
   bestowed to no purpose by us Latins.43

Yet, despite this disclaimer, Pelagius was always regarded by others as a “servant
of God.” He had a clear ascetic agenda. It was because of this agenda that Pela-
gius was approached, in around 412–­13, by the widow of Petronius Probus—­
Anicia Faltonia Proba—­and by Proba’s daughter-­in-­law—­Anicia Juliana, the re-
cent widow of the son of Probus, Olybrius, who had been consul in 395—­to write
a letter of praise and advice. The letter was written to celebrate the taking of the
veil by Probus’s granddaughter—­Demetrias.44 The invitation to write such a let-
ter had been a tribute to Pelagius’s gift for ascetic exhortation.
    Because of the disruption caused by the sack of Alaric, the veiling of Deme-
trias did not take place in Rome but in Carthage. The velatio—­the solemn be-
stowal of the veil on Demetrias by Aurelius, bishop of Carthage—­was intended
to be a fully public ceremony. The giving of the veil by the paterfamilias had been
part of the Roman marriage ceremony. Hence the bestowal of the veil on Deme-
trias by Aurelius, as a bishop and so as a spiritual father, highlighted the occasion.
This was no private vow; it was the spiritual marriage of a top aristocrat to Christ.
The marriage took place in the cathedral church of Carthage. The amount of pub-
licity the event received resembled that which surrounded the great games that
marked the debut of a senator of Rome. Indeed, the ceremony of the games was
echoed even in small details. Gifts were distributed to bishops, much as Symma-
chus had distributed ivory diptychs and little silver baskets among his peers on
the occasion of his son’s games as praetor. As bishop of Hippo, Augustine re-
ceived one such present. He thanked Proba and Juliana with studied delight:

   What words could express, what herald could be worthy of such news, to
   make plain how incomparably more glorious and fruitful it is that Christ
   should have virgins of the blood of the Anicii, than that the world should
   have consuls?45


                                        302
          renunciation, nobility, and the sack of rome


At the time, the Anicii needed a grand ceremony. They had been blamed for re-
fusing to part with their vast wealth to save Rome. Later legend held Proba her-
self responsible for opening the Salarian Gate (close to the palace of the Anicii
on the Pincian Hill) so as to let in the Visigoths of Alaric.46 She and her retinue
appear to have been escorted safely out of Rome. By contrast, Jerome claimed
that his friend Marcella had been caught in her palace on the Aventine Hill and
that she had eventually died from the beatings she received from Visigoths in
search of treasure.47 The very safety of the Anician ladies suggested that they had
struck a deal with the barbarians. As a result, Proba and her family may well have
arrived in Carthage under suspicion of treason. Heraclianus, the count of Africa,
claimed at that time to be an ardent imperial loyalist. It gave him an excuse to
shake down Proba and her retinue in the name of the distant emperor Honorius,
who had retreated to Ravenna.48
    But uncomfortable though their arrival had been, for the moment Carthage—­
and not Rome—­was the only place where the Anicians could hope to shine.
They chose to shine as loyal members of the church—­through their womenfolk.
Demetrias may even have been saved by her vow of virginity from a mésalliance.
Their reputation shattered by recent events in Rome, the Anician ladies may have
been under pressure to recoup their finances and to gain protection in a hostile
land through marrying downward into a rich provincial family.49 It was also a
time to keep the family patrimony intact. By becoming a consecrated virgin, De-
metrias stepped out of the marriage market and saved her family the expense of
providing a dowry.50
    Characteristically, all these were scenarios alluded to by Jerome, who had also
been approached to write a letter to Demetrias. Jerome’s letter showed the old
satirist’s gift for conjuring up the imagined workings of a noble family. We do
not have to believe him. But, given the situation of the Anicii at this time, the
scenarios to which Jerome referred are credible. Equally credible was Jerome’s
evocation of the supernatural significance of the ceremony. In dangerous times,
the Anicii could hope for the spiritual protection afforded (as in the recent days
of the Vestals of Rome) by the presence their midst of a “votive” virgin taken
from their own family.51


         “Spiritual riches no one can give you other than yourself ”:
                         Pelagius and Demetrias, 413

Pelagius received his invitation to write for Demetrias when he was already far
from Rome and Carthage, in Jerusalem. The Anician ladies paired him with Je-
rome, the other Latin luminary of the Holy Places. For them, Jerome and Pelagius


                                       303
                                   chapter 18


were two great ascetics, placed as it were on the panel of experts summoned to
congratulate and to advise Demetrias.
    Pelagius’s letter was utterly distinctive. It was not the letter of a monastic en-
fant terrible, such as Jerome wrote. Jerome had included innuendoes of family
pressure first placed on Demetrias to accept a husband. He had conjured up the
moment when Demetrias had resisted these pressures and when the heavy mar-
riage gifts (the equivalent of the casket of Projecta and the other items of the
Esquiline Treasure) were stowed away for good.
    Pelagius’s letter contained none of these titillating bedroom dramas. Rather,
it was the letter of a skilled teacher. He treated Demetrias as a beginning student.
He assured her that she possessed the innate gifts necessary to succeed. Then he
told her how to succeed.52 Altogether, the Letter to Demetrias was a measured
work, which proposed a measured style of life. The great connoisseur of Latin
monasticism Adalbert de Vogüé has detected in Pelagius’s Letter to Demetrias
turns of phrase and recommended practices that look straight forward to the Rule
of Saint Benedict.53
    But the Letter to Demetrias was also a manifesto. In it, Pelagius made plain to
an audience of admirers, now gathered in Carthage as they had once been gath-
ered in Rome, the theological principles that underlay his own, distinctive style
of spiritual guidance. An unmistakable and challenging view of the human per-
son (the fruit of decades of commentary, writing, and debate in Rome) lay at the
heart of his message.
    Human nature was sound. It could take the strain of an exacting ascetic
education:
   Whenever I have to speak on the subject of moral instruction and the con-
   duct of a holy life, it is my practice first to demonstrate the power and
   quality of human nature and to show what it is capable of achieving.54
      First, then, you ought to measure the good of human nature by refer-
   ence to its Creator. . . . If it is He who has made all things exceeding good,
   how much more excellent do you suppose He has made humanity itself.55
The human mind had always been taught by its own nature—­by a “natural law”
implanted in the human conscience—­to pursue the right. The moral heroism
even of pagans made this clear: “even without God, we humans show that we
have been made by God.”56 Job, for instance, was one such upright pagan. Taught
by nature alone, he had been “a man of the Gospel before the Gospels. He has
taught us how great is the treasure of the soul.”57
    The only problem, then, Demetrias had to face was how to ensure that the
clear directives of the mind were translated into action. It was here that Pelagius
sought to make his message more than clear. His life’s work was at stake on this
issue.

                                         304
           renunciation, nobility, and the sack of rome


    In Pelagius’s opinion, there was no element in the human person and no force
within the universe itself that made it impossible for a serious Christian to carry
out what his or her conscience demanded. The moral universe, as created by
God, was made up of free wills alone. Human beings might use this freedom to
do terrible evil. But they acted as totally free agents. There was no heart of dark-
ness in human nature, just as there was no heart of darkness in the universe. No
innate force existed that might resist, much less control, the will. To think that
such a force existed was to think like a Manichee. Only the ignorant, the inert, or
the blasphemous conjured up such imagined forces, so as to give Christians an
excuse for not fulfilling the law of God: “Only those who do not want to change
their lives, persuade themselves that they are up against ‘human nature’ itself.”58
    Holiness came from the human will alone. Demetrias did not need to wait to
receive the grace of God to realize her spiritual ambitions. Pelagius made clear
that he thought it was profoundly wrong to talk of the “grace of God” as if it
came as a totally new and unexpected gift from God, given “out of the blue” as it
were. To treat grace in this way, as if it were a force that came from outside the
self, was to do no more than objectify one’s own inertia:
   we languish in ignorance, due to our own sloth and idleness . . . struck with
   amazement, we come to think that sanctity is conferred upon us from
   some outside source.59
By contrast to this affectation of passivity, Demetrias was urged to remember her
inner resources. She must learn to draw upon her own true wealth.
   Everyone realizes that your physical nobility and your material wealth be-
   long to your family . . . but spiritual riches no one can give you other than
   yourself. . . . Spiritual riches can not be there, unless they come from you
   alone.60
    This proved to be a fatal sentence for Pelagius. It appeared to imply that God
gave nothing to Demetrias. She already had all the spiritual riches she needed to
live a perfect life. Over four years later, Augustine and Alypius reminded Anicia
Juliana of this passage. In a joint letter written to Juliana in late 417–­18, after she
had returned to Rome, they warned her:
   To write, “these goods [wealth and nobility] can not be true goods” . . . is
   straightforward, solid food. But what he wrote, [that spiritual riches]
   “come from you alone”: that is poison.61
   The head of a great domus, Juliana was unimpressed by their protests. The two
African bishops received a distinctly chilly answer. She assured them that her
domuncula—­her “dear little house”—­had never harbored heresy. No breath of
suspicion had ever touched a member of the Anicii. In effect, she told Augustine

                                         305
                                  chapter 18


and Alypius to mind their own business. The original of Pelagius’s letter re-
mained with the Anician family and was plainly read with approval.62


       “Let all that dignity . . . be transferred”: Pelagius and Nobility

Juliana had no reason to be disturbed by Pelagius. For, in the Letter to Demetrias,
he had implicitly validated the nobility of her family. He derived the prospective
sanctity of Demetrias directly from her Anician descent: the one led to the other.
As Jean-­Marie Salamito has acutely observed, this aspect of the Letter to Deme­
trias involved a maneuver that was more audacious than was usual among late
Roman Christian writers. In their relations with the Anicii, as with other nobles,
Augustine and Jerome had been prepared to praise the noble origins of their
correspondents. But they treated this as mere “worldly” nobility, which the true
Christian should strive to forget. Normal nobility stood in sharp opposition to
the true nobility of the soul. Thus, Augustine wrote to Juliana in 413 that the
Anicii had provided “the world” with consuls; but Christ received virgins “in a
manner incomparably more glorious and fruitful.” There was no hint, in this flat-
tery, that producing consuls might in any way contribute to producing holy vir-
gins. The one nobility did not lead naturally to the other in such a way that noble
birth in and of itself helped guarantee nobility of spirit.63
   With Pelagius, this was not the case. He urged Demetrias not to forget who
she had been. On the contrary:
   Let all that dignity which you derive from your famous family and the
   illustrious honor of the Anician blood be transferred to the soul; let that
   person be counted famous, lofty and noble, who guards that nobility,
   keeps it intact and thinks it demeaning to be a slave to vice.64
As Salamito has pointed out, such passages implied a causal link between Chris-
tian perfection and noble birth.65 For Pelagius, earthly nobility was not the an-
tithesis to Christian nobility: the one could lead directly to the other. Demetrias
had transferred her excellence; she had not left it behind. Pelagius expected her
to draw on a sense of noblesse oblige that was as secure (and as much an insepa-
rable part of herself ) as were the inalienable spiritual riches of her mind.
    Altogether, readers of Pelagius’s Letter to Demetrias could not have avoided
noticing in it a clear echo, in the spiritual realm, of that high sense of autonomy
that had always distinguished the inner circle of the nobiles of Rome. As we saw
when we discussed the social world of Symmachus, theirs was a nobility con-
ferred by nobility. It was not a nobility that depended on the grace and favor
of an emperor. It had not dropped upon them (as it did upon mere provincials,
such as Ausonius) as if from heaven itself. It was fully theirs, rooted in their na-

                                        306
           renunciation, nobility, and the sack of rome


ture, as unshakable and as utterly autonomous as was the “natural nobility” of the
soul upheld by Pelagius.
    We will have occasion, in a further chapter, to examine in greater detail what
this aspect of Pelagius’s message meant to Augustine and to the clergy of Africa,
and why they decided to oppose it with such vigor. To the Roman refugees in
Carthage in 413, however, it meant one thing. Shaken by the sack of Rome, the
Anicii had maintained their innate nobility. Demetrias had not abandoned all
trace of her noble birth through dispossession and headlong flight to foreign
lands—­as her peers, Pinianus and Melania the Younger, were intent on doing.
Demetrias, indeed, had no intention of vanishing to the East. She returned
quickly to Rome with her family as soon as peace was restored. Like Melania the
Younger, she died as an old lady, in the 450s. But she had not withdrawn into
a cell in the Holy Land. Rather, she continued to live (as Pinianus and Melania
had once done) in the suburbium of Rome. She was buried in a shrine dedicated
to Saint Stephen, which she had built into her large villa on the Via Latina, three
miles out of Rome. Nor, as far as we can see, did she turn this villa into a convent.
It remained a noble domus. Written in large monumental lettering, her epitaph
described her as
   Demetrias Amnia Virgo.66
   (Demetrias the virgin of the Anician race.)
Demetrias still represented (in the age of Atilla the Hun) a fragment of a stable
world.
   In 413 the Anicii had received from Pelagius a heightened sense of their own
nobility at a time of crisis. Other followers of Pelagius, however, would treat the
rich less kindly. Let us turn to the remarkable anonymous author of the Pelagian
De divitiis—­the vehement treatise On Riches, which was written around 410 and
became known to Augustine in Africa around 414.




                                        307
                          Chapter 19
                          •••••
                Tolle divitem: Take away the rich
              The Pelagian Criticism of Wealth




        “The sword of the free will”: Pelagius, Habit, and the Social
                          Dimensions of Wealth

Pelagius’s Letter to Demetrias was a celebratory manifesto, written for a very spe-
cial aristocratic occasion. Concentrated on the convergence in the young virgin
Demetrias of nobility of birth with a “natural” nobility of the mind, it shunned
the issue of the huge wealth of her family. Altogether, on the issue of wealth Pe-
lagius tended to be thoroughly conventional. A typical mentor writing for well-­
to-­do disciples, he stressed un-­wealth, not poverty. A teacher should be above
money. His students, like the “saints” addressed in the Epistles of Saint Paul,
should avoid snobbery and undue concern with petty social distinctions. It was
the morality of an aristocratic philosophical counterculture, of which we have
already seen many examples among the study groups of late antiquity.1
   But there was one theme on which Pelagius’s thought had taken on a sharper
profile than was usual. That was his notion of habit. Committed to a view of the
absolute freedom of the will, Pelagius explained the human sense of difficulty
in fulfilling the commands of God by stressing the cumulative resistance to the
good created by human custom. No inert or malign force of nature cramped the
will. But nevertheless, when confronted by God’s challenge to do good, Chris-
tians, despite their possession of free will, found themselves cramped by their
own past—­by the slow piling up of bad habits in the self, derived from previous,
free acts of the will.

   Nor is there any reason why it is made difficult for us to do good other
   than the fact that a long habit of doing wrong has infected us since child-
   hood and corrupted us little by little over many years and ever after holds


                                       308
                   the pelagian criticism of wealth


   us in bondage . . . so that it seems, somehow to have acquired the force of
   nature.2

    But not only was the individual held in the grip of his or her own past. Society
itself was also responsible for the bad habits that opposed the will. Society as a
whole was held in the grip of evil customs. These customs were the mute deposit
of past ages of willful sinning by individuals. Nonetheless, when faced by the
weight of social custom, Pelagius remained optimistic. Custom was not insuper-
able. What the free will had created, the free will could undo. Habit remained
external to the will. It was like rust that had come to form around the moving
parts of a machine. Pelagius would teach Demetrias how to file away that rust so
as to recover her natural freedom to do good.3
    This view of custom had radical implications. Society might seem immobile,
but its immobility was only apparent. It was the result of the free actions of for-
mer days. The effects of these actions could be reversed; wealth did not have
to be seen as an irremovable feature of society. Rather, it could be treated as
nothing more than another bad habit inherited from the past. Like any other
bad habit, human beings could shake it off by an act of renunciation. Pelagius
wrote for those who were prepared, in the words of his Letter to Demetrias, to
wield “the sword of the free will” in cutting through the bonds that held them to
great wealth.4
    Pelagius did not pursue this theme in his writings. But his view of habit pro-
vided a theoretical justification for the supreme willfulness of persons such as
Pinianus and Melania in forcing through the dispersion of their inheritance.
What the young couple had dared to do, Pelagian writers dared to think. They
wrote so as to exhort others to follow a course of radical ascetic renunciation.
Wealth was a bad habit. It was the result of innumerable free acts of avarice and
violence. A free act of renunciation would reverse that sinister process. Wealth
could drop off the rich like a great cake of rust.
    Pelagius was surrounded by a fringe of followers who were often considerably
more radical than he was. Many were attached to noble houses and wrote for
noble patrons. They breathed the heady atmosphere of an ascetic movement in a
time of real crisis, when entire fortunes were being shaken by public calamities.
They had been present at moments of dramatic renunciation and self-­imposed
exile. Followers of Pelagius had formed part of the entourage of Pinianus and
Melania as they fled from Italy to Sicily and from thence to Africa. They had been
armed by their teacher with a quite distinctive constellation of ideas, to which
the notions of freedom and habit were central. They looked back in anger at the
passing of an age of affluence that the sack of Rome appeared to have brought to
an end. Wealth was for one thing only—­to be renounced.


                                        309
                                  chapter 19


        “Flowers which bloom from crime”: The Pelagian De divitiis
                        and the Origins of Wealth

The most striking example of this streak of social thinking was the anonymous
Pelagian treatise entitled De divitiis—­On Riches. It was written some time be-
tween 408 and 414. Its author is a shadowy figure. He was first introduced to
English-­speaking scholarship in the 1960s by John Morris under the somewhat
raffish name of the “Sicilian Briton.” Morris presented the author as a refugee to
Sicily from a Britain already in the grip of the social upheaval that (in Morris’s
opinion) had accompanied the withdrawal of the Roman armies from the prov-
ince. Along with other Pelagian tracts, the De divitiis was supposed to have cir-
culated in war-­torn Britain as part of an ideology of revolution.5
    In recent years, however, the exemplary study of Andreas Kessler has removed
much of this imagined background. The “Sicilian Briton” has declined into the
less colorful “Anonymous Roman.”6 He did not come from a Britain in the throes
of revolution. Rather, he grew up in the world of the exuberantly rich in Rome
and Sicily. Kessler points out that he was not interested in the redistribution of
property. Almsgiving to the poor was notably absent from his concerns. It was
the nature of wealth itself and the urgent need for its renunciation that preoc-
cupied him. He did not envisage the reorganization of late Roman society as a
whole.
    What cannot be denied, however, is the sharp profile of the treatise itself.
Scholars have reacted to the De divitiis in very different ways, depending on their
ideological commitments. John Morris claimed that “the crisp argumentation . . .
is by any definition socialism.”7 Georges de Plinval (a sober exponent of the
thought of Pelagius) was less impressed. For him, it represented “the first, me-
thodical attempt to distort the thought on wealth of the Fathers of the Church.”8
To Jean-­Marie Salamito, it was an exercise in “ascetic brinkmanship,” startlingly
different in tone from the measured convergence of nobility and spiritual excel-
lence canvassed by Pelagius. It was a rant, not a contribution to social thought.9
    These judgments tend to isolate the De divitiis. They ask both too much and
too little of it. They look for a revolutionary program and tend to be disap-
pointed when they find in it, on a first reading, no more than the usual array of
catchwords employed in contemporary ascetic tracts. But we should look at the
De divitiis against the background of late Roman denunciations of wealth as a
whole. The recent, patient study of Santo Toscano has placed the De divitiis
against that background. Toscano shows that the tract was characterized by an
unusually spirited rearrangement of conventional arguments and by real knowl-
edge of the contemporary world.10
    It is this rearrangement of conventional arguments for a radical purpose that
gives the author of the De divitiis a sharp profile. It rescues him from anonymity.

                                       310
                    the pelagian criticism of wealth


So far we have dealt with known authors (such as Ambrose, Augustine, and Pau-
linus of Nola) whose life and social context we can attempt to explore. Here we
have something different. We do not even know the name of the author of the
De divitiis. We can only have a rough idea of the date it was written and of the
milieu from which he came. But we can see that the De divitiis was the treatise
of a master disputant. The author’s whole-­hearted concentration on the issue of
renunciation led him to scan the entire range of attitudes toward wealth that had
been common to Christians and pagans in the ancient world (whose outlines we
have seen in earlier chapters). He found that the common sense of wealth, which
had been accepted by even the most daring writers, was inadequate. In the course
of his argument, he dismissed an entire inherited conglomerate of notions that
had made wealth seem tolerable in the Christian communities. He treated these
notions as no more than special pleading in favor of the rich. His readers were to
be left with no excuse for not taking the road through the narrow crack of total
renunciation, which Paulinus of Nola, Pinianus, and Melania the Younger had
taken.
    First and foremost, we are dealing with a treatise deeply influenced by Pela-
gius’s sharp sense of the autonomy of the will. For the author of the De divitiis,
wealth had no existence outside the will. There was no such thing as simply
“being” rich in an unproblematic manner. Wealth was the product of avarice,
which was the wish to be rich. When, in his First Letter to Timothy (1 Tim. 6:9),
Paul spoke of the rich as those “who wish to be rich,” our author claimed that
Paul had made clear that wealth was “located squarely in the will.” And this was
not simply a will to have more than one should have. It was a dire and tenacious
will to have, tout court.11
    If the will to have was evil in itself, then traditional restraints on wealth (Chris-
tian and non-­Christian) were ineffective. Most exegetes of Paul, when faced by
the First Letter to Timothy, had been content to fall back on the comfortable
distinction between “good” wealth and “bad” wealth. This distinction drew at-
tention to the good or bad drives of those who were already rich and to the good
or bad uses to which this wealth could be put—­whether for luxury or for sober
living, for miserliness or for generosity. This attitude, in effect, put the wealth of
the wealthy on parole. It urged the rich to be content with what they already had.
It was only weakness of character on the part of the bad rich that led them on
to avarice. Personal failings—­sensuality, pride, and the lust for power—­drove
them to increase their wealth. Discourse on wealth was, in effect, not a discourse
about society. It was a moral discourse about the impact on society of the per-
sonal vices to which the rich were most exposed—­such as love of luxury, cruelty,
and ambition.
    For the author of the De divitiis, this was not so. Avarice was not luxury, nor
was it sensuality, nor even the lust for power. These conventional sins of the bad

                                          311
                                  chapter 19


rich were only secondary manifestations of a deeper and more sinister drive. Ava-
rice was a pure product of the will. It was ensconced (as the will must be) in the
very heart of the human person. Indeed, there was a frightening permanence and
bodilessness about the drive to wealth. While sex might be satiated, avarice was
not.12
    Because it was a product of the human will, wealth had a history. And it was
a grim one. Wealth in the present was based on an apparently endless regress of
free acts of greed and power that reached back for thousands of years. The lush
“flowers of wealth” pushed their roots deep into “a bed of crime.”13
    Here the author of the De divitiis proposed an unexpectedly radical version of
the history of human society. We have seen (in the case of Ambrose) that a tra­
dition of primitivism was deeply rooted in the Greek and Roman worlds. It had
played an essential role in Ambrose’s social thought. Ambrose believed, as did
many others, that there had once been a Golden Age when an abundant nature
had provided human beings with their needs. Only later was the Golden Age fol-
lowed by the zero-­sum game by which human beings had usurped the common
earth through claiming parts of it as private property. This, in turn, had led to the
present state of society—­a society characterized by estate walls, locked store-
houses, land grabbing, violence, and war.14
    For many Christians, this Golden Age appeared to have lingered for millen-
nia. Sulpicius Severus (whom we have already met as a friend of Paulinus of
Nola) wrote in his Chronicle that the first human war had been the war between
Abraham and the kings, in the valley of the Dead Sea. This war had occurred
precisely 3,312 years after the creation of Adam.15 In writing in this way, Sulpi-
cius assumed that the history of the human race included millennia of social
innocence, without property and without war. This was a comforting belief. If
social innocence had been the norm among humans for so long, it might yet be
recaptured.
    The Golden Age might return in modern times, if only in a few outstanding
individuals. Describing the ascetic regime of John the Baptist in the desert—­
where he fed on wild herbs and honey—­Paulinus of Nola wrote of John as hav-
ing lived as life had once been lived “in the first freshness of the human race.”16
John emerged from the desert as a living avatar of the Golden Age. Christians
were expected to strive to bring back echoes of those more sober times in their
social life. When, in around 406, Paulinus wrote an Epithalamium for the mar-
riage of the young deacon Julian of Eclanum (of whom we will hear more in
the course of the Pelagian Controversy), Paulinus urged Julian and his wife (the
daughter of a bishop) to avoid the excesses of a fashionable marriage. They
should opt instead for “the holy simplicity of our first ancestors.”17
    Altogether, the idea that a long stretch of “holy simplicity” had ended only
recently (when seen against the full span of human time) was a fixed component

                                        312
                   the pelagian criticism of wealth


in the social imagination of Christians in Rome. Most Christian Romans, how-
ever, did not imagine the Golden Age as a radical utopia. It was not an age of
undifferentiated innocence, with no property and no social distinctions. Rather,
what they usually imagined was a softer version of the present world, not un-
like the softer, kinder version of contemporary society they hoped to find in the
Christian churches. We can see this in the poetry of a remarkable figure from the
highest ranks of the Christian aristocracy.
    Faltonia Betitia Proba was the grandmother of Faltonia Proba. In the 350s
she wrote a Cento on the life of Christ (composed from ingeniously chosen half
verses of Vergil). She drew on the memorable description, in book 8 of the Ae­
neid, of the dire onset of the discolor aetas, of the “tarnished age” of avarice and
war that had succeeded more innocent centuries:
   There came the craze of war, and greed.
   Justice made tracks as she withdrew from earth.18
    Betitia Proba went on to describe the call of Christ to the Rich Young Man as
a call to regain the Golden Age. Her poem did not report Christ’s challenge to
abandon all, still less the follow Me that would haunt the generation of Paulinus,
Jerome, and Melania the Younger. Instead, in Proba’s rendering of the Gospel
incident, the spoiled richling was challenged to step back into the Golden Age.
Proba did not present him as having been urged by Christ to become poor.
Rather, he was told by Christ (in a series of echoes of Vergil) to behave like an
aristocrat of a gentler age, when Good King Saturn had ruled in Italy. He was to
be generous to his dependents and to use his power to protect the suffering.19
    By contrast, the author of the De divitiis nurtured no such comfortable
dreams. He was uninterested in the notion of a Golden Age and of the conse-
quent emergence of property. He believed that as long as human beings had free
wills, they had been capable of avarice and hence of accumulating wealth.20 This
was a remarkably demystified view. It had direct imaginative repercussions. It
robbed the rich of an idealized past in which wealth had been innocent. There
were no good rich men in the deep past to whom rich Christians could look as
models that excused their own possession of wealth. For most rich Christians,
the Patriarch Abraham had been the prime example of the good rich man: he
had combined holiness with great wealth. The present-­day rich assumed that if
they used their wealth in the right way, they could be the Abrahams of their own
times—­generous, hospitable, and protectors of the weak. And, if they imitated
Abraham in this respect, they could retain their wealth with an easy conscience.21
    The author of the De divitiis denied this belief categorically. He insisted that
Abraham had been an exception—­almost a sport of nature. Abraham did not
show that other rich men could be holy; he only showed that to be both rich and
holy was an exception. The modern rich could not claim to be like him. Abraham

                                        313
                                  chapter 19


had been loved by God because he had been unrepeatable. Abraham had used his
will in a manner starkly different from what had already become the grim norm of
humanity and what would remain the norm after his death up to modern times.
   This view of Abraham implied an unusually disabused view of human history.
Abraham had not been preceded by a long age of innocence, still less by other
examples of good rich persons. All human time before Abraham had been oc-
cupied by tyrants and by men of power in a world whose social order had been
created by the clash of human wills alone, acting in a purely human space left
vacant by God.22
   To contemporaries, this was a truly chilling conclusion. In the words of Boni-
face Ramsay: “This argument effectively removes wealth from the ambit of di-
vine providence.”23 The author of the De divitiis did not think that wealth had
been granted to some men by God through his providence so as to be used by
them as stewards of His bounty. At best, God had reluctantly acceded to the
creation of disparities of wealth much as He had condoned the proud gesture
with which the people of Israel had set up a king, despite the warnings of the
prophet Samuel.24
   Put bluntly, God’s providence played no part whatsoever in the existence of
great wealth. Still less had God given great wealth to some so that they could
offer it back to him as votive wealth. This was what Paulinus had claimed to do.
He did not show a hint of disquiet about his own wealth, provided that he of-
fered it to God by building the shimmering shrine of Saint Felix at Cimitile. The
De divitiis could have been written as a rebuke to just such a person as Paulinus.


     Tolle divitem et pauperem non invenies: Take away the rich and you
                              will find no poor

Who, then, were the rich? In the first place, the author of the De divitiis asserted
that no one could claim to be an originarius dives—­rich from birth and, for that
reason, innocent of avarice.25 By this statement, he brushed aside the traditional
distinction between family wealth and “new” wealth. Family wealth had tended
to be treated as unproblematic wealth, wealth that had always been there. Such
wealth was thought to be as stable as the land itself. As we saw in the case of Sym-
machus and Ausonius, wealth of this kind tended to be validated by a strong
sense of heritage. It was guiltless wealth. Only new wealth, wealth that the wrong
sort of rich had gained through violence and sharp dealing, was worthy of op-
probrium. On the contrary, as the De divitiis pointed out, every inheritance had
its own, dark history: “I was talking not so much of the possession of riches as of
their source, since I think that they can hardly have been acquired without some
injustice.”26

                                        314
                   the pelagian criticism of wealth


    To late Roman readers, this in itself was a platitude. There was a common
proverb, cited on one occasion by Jerome, which stated that “a rich man is either
a wicked man or the heir of a wicked man.”27 But it was the consequentiality of
his answer, not the question itself, that distinguished the author of the De di­
vitiis. He turned a much-­repeated adage into an inexorable social law.
   “Riches are evil then,” you will say. First discover what riches are. . . . The
   human race is divided into three classes: the rich, the poor, and those who
   have enough. . . . To be rich is to have more than is necessary; to be poor is
   not to have enough; and to have enough . . . is to possess no more than is
   absolutely necessary.28
“To have enough”—­to possess sufficientia—­was the measure of the difference
between wealth and poverty. And, for the author of the De divitiis, this measure
had to be calibrated and maintained with more than usual strictness. In his view,
the distribution of wealth and poverty in society was the result of an unforgiving
zero-­sum game. Those who went beyond the measure of sufficiency could do so
only by taking from the poor. Excess in the few automatically led to disposses-
sion in the many:
   Does it seem just to you then that one man should have an abundance of
   riches, over and above his needs, while another does not have enough even
   to supply his daily wants? That one man should relax in the enjoyment of
   his wealth, while another wastes away in poverty?29
    As we saw in the case of Paulinus of Nola, the juxtaposition of rich and poor,
of Dives and Lazarus, was a theme calculated to trouble the conscience of the
Christian rich. Paulinus had solved the issue by insisting on the mystical com­
mercium, the providential symbiosis, by which God had allowed the poor to
cluster round the rich so that the rich could save their own souls by almsgiving.
By contrast, the author of the De divitiis stripped the juxtaposition of rich and
poor of any hint of providential purpose. Rich and poor were not just two groups,
made eternally distant one from the other by the hidden will of God. Rather,
wealth and poverty were causally interconnected. Whether they were aware of it
or not, the rich had actively created the poor. For the rich had won the remorse-
less tug-­of-­war for limited resources, which took place to the benefit of the rich.
Every time someone overstepped the divinely ordained line of mere sufficiency
by becoming rich, others were pulled down into poverty.
    Sufficientia was not a classical term.30 It was taken, originally, from the book
of Proverbs (30:8), where the Hebrew lehem huqi referred to the daily bread al-
lotted to each person by the hand of God. It conjured up the ideal of contentment
and gratitude to God for whatever wealth had already come one’s way. It was a
term that usually allowed a generous fudge factor in what counted as “sufficient”

                                        315
                                   chapter 19


possessions. In the De divitiis, however, sufficientia was a polemical slogan. It
traced, with unforgiving clarity, an economic poverty line below which the poor
had been dragged by the very existence of the rich.
   Tolle divitem et pauperem non invenies:
      Get rid of the rich and you will not find the poor. Let no man have more
   than he really needs, and everyone will have as much as they need, since
   the few who are rich are the reason for the many who are poor.31
   We should not underestimate the sharpness of this view. Speaking of critics of
the wealthy in the Hellenistic Age, the great Russian historian Mikhail Ros-
tovtzeff (himself an exile from the Bolshevik regime) once observed: “For them,
the rich were not, as for some of their modern successors, criminals, but fools.”32
Most Christian writers and preachers of late antiquity (even Ambrose) had been
content to treat the rich as fools. They had misused in foolish ways the good
wealth bestowed on them by God. The author of the De divitiis went one step
further: for him, the rich were criminals. They were creatures of free will, and
they had made society what it was by their free actions. This was a society starkly
divided between rich and poor. The one had caused the other. The extent of the
wealth of the rich spelled out with implacable precision the extent to which they
had dispossessed the poor.


      “Is this really the wealth of their own hands?”: Wealth and Power

The argument of the De divitiis was pushed through with such rhetorical zest
that many have doubted its seriousness and, hence, its relevance to contempo-
rary conditions.33 Yet there is a precision about the description of the rich in the
De divitiis that rings true for a certain class and region. The rich of the De divitiis
were not the rich of Ambrose. The rich of Ambrose were presented as archetypal
owners of the land. They were monsters of the social imagination, whose profile
derived from a long Roman tradition that had viewed with disquiet the growth
of latifundia and the dispossession of the small farmer.
    The De divitiis mentions in passing the greed of those who yearned for
“boundless estates . . . measureless spaces.”34 But the persons who truly angered
him were not the great landowners but the judices—­in the first instance, provin-
cial governors acting as judges. They were the overbearing servants of the em-
peror. Their oppression of the poor was not linked to the growth of great estates
but to the workings of the imperial judicial system. It was the relation between
wealth and government power the Pelagian writings chose to denounce with un­
usual vehemence.


                                         316
                   the pelagian criticism of wealth


    In this, the De divitiis was not alone. Other partisans of Pelagius wrote trea-
tises that showed the same obsessive focus on the relation between wealth and
administrative violence. The writer of the treatise De vita christiana—­On the
Christian Life—­pointed out that many such persons had fallen victim, in his
own days, to bloody revolts:
   Others again, who had unjustly executed and dispossessed a countless
   multitude of men were torn apart limb from limb and piece from piece, so
   that the number of their divided members was no smaller than the num-
   ber of those they had caused to be killed.35
    It is not at all surprising, given the vigor of such passages, that John Morris
should have imagined that he had caught in them a distant echo of popular ven-
geance in a world turned upside down by the withdrawal of the Roman govern-
ment from southern Britain. But similar events had happened in Rome (not least
the unprecedented lynching of a Prefect of the City described in the Life of Me­
lania). In this respect, we should remember the composite nature of the noble
class in Rome. In the 410s (as in the 370s) not all nobles were like Symmachus
or the Anicii. A very large number of them would have been new men who had
risen to wealth through government service. It was they who produced the ju­
dices who were denounced, in the Pelagian writings, by authors who came from
much the same class as they did.
    Hence a division within the Pelagian movement. Nobles such as Demetrias
and her mother, Juliana Anicia, might patronize Pelagius. He spoke to them in
high terms of their capacity to draw upon an innate nobility of the soul that
seemed to echo their own high opinion of themselves. But those who applied the
ideas of Pelagius to social issues seem to have come from the lower layer of the
nobility, which (as we have often had occasion to see) was a fertile breeding
ground of mavericks. The enfant terrible of the Pelagian movement, Caelestius,
was a “noble by birth” and, at the same time, a student of administrative law.
Caelestius was almost the exact social equivalent of what Augustine’s friend, the
young Alypius, had once been—­a notable making his way as a lawyer in Rome.
One of the principal opponents of the Pelagians, Constantius, was a retired vi­
carius: he had been an administrative stand-­in for the Praetorian Prefect (a high
official, such as Alypius had served when he had been a legal adviser in Rome).36
    Members of this class had no illusions as to the source of their own wealth. It
was not immemorial acres; it was access to gold, gained by official power. Nor
had the Roman congregations any illusions as to the wealth of the wealthier lay
members of their church. Assembled in great basilicas, the People of God watched
the wealthy every Sunday as they solemnly processed up the aisle to leave their
offerings on special tables placed near the altar. The deacons would bring these


                                       317
                                   chapter 19


offerings to the altar to be offered to God with a solemn prayer of thanks and
blessing by the priest.37 At that moment, in the Roman church and elsewhere,
the names of those who brought donations would be read aloud to the acclama-
tions of the congregation. We know of this practice from a remark of Jerome’s. It
is characteristic of the inveterate satirist that he should have added:
   But is this really their own wealth (Proverbs 13:5)? We see many who op-
   press their farmers, the poor and their clients—­not to mention the vio-
   lence of servants of the emperor [militantes—­bureaucrats as well as soldiers]
   and governors, who despoil through the use of official power. . . . The dea-
   con may read out aloud the names of those who bring offerings—­“She has
   brought so much,” “He has promised such and such a sum.” They bask in
   the plaudits of the populace, while their conscience should torment them.38
   By creating ceremonies that echoed in the churches the face-­to-­face civic
encounter of the city’s rich with “their” people in the circus, the bishops had
unwittingly re-­created the tradition of criticism that had always existed as a dark
undercurrent to the dialogue between the rich man and his admirers. Wealth
given to the people (whether to the shows or to the church) was only too often
wealth that needed to be laundered.
   The Old Testament notion that “wealth from rapine” must not be offered at
the altar of God empowered Christian critics of the rich. In every city, recurrent
ceremonies of offering and the creation of pious foundations (such as Paulinus’s
poorhouse at Cimitile or the hospital of Pammachius and Furia at Rome) pro-
vided a moment when local opinion might judge the Christian rich. The rich
could always be criticized for offering wealth tainted by rapine. In the words of
the Pelagian De vita christiana:
   These are not the sort of alms that God asks for. . . . It is better for you not
   to give alms at all than to cause a great number to be despoiled of money
   from which you put a roof over the heads of a few.39
   The author of the De divitiis had no illusions as to the relation between wealth,
power, and public cruelty. His portraits of the rich were even more memorable
than were the cruelties of the great landowners conjured up by Saint Ambrose:
   Before your eyes human bodies . . . battered with a scourge of lead or bro-
   ken with cudgels or torn apart with claws or branded in the flames . . . and
   you, the upholder of riches and of the sale of offices, recline without a care,
   resting on thick carpets piled high beneath you . . . and entertain your
   guests with the tale of the man whom you have savagely tortured . . . and
   lest anyone present . . . be struck with horror at the story, you go on to claim,
   in doing this, that you are beholden to the laws.40


                                         318
                    the pelagian criticism of wealth


                                Christ before Pilate

Last but not least, in the Pelagian writings, the horror of a society dominated
by the rich was thrown into high relief by the silent presence of Christ. It was not
the poor nor the monk who was the living rebuke to the conscience of the
rich—­it was Christ Himself. True to Pelagius’s emphasis on the power of example
to move the will, Pelagian writings focused with unusual power on the humility
of Christ.41 In this, they reflected the sensibility of a post-­Jerome generation. The
ascetic notion of the utter poverty of Christ, which owed much to Jerome’s fierce
linking of the absolute poverty of Christ to the poverty of the monks, formed
the foundation of the Pelagian critiques of the rich.
   Times had changed. For Paulinus of Nola and others of his generation, the
abjectio, the stepping down of God Himself from heaven to earth, had been
abasement enough. As we saw in the case of Pinianus and Melania the Younger,
this stepping down was mirrored in a drastic change of dress. But this was not an
emptying out that totally destroyed the social person. The Christ of the Pela-
gians (like the Christ of Jerome) had stepped down even further. He was down
and out in Rome. He was imagined, by Jerome, to linger quite literally among
the poor who gathered at the steps of the great marbled palaces.42
   The author of the De divitiis was less moved than was Jerome by pathos for
the poor. What counted most for him was the stark contrast between poverty
and worldly power. In His utter, silent depletion, Christ confronted the rich di-
rectly, as the exact opposite of their own existence, much as He had once stood
before Pilate.
   So let us see if the rich man’s way of life has any similarity with that of
   Christ. There is none that I can see. . . . The rich, with vainglorious and
   proud spirit . . . are accustomed to solicit earthly power and to take their
   seat upon the tribunal before which Christ was heard. . . . He stood humbly
   before that tribunal; you sit on the tribunal, above those who stand before
   you, perhaps about to judge a poor man. . . . He said that His kingdom was
   not of this world, but to you the glory connected with an earthly empire is
   so desirable that you procure power in it at vast expense or at the cost of
   unworthy and wearisome servitude and flattery.43
    Altogether, the author of the De divitiis was categorical. When Christ had
said that It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of heaven (Matt. 19:24), he spoke of an outright im-
possibility. His words could not be palliated by allegory, by special pleading, or
by ingenious textual emendation—­unless, he added, the rich were to find a very
large needle or a very small camel.44 Only those who, like Pinianus and Mela-


                                         319
                                    chapter 19


nia, had squeezed through that agonizing crack in the wall by totally abandon-
ing their property could hope to come out on the other side to the Kingdom
of God.
   This was a pamphlet calculated to send shock waves through the community
of Christians both in Rome and in exile. As far as we know, Augustine never read
the text of the De divitiis. But in 414 (that is, only a year after the arrival of Pela-
gius’s Letter to Demetrias in Carthage) a certain Hilarius wrote from Syracuse to
Augustine at Hippo. Hilarius listed five propositions “on which certain Chris-
tians in Syracuse are holding forth.” One proposition said:
   A rich man who remains in his riches will not enter the Kingdom of God
   unless he sells all that he has: nor will those riches be of any use to him [in
   securing salvation] even if he uses them to fulfill the commandments [that
   is, for almsgiving].45
   Augustine instantly associated these propositions with the opinions of Pela-
gius’s more extreme followers. By 414 he and his colleagues had begun to take
the measure of the spread of Pelagian ideas. Pelagianism—­that is, an -­ism made
up of heretical ideas—­had begun to take shape in their minds. They found them-
selves confronted with two distinctive statements, which summed up two dif-
ferent wings of the same movement—­Pelagius’s letter to Demetrias and the De
divitiis, the Pelagian treatise On Riches. Both statements had been generated in
Rome. Both had been provoked by the actions of leading members of Roman
society—­by the vocation and veiling of Demetrias and by the renunciation of
Pinianus and Melania. Both had come to Augustine’s doorstep as a result of the
massive displacement of personnel caused by Alaric’s sack of the city in 410.
Both caused grave disquiet to Augustine and to the bishops of Africa.
   This new challenge came to Augustine when he had already had fifteen years
of experience as a bishop in Africa behind him. When we meet him now, in 414,
we meet a different man from the priest, the newly ordained bishop and the ad-
vocate of monastic poverty of the 390s. Augustine was now an old man. He had
entered his sixties. He had breathed the distinctive air of Africa for a long time.
This was a province whose Christianity had taken on a particular form, hardened
by a century of grassroots growth and by the bitter confrontation of two great
local churches.
   Africa was a different world from the Rome and Gaul where we have lingered
in our most recent chapters. It was with his experience of Africa behind him that
Augustine faced the new challenge that had been brought to him, almost by ac-
cident, by noble persons from across the sea. The Pelagian Controversy that
began with this encounter was never a mere war of minds alone. It quickly be-
came a clash between two Christian landscapes. For this reason, we must go


                                         320
                  the pelagian criticism of wealth


back for at least a decade (to the early 400s) to follow Augustine as a pastor and
preacher in Africa. Only by giving due weight to his day-­to-­day experiences in
the churches of Africa can we appreciate the nature of Augustine’s reaction both
to Pelagius and to the disturbing views on wealth that had only recently been
reported to him from Syracuse.




                                       321
                          Chapter 20
                          •••••
                          Augustine’s Africa
                          People and Church




     Horrendo et perseverantissimo clamoris fremitu: With a frightening
                    and persistent roar of acclamations

               Pinianus and Melania at Hippo, 411 AD

For the next three chapters and for much of the fourth, we will find ourselves in
Africa. This means, of course, that we will return to Augustine. But we will not
return only to Augustine. We will find ourselves in an extensive and strange land-
scape in which Augustine, for all his prodigious output as a writer, was no more
than one figure among many. He was not necessarily the most important figure.
Indeed, as we shall see, many African Christians (perhaps, indeed, the majority)
regarded him as an unwelcome interloper who attempted to forward the claims
of his own church at the expense of a long-­established form of local Christianity.
For Africa was not only a large and diverse province. It harbored the oldest and
most solidly established Christian landscape in the Latin West. No area outside
the great city of Rome could boast of so long a Christian past. And in no other
Latin region had the Christian past been so heavy with disagreements between
two nearly identical versions of the same Christian faith.
   For this reason, we must look first at the overall landscape of Christian Africa
in order to understand the zest with which competing Christian communities
had poured their wealth into the creation of churches. As a result of this, the
African Christianity of the fourth century became the first grassroots Christian
movement to appear in the Latin West. In the following chapter we will examine
the manner in which Augustine preached on the themes of wealth and poverty
to boisterous communities. Then we will see the manner in which Augustine
placed the views that had been formed by such preaching in the path of the very
different attitudes toward wealth espoused by radical upholders of the cause of

                                       322
                              augustine’s africa


Pelagius. The last of these chapters will cross the sea again from Africa. It will
deal with the manner in which the African church secured the condemnation of
Pelagius in Italy. It will then examine the implications of the victory of Augus-
tine and his African colleagues for the relations between church and empire
throughout the West in the generation before the imperial system set in place
with such confidence by Constantine and his successors collapsed in the face of
an unprecedented combination of civil war and barbarian invasion.
   Roman Africa was as large as Italy. In the fourth century, much of it was more
prosperous than Italy. But it was a world of its own. Africa was different. Romans
always spoke of it as “an other sky”—­as if it was a different hemisphere.1 Roman
refugees who arrived in Africa after the Gothic sack of Rome in 410 soon real-
ized that they had come to a strange land. At the very end of 410, for instance,
the noble Roman couple Pinianus and Melania the Younger together with Al-
bina, the mother of Melania, arrived in Africa. They made straight for inland
Numidia, where estates belonging to their families may well have existed for cen-
turies. Outside Thagaste (Souk Ahras, Algeria), they owned one such enormous
property.
   [The villa settlement] had a bath and employed many artisans who worked
   in gold, silver and bronze, along with two bishops, one of our [Catholic]
   faith and one of the [Donatist] heretics.2
This estate was given to the church of Thagaste, where (as we have seen) Augus-
tine’s friend Alypius had been bishop since 395. Viewed through the eyes of
these great Romans, Thagaste seemed “small and exceedingly poor.” Pinianus
and Melania’s estates in the area were believed to be larger than the entire terri-
tory controlled by the city. The pious couple set about to remedy the poverty of
Alypius’s church:
   She [Melania] adorned the church of this holy man [Alypius] with reve-
   nue as well as with offerings of both gold and silver treasure and valu-
   able silk veils, so that this church which formerly had been so very poor
   now stirred up envy of Alypius on the part of the other bishops in that
   province.3
It looked as if Pinianus and Melania might turn the church of Thagaste into the
Cimitile of Numidia.
    Other Christian congregations in other cities were quick to react to this new
influx of wealth. Intercity rivalry had always been the stuff of civic life in Africa.
The constant striving to do better than one’s neighbors had thrown up the spec-
tacular buildings of an earlier age. The Christian communities wanted to do the
same. They wanted larger basilicas, a better-­paid clergy, more funds for poor re-
lief. The best way to do this was to attract rich benefactors.

                                         323
                                  chapter 20


    Thus, when Pinianus and Melania, led by Alypius, made their way down to
the coast to visit Augustine at Hippo in the spring of 411, the Christian populus—­
Augustine’s congregation at Hippo —­was waiting for them. At a church service,
Augustine and Alypius found themselves cornered by a determined crowd. The
bishops stood on the slightly raised floor beneath the apse at the end of the
church. The populus occupied the main body of the church. “With a frightening
and persistent roar of acclamations” they demanded that Pinianus be made a
priest at Hippo.4 Augustine and his Roman visitors had no illusions as to why
they did this. The congregation had acted “so as to retain among them a man of
wealth who was known to despise money and to give it away freely.”5
    As we have seen, urban benefactors had long been subjected to similar pres-
sures to show generosity to the populus of their cities. But this pressure had been
brought to bear in vast open-­air circuses and amphitheaters. By contrast, the
basilica of Hippo may have measured 120 by 60 feet, with standing room for
only a few hundred persons. In such an enclosed space, the zeal of the populus
as it pressed forward toward the apse was terrifying. Alypius did not dare step
down from the slightly raised floor for fear that he would be set upon by the
crowd, who viewed him as the rival for Pinianus’s money because he was bishop
of Thagaste.6
    In expressing themselves in this vehement manner, the Christian populus
thought of itself as inspired by God. Their unanimous clamor was not a mere
roar. It probably took the form of the rhythmic acclamations that accompanied
the bringing of gifts up to the altar. This was the high point of the involvement
of the laity with the solemn drama of the Mass. Hence the pressure put on Pini-
anus at this moment to accept the priesthood and to swear an oath not to leave
the city. Pinianus’s acceptance of these demands would have been seen as his
Sunday offering. By giving in to the chants of the people, Pinianus would in ef-
fect have surrendered his vast wealth to the church of Hippo.
    Twenty years previously, Augustine himself had been made priest at Hippo in
the same high-­handed manner. Paulinus of Nola also had been ordained a priest
at Barcelona (on Christmas Day 394) “by the force of a [Christian] plebs sud-
denly inflamed [by God].” Pinianus was to be for the Christian people of Hippo
what the Christian people of Barcelona had wished Paulinus to be—­a rich bene-
factor permanently tied to their city as a member of the clergy.
    But the “Christian people” of Hippo underestimated the sheer idiosyncrasy
of a noble family. At the very moment Augustine was holding the pen to append
his signature to the oath extracted from Pinianus, Melania simply said: No.7
That was the end of the matter. Melania’s was the voice of the super-­rich, whose
members felt entitled (as did Paulinus of Nola) to live where they wished and to
take their money with them. The congregation dispersed. Augustine was left to


                                       324
                            augustine’s africa


explain the incident to his injured colleague Alypius and to the great Albina, the
mother of Melania, who regarded the whole matter as a shabby attempt by a
provincial church to grab the money of the great. The noble refugees returned,
thoroughly alienated, to their country estate outside Thagaste. Gerontius, the
writer of the Life of Melania the Younger, passed over the incident at Hippo in
complete silence.
    We only know of the incident from two embarrassed letters Augustine later
wrote to Alypius and to Albina. What they reveal is the extent to which the
congregation of a provincial church in Africa had been swept up in a moment of
collective greed. Pinianus’s arrival in Hippo had given them a now-­or-­never op-
portunity to gain real wealth.
    The incident is a reminder that wealth such as that of Pinianus had not come
near the churches of Africa. It was not that the church of Hippo was not wealthy.
Augustine told Albina that, as bishop of Hippo, he himself managed estates that
were twenty times larger than his family property had been at Thagaste. (One
would love to be able to quantify this remark. If the revenue of a modest town
councillor was 50 solidi a year, then the revenue of the estates of the church of
Hippo would have amounted to 1,000 solidi a year. This was no small sum. It
was roughly the same as the estimated revenue of Ausonius’s “little” hereditary
estate.) But as Augustine pointed out, an income of this size was nothing com-
pared with the income of Pinianus, which may have been as much as 120,000
solidi a year:
   For in whatever church, especially in this our Africa, our friend Pinianus
   might be ordained (I do not say as a priest, but even as a bishop), he would
   still be in deep poverty compared with his former affluence.8
    Compared with the wealth of Albina and her family, the churches of Africa
bore the indelible mark of mediocritas. In the early fourth century, the largesse
of Constantine had largely passed them by. Throughout the fourth century no
African church had received windfalls from eccentric senators. No African
city—­not even Carthage—­had attracted a bishop such as Ambrose. Nor had any
city gained a Paulinus of Nola. For over a century, from the age of Constantine
onward, the wealth of the churches of Africa was thought of as having grown
from the ground up as a result of determined, low-­profile giving by its local
congregations—­its populi and plebes.9
    Altogether, the noble families of Rome who landed in Africa in 410 found
themselves in an unaccustomed Christian landscape. It was the landscape in
which Augustine, now almost sixty, had worked for twenty years, first as a priest
and then as a bishop. For this reason we must first take a large step backward so
as to place Augustine against the wider world of Africa.


                                       325
                                 chapter 20


           Augustine’s Africa: Many Landscapes, Two Churches

By “Africa,” of course, we mean Roman Africa—­what we would now call North
Africa or, in Arabic, the Maghreb (effectively the territories of western Libya,
Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco). For Romans, this region was “Africa” and its
inhabitants were the “Africans.” Roman Africa was not the same as our Africa.
Apart from the ancient land of Egypt, the remainder of the vast continent was
virtually unknown to the Romans. Sub-­Saharan, equatorial Africa and what is
now South Africa were cut off from the Mediterranean fringe of north Africa by
the Sahara Desert, as if by an impassable ocean of sand.
    For Augustine, the first and most important landmark in his life as a bishop
in Africa was the city of Hippo itself. It was not for nothing that Hippo (modern
Bône/Annaba in Algeria) derived its name from the Punic ûbôn—­harbor. It was
the “Harbor of the Kings.” In ancient times, it had been the window onto the
Mediterranean of the great inland kingdom of Numidia. Though only a quarter
of the size of Carthage, Hippo was the second largest port on the Mediterranean
coast of Africa. For centuries, grain levied for the annona of Rome had passed
directly from the plateau of Numidia to Hippo and thence to Ostia.10 As bishop
of Hippo, Augustine found himself in one of the hubs of the Mediterranean
world. Hippo was a place where news from the outside world arrived quickly and
from which Augustine’s voice (in the form of his writings and letters) could be
heard in places as far apart as Gaul, Italy, and the Holy Land.
    To the east of Hippo, all roads led to Carthage. As a bishop, Augustine spent
a third of his life outside Hippo. He traveled regularly to and from Carthage to
attend the councils of the African church.11 It is important to do justice to this
part of Augustine’s life. Despite his huge personal output, Augustine was very
much a team player. He was always careful to present himself as no more than
one bishop among many. He loaned his pen as a writer and his voice as a preacher
to decisions that were taken in large councils of bishops gathered at Carthage
from all over Africa. These decisions had been masterminded by Aurelius, the
bishop of Carthage and honorary head of the African churches, and by Augus-
tine’s episcopal colleagues, his forceful friend Alypius among others. When we
speak of “Augustine” (especially in connection with the churches of Africa) we
must remember that we are not dealing with a lonely genius but the spokesman
of what contemporaries called “the churches (or the church) of Africa.” Behind
Augustine stood a body of men whose capacity for collective action made them
the most formidable pressure group in Latin Christianity.
    Augustine traveled to Carthage by land. Each journey would take around ten
days on horseback or by carriage. Sometimes he took the coast road, but more
usually he struck inland to join the well-­used road system that led from the pla-
teau of Numidia down the Medjerda valley (the ancient Bagradas) to Carthage.

                                       326
                             augustine’s africa


Traveling along that road, Augustine would have passed through a densely set-
tled landscape dotted with little Roman cities that were as confidently embedded
in a classical Roman past as were the cities of the heritage zone of Symmachus’s
Campania.12
   Thus, when we talk of “Augustine’s Africa” we must always remember that
we are talking of a distinctive, clearly delimited landscape—­the northeastern
quadrant of Roman Africa, between Hippo and Carthage. As we have seen, this
region had become the economic center of gravity of the late Roman West. In it,
the traditional life of the cities had been maintained with peculiar intensity.
   But Augustine’s Africa was only a small part of all of Roman Africa. Augus-
tine was well aware that at his back lay a world as large as all of Italy, and many
times more diverse. Stretching south for 200 miles to the Sahara and for over
1,100 miles from the Gulf of Syrtes (modern Libya) to the Atlantic coast of
modern Morocco, Roman Africa was a confederation of sharply contrasting land-
scapes. Even Augustine’s own diocese was full of contrasts. It stretched thirty
miles inland from the alluvial plain of the Seybouse into the foothills of the Nu-
midian Alps. Already along the inland fringes of the territory of Hippo one en-
tered a different world. Punic, not Latin, was spoken in the mountain villages.13
   Yet farther south lay a world very different from that of Mediterranean Af-
rica. On the huge plateau of Numidia, the grid of cities (which was so tight along
the Medjerda valley) only covered parts of a vast, dry landscape. The agrarian
settlements on the wide plains of Numidia were a world apart. Their inhabitants
were deliberately kept underdeveloped by Roman standards. Their villages were
denied any form of corporate existence and were frequently named after the es-
tates on which the villagers worked, held to the land by various forms of bonded
labor.14
   The economic and social needs of this extensive subcivic world were met by
intermittent rural markets—­by nundinae.15 These markets were, at one and the
same time, essential to the owners of the great grain fields and feared by them as
perpetual flash points of violence. Grain harvesting took place in the early sum-
mer; harvesting of the olives came later—­in the autumn and early winter. Both
harvests required the mobilization of large gangs of workers. A significant num-
ber of these gangs were wage laborers from distant regions. Such were the gangs
that had been led out, “under the rabid sun” of eastern Numidia, by the Harvester
of Mactar, whom we met in chapter 1.16 These gangs were made up of strong and
desperate men who were tied to their employers by debt. Their hope of reward
depended on the random oscillation of crop yields in a dry region. Numidia was
not the effortless breadbasket of Rome that Romans liked to imagine. It was a
land of dangerous shortages. In the fourth century, grain production was driven
by taxation and by the lure of profits across the sea. It pushed against the ecologi-
cal limits of the possible. Landless men or sharecroppers waited, year by year, to

                                        327
                                  chapter 20


see if they would return home with money in their pockets and the landowner’s
wine in their bellies, or if they would sink yet further into debt due to bad
harvests.
    A wave of violence had rocked southern Numidia in the late 340s. Signifi-
cantly, the principal aim of this violence had been the cancellation of debts. What
is equally significant was that the violent bands of which we happen to know
were led by Christians. Two otherwise unknown figures, Axido and Fasir, were
acclaimed as “leaders of the saints.” The bands that were mobilized at this time
were called by their supporters Agonistici: “Fighters [for the Lord].” Their ene-
mies called them circumcelliones—­Circumcellions. In all probability, “Circum-
cellion” was originally a religiously neutral term. It was used of the laborers who
attempted to scrounge a living by gathering around the warehouses, the cellae, on
the great estates in the hope of employment or of handouts of food.17
    We know of the Circumcellions largely through Augustine’s account of them.
He presented them as a religious phenomenon. He spoke of them as dangerous
“crazies”—­as a species of terrorist monks given to murder, mayhem, and suicide.
The outside world was encouraged to believe that the Circumcellions were a
constant threat to law and order throughout the countryside of Africa and that
they were the strong-­arm men of the rival church to Augustine’s own Catholic
community. In this way, a phenomenon born of the gray misery of rural Nu-
midia has come to be known to us almost exclusively from the works of Augus-
tine writing hundreds of miles away, in the distant coastal city of Hippo. He con-
sistently presented them as a melodramatic, religious phenomenon.18
    We should always be aware of Augustine’s distortion of the evidence. When
we talk of Augustine’s Africa we must bear in mind that what Augustine presents
is a landscape deliberately viewed through religiously tinted glasses through
which we can see only so much of a vast and complex world. We must strive to
free ourselves from Augustine’s vivid but narrow vision so as to take in fourth-­
century Roman Africa as a whole.
    First and foremost, we must remember that Augustine had good reason to
present a lopsided view of his home province. Quite as much as Ambrose, he
found himself in the position of a faction fighter. He was determined to bring
an age of compromise to an end and to install a new Catholic order in what he
considered to be a backward region. From the moment he became a priest and
then a bishop in Hippo he was committed to a bitter confrontation with a near-­
identical Christian church that was quite as strong and popular as his own. He
had to confront what he called “the Donatist schism.” In this confrontation, he
weighed in with all his energy on the side of a group of forceful bishops (his
friend Alypius among them) who were determined that their church, and their
church only, should be recognized as the “true” Catholic church of Africa.


                                       328
                             augustine’s africa


    We usually speak of the history of Christianity in fourth-­century Africa as
if it was dominated by the Donatist schism. But this impression is largely due
to the polemical skill of Augustine. He claimed that his church was the “true,”
Catholic church of Africa because his community had been recognized by all
churches spread throughout the Roman empire. By contrast, he claimed that
the church of his rivals had turned their backs on the wider Catholic world and
had chosen to remain a local splinter group confined to Africa. They had fol-
lowed Donatus—­in Augustine’s opinion, a figure of dubious charisma—­who had
formed a separate church, which he had headed as bishop of Carthage between
311 and 355. It was for this reason that Augustine and his colleagues named
their rivals “Donatists.” He and his colleagues were determined that others should
see the Donatist church as no more than an obstinate minority—­alien, tainted
by violence and altogether unworthy of respect.19
    In his brilliant new book Sacred Violence and in other publications, Brent
Shaw has effectively dismantled this powerful and enduring stereotype.20 Shaw
makes clear that Augustine’s insistence on the otherness of his rivals and on their
resolutely local vision of themselves as the only surviving church in Christendom
obscured the fact that, for a century, the two groups that he called “Donatists”
and “Catholics” had competed as equals all over Africa. Their rivalry had been
part of the general spread of Christianity in Africa.
    Indeed, the rivalry of the two churches was far from being a spiritual catas-
trophe, as Augustine would have us believe. In reality, it greatly accelerated the
process of Christianization. What Augustine presented in doctrinal terms as a
fruitless conflict between Donatists and Catholics was experienced on the ground
as the vigorous replication (region by region, city by city, and village by village)
of two barely distinguishable forms of the same Christianity, each claiming to be
more zealous than the other.
    Until the imperial authorities weighed in massively in support of Augustine’s
party (which only occurred in a persistent manner after 411), neither church had
enjoyed an overwhelming social or financial advantage over the other. Both
churches appealed to much the same constituency as had the other churches of
the Latin West in the post-­Constantinian generation. There was nothing very
exciting about the personnel of either church. Members of the lower echelons of
the town councils, schoolteachers, and lawyers provided the leaders. The average
inhabitants of the cities and the inhabitants of the villages provided the follow-
ers. Although Augustine frequently denounced the social disruption caused by
the existence of two churches, African society as a whole was not greatly affected
by their rivalry.
    This was because Christianity in Africa, though vocal, was strangely encapsu-
lated. Paganism was still widespread. Even many laypersons who were Christians


                                        329
                                  chapter 20


felt that they had better things to do than involve themselves in disputes raised
by their bishops and clergy. As in Rome, so in the cities of Africa, the higher
levels of the civic elites remained closed to the affairs of the church. Many lead-
ing civic notables were pagans. Even when they were Christian, the “temple” of
the town council with its solemn rituals and its unceasing, yearlong involvement
with concrete, non-­religious problems—­entertaining the people, maintaining
law and order, and collecting taxes—­made religious conflicts between Christians
seem of secondary importance.21
    When Augustine became bishop of Hippo (in 396), he found that his own
party was in a minority in the city. For all his talent, he did not hold the social
high ground. He was faced by local elites who appeared not to take the division
between the two churches very seriously. At the top of society, Donatists and
Catholics married each other with little thought to the views of their respective
bishops. For such persons, blood and class were a lot thicker than baptismal
water. Notables who looked favorably upon Augustine’s rivals blocked his efforts
to force the pace of religious controversy.22
    To persuade such persons to support the Catholic cause was not simply a mat-
ter of persuading them to take sides as Christians for one church or another. It
involved a more drastic change of attitude. They had to be persuaded to look at
the world in terms to which they were not yet accustomed. They had to be taught
to see Africa through the same, religion-­tinted glasses as did Augustine and his
colleagues. In the generation before Augustine became bishop and for many de-
cades afterward, they had not yet put on those glasses. The “civil religion” of the
cities, whose continued strength we evoked in chapter 3, was what still held their
attention, not the divisions between two Christian churches, each of which was
staffed by busy but largely insignificant persons.
    Yet, despite the nonchalance toward Christian affairs of the elites of Africa,
the division between Catholics and Donatists had created facts on the ground
on a massive scale. No other Christian region in the West could boast so many
bishops. When the two parties were summoned to a conference, which met at
Carthage on June 1, 411, over 560 bishops trooped into the city from territories
as far apart as western Libya, Tunisia, and Algeria. Each church had around 280
bishops.23 (As late as 600, Italy had only 240 bishops—­under half the number of
those who competed so fiercely in the towns and villages of fourth-­century Af-
rica.) The aristocratic refugees from Rome who arrived in Carthage at roughly
the same time as the conference between the two churches would have witnessed
a parade of massed bishops through the streets of the city that was inconceivable
in any other province of the West.
    The conference of Carthage of 411 marked the climax of a dramatic change of
pace in the rivalry between Catholics and Donatists in Africa. Constantly lob-


                                       330
                             augustine’s africa


bied by the representatives of the Catholic church to which Augustine belonged,
the emperors finally decided to take in hand the religious affairs of the province.
They outlawed the Donatist church. Its buildings were confiscated, and its bish-
ops were exiled from the cities. Upper-­class lay supporters were penalized, and
their legacies to the Donatist church were declared invalid. No one was executed
(as Priscillian had been executed) or forced directly to change their belief—­
unless they were peasants on the estates of a particularly zealous landlord. They
were simply deprived of their church and faced with a painful choice. Leading
local figures had to decide between loyalty to the emperor and loyalty to the
Donatist church in their city, which the emperor had declared to be a non-
­church.24
    Not surprisingly, given the role of the imperial system in the establishment
of status and honors at all levels in provincial society, a large number of lay­
persons joined the Catholic church. They waited to see if the imperial policy
would change back to tolerance. Only the Donatist clergy remained intransi-
gent. Theirs was the “church of truth.” Through using the power of the state to
establish itself, the so-­called Catholic church simply showed that it was a fake
 church, as the Donatist clergy had always claimed it to be. It was a church “of the
 persecutors”—­a church based on force.
    This situation only developed after 411. A decade earlier, however, in 400, it
 was far from certain that the emperor would intervene so massively. The two
 churches of Africa faced each other as equals. Both had expanded largely un-
 troubled in the easier days of the post-­Constantinian empire. Without ever be-
 coming a dominant religion, Christianity had come to occupy a distinctive niche
 in Roman Africa. Throughout the fourth century, the elites of Africa and the
 provincial governors who came to Africa from overseas (men from senatorial
 families in Rome, like Symmachus) took for granted the bipolar world set in
place by Constantine. In this bipolar world, a vigorous but socially unprepos-
sessing Christianity was given free rein provided that the internal differences
between Christians did not impinge unduly on the affairs of the upper classes of
the cities.
    Thus, neither church was allowed to occupy the social high ground in the cit-
ies of Africa. But what the elites of the cities did not realize was the vigor with
which the two churches had set about creating worlds of their own. They did this
by competing with each other. This rivalry mirrored the spirit of competition that
had once been the lifeblood of the cities of Africa. The two churches competed—­as
the cities had always competed—­by spending their money. The war of words (of
which we know so much from the copious works of Augustine) was accompa-
nied by a silent and determined war of wealth that is hardly ever mentioned in
our otherwise voluble sources. It is to this war of wealth that we must now turn.


                                       331
                                   chapter 20


          Quid imperatori cum ecclesia: What has the Church to do
                            with an Emperor?

                  The Autonomy of Church Wealth

Here we must pause to do justice to the very real religious passions that fueled
the rivalry between two, nearly identical churches. The cause of the schism itself
lay in the past. The Donatists accused the Catholics of having tolerated bishops
who had lapsed by offering sacrifice and by surrendering copies of the Holy
Scriptures to be burned at the time of the last great persecution in 303. Catho-
lics replied that these accusations were false; that Donatist bishops also had
lapsed; and that, in any case, the failure of a few of its members did not drive the
Holy Spirit from the church as a whole. But that was a hundred years ago. No
reconciliation between the two parties had occurred. Why had this stalemate
happened?
    A principal reason was the fact that both parties were fiercely attached to a
belief in the absolute spiritual autonomy of their own church. This was not a
vague doctrine. Every local church was presented as the only place in its locality
where the Holy Ghost was to be found. We cannot understand the sharpness of
the rivalry between the two churches unless we enter into the conviction of the
bishops and clergy of each of them that it was their church—­and their church
alone—­in which God dwelt. The church of their rivals was an empty shell, de-
void of the presence of God. Its bishops lacked the Holy Spirit. Spiritually, they
were dead men walking. They could not offer salvation to those who followed
them. Their churches were fake churches, even more sinister than pagan temples
had been. Pagan temples reeked with the smoke of incense and sacrifice. They
were plainly alien. But dead churches, though they still pretended to be Chris-
tian, were as toxic as any temple. This was the ultimate trick of the Devil. It had
brought to Africa a foretaste of the days of Antichrist, when ultimate evil could
masquerade, in an uncanny fashion, in the form of a persecuting Christian
church supported by emperors who claimed to be Christian.25
    In churches who held such a view of themselves, the wealth of each local
church could not be treated as a purely worldly matter. This wealth was regarded
as the concretization, in financial terms, of each church’s unique possession of
the Holy Spirit. In matters of church finance, as in so much else, the bishops of
both churches looked back directly to the example of Cyprian of Carthage in the
mid-­third century. As we saw in chapter 2, Cyprian had propounded an intensely
sacralized and inward-­looking notion of religious giving. Only money given to
the bishop by members of the true church could count as holy offerings. Only
the bishop could redistribute these offerings as holy alms. The flow of wealth in the
churches was thought of as a watertight system. The Christian plebs gave to the

                                        332
                             augustine’s africa


bishop, who stood at their core as the guarantor of the presence of the Holy
Spirit in each congregation. Vigor in giving not only provided financial muscle.
It was a clear sign of the energy of the Holy Spirit at work in the congregation.26
By contrast, wealth that came from outside the church and wealth that was re-
distributed without the bishop was dead wealth. It was empty of the Holy Spirit.
Both Catholics and Donatists believed this intensely. Outside their church there
was no salvation. Nor could there be any spiritually efficacious pious giving.
Only by giving in the right church could sins be expiated and treasure on earth
be placed in heaven.
    In a famous incident in 346, Donatus, bishop of Carthage, made plain this
attitude toward the wealth of the church. He was faced by an unprecedented
situation. The emperor Constans had attempted to intervene in the affairs of the
churches of Africa. Constans had hoped to introduce a Constantinian style of
church government into the province. In other provinces, the Constantinian sys-
tem had worked well. As we have seen, conformity to the imperial definition of
Christianity was bought by the judicious distribution of privileges and, above all,
by the infusion of imperial funds into the local churches. In 346 imperial com-
missioners arrived in Carthage bearing funds to distribute to the poor. This would
not have been a random almsgiving. Individual local churches who accepted the
imperial preference for the “Catholic” rivals of Donatus would have found their
wealth increased through imperial funding offered in the name of the poor.
    But the emperor had miscalculated the religious mood of Africa. Donatus
reacted instantly. He refused imperial subsidies with a phrase that made him fa-
mous: Quid imperatori cum Ecclesia?—­“ What has the Church to do with an Em-
peror?”27 This phrase did not refer to any abstract issue of the relations between
Church and State. It was made in the spirit of Cyprian. Only the bishop could
distribute wealth within the churches, in a closed circuit of holy giving that
began with the offerings of the faithful within the church to their bishop and that
continued through the outward flow of wealth in the churches from the holy
hands of the bishop. By contrast, wealth that came directly from an emperor
came from outside the church. It was wealth untouched by the Holy Spirit. It was
wealth without blessing. With all the confidence of an Ambrose (but a whole
generation earlier), Donatus played the upright Daniel to the emperor Constans’s
Belshazzar: May your gifts remain with you, O King.28 It was a resounding snub to
the Constantinian system.
    Nor was Donatus alone. A little later, the imperial commissioners, still car­
rying money boxes full of coins for the poor, reached southern Numidia. In the
340s that part of Numidia had been a zone of agrarian distress, recently shaken
by the activities of Axido and Fasir. Faced by the arrival of the commissioners,
the Donatist bishop of Bagai (also called Donatus) turned his church into a pub-
lic warehouse. He was accused of laying in stores because he intended to stand

                                       333
                                   chapter 20


siege in his basilica. But the warehouse set up in the bishop’s church was not only
a sign of readiness for war. It was the symbol of the role of the bishop as the only
true distributor of food to the poor of the region.29 Many churches have been
discovered in Africa ringed by storehouses.30 Complaints by the rival bishops at
the conference of Carthage reveal that to put a country church out of action in-
volved two acts—­desacralizing it by breaking its altar and denying its role as a
center of holy alms by carrying away its store of grain.31


     Non opus est procerum . . . sed rectoris: This is no work of [worldly]
               magnates, but of a bishop, ruler of the flock

          Wealth and Building between Two Churches

We know about these vivid incidents through the lively war of words that took
place between the polemists of both churches, Augustine being the most prolific
among them. But we can also trace this war on the ground. A long tradition of
archaeology first pursued by the French in their north African territories and
then continued in the modern states of Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco has re-
vealed an entirely new dimension to the struggle of the churches. Of all the prov-
inces of the Latin West, it is only in the Roman Africa of the age of Augustine
that we can see the emergence of a Christian landscape in towns and countryside
alike.
    These excavations have revealed a fact almost too big to be seen. Like central
France in around the year 1000, the landscape of Africa began to be “covered
with a white robe of churches.” Each church was an argument in stone in favor of
one church or the other. Each was a place where the Holy Spirit was to be found.
In the High Plains north of Timgad (in southern Algeria), the ground is covered
with the ruins of churches: seventy-­three were charted in one survey alone of
central Numidia. Many settlements eventually came to have three, four, or even
seven churches.32 The ruins of these churches represent a hidden Africa, of which
we have little or no hint in the copious works of Augustine. It is impossible to
decide which of these churches were Donatist and which were Catholic. Nor are
they easy to date; fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries blur together. But what is evi-
dent is the unflagging enthusiasm with which these churches were set up.
    Let us look at a few examples. Perhaps the most spectacular was the great
basilica associated with the shrine of Saint Crispina at Theveste (modern Tebessa
in eastern Algeria). It appears to have been built in a single campaign that must
have involved a huge mobilization of wealth and labor. Rising on a high podium
outside the city, it dominated the road that led up from Carthage into Numidia.
Flanked by a hostel and entirely surrounded by a row of strong storerooms, each

                                        334
                             augustine’s africa


closed with an ingenious lock, the basilica stood above a wide courtyard framed
on either side with triumphal arches that deliberately echoed the Roman monu-
ments of the city. The basilica was reached by mounting a broad flight of steps,
in the manner of a Roman temple. Once inside, the visitor would find a door in
the right wall that opened into a small three-­conched shrine of the martyrs. The
shrine was sheathed in marble and domed with golden mosaic.
    The basilica of Theveste had an unusually high roof, lit by clerestory windows.
But—­unlike the martyr’s shrine—­its walls were covered only with painted plas-
ter. This was no opulent jewel-­box, like Paulinus’s Cimitile. Rather, the building
complex as a whole had a gruff Roman monumentality. It was a “City of God” in
stone.33 This “City of God” lay just outside an “earthly city” whose ancient cus-
toms had by no means disappeared. At just the same time as the great shrine was
being erected, the families of civic notables of Theveste were busy repairing the
amphitheater of the city, as their ancestors had done, over a century before.34
These two enterprises—­the building of a great Christian shrine and the repair of
an ancient amphitheater—­are a reminder of the fact that the rivalry of the two
churches of Africa with each other took place against the wider background of
a rivalry between Christianity as a whole and robust traditions of civic life to
which Christianity had remained peripheral.
    The great basilica at Theveste may have been a Catholic building. Far to the
south, at Timgad, it was the Donatists who had flexed the muscle of church
wealth to best effect. As late as 368, the ancient capitol of Timgad was restored
by a leading town councillor who was praised for “having repaired the city.” By
the 380s, however, the city’s capitol looked out over a huge new basilica set in a
church complex that measured 541 by 380 feet. The inscription on the floor of the
basilica made clear that this was a house of God built by the wealth of God: “This
was done and perfectly completed by the command of Optatus, High Priest of
God.” Optatus was the Donatist bishop of Timgad. He was by no means a little
man. Between 388 and 398 he was a leading figure in the province. He was so
close to the generals who were charged with the defense of Africa that he is one of
the very few bishops in the history of the Early Church who enjoyed the consider-
able (if dubious) distinction of having been executed for his role in a civil war.35
    It was figures such as Optatus who brought the Constantinian system to an
end in Africa. Optatus no longer fitted into a model of society that assumed
bishops would rule a lively but essentially low-­profile church under the disen-
gaged eyes of the true elites. Optatus stood for a new option. It was an African
option. For, unlike Ambrose, who had come into the church from on top, Opta-
tus had risen from the ground up, like his basilica. He may well have come from
a humble background. But his office as Christian bishop had raised him into
prominence. His great basilica showed to the world at large that he was the guard-
ian of sacred wealth provided by the offerings of innumerable pious givers.

                                        335
                                  chapter 20


   The tide of holy giving did not show itself only in the basilicas that appeared
on the edges of the major cities. The smaller cities also were studded with churches
built by their congregations. Constant rivalries sharpened the collective urge to
build. When the Donatist bishop of Membressa (a small town at the head of the
Medjerda valley) was ousted from his church by a rival faction, his congregation
instantly built him yet another basilica!36
   But to understand the strength of this surge of building, we have to go to
Numidia. The villages of Numidia have provided the most vivid evidence for the
enthusiasm of humble congregations. Occasionally we meet groups of donors.
Such were Publius, Petronius, and Tunnius, from Henchir Guesseria, a little
church fifteen miles northeast of Timgad. On the mosaic in front of the apse
they declared that they had “promised and completed their vow to God and to
His Christ,” favente Deo, “through the good favor of God.” They then added, on a
note of communal pride, Gadiniana floret: “Hurrah for the plebs of the Gadinii.”37
Other churches were built through the collaboration of neighboring villages:

   The Venusianenses began it, the Mucrionenses donated five columns, the
   Cuzabatenses donated six columns, all paved the apse: the Cuzabatenses
   decorated it the most. Rogatus the priest and Emilius the deacon planned
   the building.38

This combination of local pride and clerical guidance characterized the African
churches.
   The sense of autonomy was by no means limited to Donatists alone. Some
time in the late fourth century, the Catholic bishop Alexander built a church
of the martyrs on the western promontory of the bay of Tipasa, 320 miles west
of Hippo. It looked across the bay to the prominent shrine of Saint Salsa. Alex-
ander’s inscription made plain that, as a builder, he owed nothing to the lay
world:

   Here, where the walls are rendered praiseworthy by a light-­filled roof,
   where the vaults shimmer and you see the holy altar: this is not the work
   of any magnates. No: the glory of such a deed redounds through all ages to
   Alexander, Ruler [of the flock].39


                      Populus: A Grassroots Christianity

The spread of Christianity reconfigured the countryside of Africa. It brought a
new sense of identity to the many faceless settlements that had lain in the shadow
of the Roman cities. In a remarkable new book entitled Peasant and Empire in
Christian North Africa, Leslie Dossey has shown that the emergence of a country-­

                                        336
                             augustine’s africa


based episcopate represented a revolution in the history of rural Africa. Formerly
the villages had been held at arm’s length by the cities. They were not allowed to
function as autonomous units. The appearance in them of bishops gave them a
new pride, an identity, and a capacity for collective bargaining they had not en-
joyed previously. As Dossey points out, this development did not take place only
because of initiatives taken at the top. In many cases, the pressure came from
below. Villagers made skillful use of the division between the two churches so as
to obtain a bishop for their own village. All over the countryside of Africa, but
especially on the great plains of Numidia, a sense of privilege once associated
with the grant of municipal status came to be expressed, in the fourth century, in
religious terms through the installation of a bishop with his church and clergy.40
    The arrival of a bishop brought many things. It turned a hitherto faceless
settlement into a holy plebs—­a people of God, in whose midst the Holy Spirit
dwelt. The bishop could also represent the community in secular matters. As a
bishop, he could challenge the great. He could carry petitions to the authorities
all the way to Italy. His curse might be feared by the powerful.41 If he was a Cath-
olic bishop (and in most areas, even if he was a Donatist bishop), he was treated
as a vir venerabilis—­a man to be revered. Even when he was of low social status,
his body was untouchable. He could not be flogged in the way that any other
peasant could be flogged.42
    Thus, over the course of the fourth century, a new world came into being
in the countryside. A new style of Christian bishop emerged as a village leader.
Concentrating as he did on the highly urbanized world between Hippo and
Carthage, Augustine may not have been fully aware of the extent of the revolu-
tion this represented. But, in his old age, Augustine experienced one such coun-
try bishop. It was not a happy experience for him. Let us conclude by looking for
a moment at this vivid incident.
    In late 411 Augustine had chosen Antoninus, a monk from his own monas-
tery, to be bishop of the castellum—­the hill village—­of Fussala, in the Numidian
Alps on the southeastern edge of the territory of Hippo. He did so, ostensibly, so
as to counter Donatist influence in the region. By 422, however, Augustine had
come to regret his choice. In his opinion, Antoninus had turned out to be a petty
tyrant. But this was not everyone’s view of Antoninus. On the spot, the young
bishop was far from unpopular. As a bishop, Antoninus put a new face on Fus-
sala. He built an impressive bishop’s palace in the village. He united around him
the local strongmen—­the guardians of the city walls, headed by a retired soldier.
He also brought new legal skills—­a stenographer from Augustine’s monastery
and a legal agent, a defensor, paid for by the church. He received from the pri-
mate of Numidia letters that enabled him to travel as far as Italy so as to secure
the release of prisoners arrested by the Count of Africa, the commander in chief
of the Roman forces in the province.43

                                        337
                                  chapter 20


     In 422 Augustine and his colleagues attempted to depose Antoninus for vio-
lence and extortion. Antoninus did not give in easily; he appealed directly to the
bishop of Rome. We know about his career because Augustine was forced to
write an embarrassed letter on the subject to bishop Celestine of Rome. This
letter (Letter 209) has long been known. It can now be supplemented by an-
other letter on the case of Antoninus (New Letter 20*) that was discovered by
Johannes Divjak in 1975 in a collection of hitherto unknown letters from Au-
gustine’s old age.44
     The new letter shows that Antoninus had created a solid position for himself
at Fussala. It was Augustine who was insecure. In the late summer of 422 Augus-
 tine found himself forty miles from Hippo in the hill country of Numidia. It was
not his world. Everyone in the villages claimed to speak only Punic. They were
far from passive. After one group had been berated in Punic by a Numidian
­colleague of Augustine’s, they all walked out of the church—­even (Augustine
adds) the local nuns, women whose chastity symbolized the holiness of the local
church. Augustine and the other Latin-­speaking bishops were left stranded.45
     Augustine wrote the New Letter 20* to Fabiola, an upper-­class Roman lady.
 She had offered hospitality to Antoninus in Rome. The energetic young bishop
 from the backlands had evidently brought her a heroic tale of persecution at the
 hands of the powerful.46 Fabiola was as high as you could get; she may well have
been the daughter of Fabiola, the correspondent of Jerome who had collaborated
with none other than Pammachius, the senatorial friend of Paulinus of Nola, to
found a hostel in the Port of Rome.47
     Dubious character though he may have been, Antoninus of Fussala was a sign
 of the times. Half a century previously, in the days of Symmachus, a steady trickle
 of deferential clients had come to Rome as the “special people” of one or another
great Roman aristocrat. They had placed statues and laudatory addresses in the
courtyards of their palaces. This practice continued. But, by the 420s, figures like
Antoninus had also begun to make an appearance. Bishops from lower-­class back-
 grounds felt free to approach the palaces of the great in Rome. Antoninus joined
 many worlds. He was bilingual in Latin and Punic, and his official position as the
 spiritual head of a mountain village gave him and his congregation access to a
 wider world. Even if his stories were self-­serving, they were the sort to which
 Christian aristocrats were now expected to pay attention. He brought directly
 to the highest circles of Roman Christian society vivid tales of misery, injustice,
 and hard dealing from the very ground of Africa. It is against this background of
 increasing pressure from below that we must place the preaching of Augustine
 before the populus—­the far-­from-­passive Catholic congregations of Hippo and
 Carthage.



                                        338
                           Chapter 21
                           •••••
                   “Dialogues with the Crowd”
 The Rich, the People, and the City in the Sermons
                   of Augustine




           “Dialogues with the crowd”: Augustine and the Populus

In late antiquity, a bishop was supposed to be a seminator Verbi—­a “Sower of
the Word.”1 He did not have to write books, but he was expected to preach. Au-
gustine preached ceaselessly. In the thirty-­five years in which he was bishop of
Hippo (between 396 and 430) he preached over six thousand sermons. He was
a magical speaker. In reading sermons of Augustine, we can usually be certain
that we are not reading carefully reedited texts (as was the case with Ambrose).
We are reading his own words as they were first heard. This is because rich mem-
bers of the congregation would pay skilled experts in shorthand to take down
every word as it came from his lips.2
    Of this torrent of words, only around one-­tenth has survived. Of these, many
of the original sermons were cut down by medieval copyists, who were only in-
terested in certain parts of them. They wanted to know about the theology of
Augustine and not about the Africa of Augustine. They often found that many
of these sermons were too full of local color to be of interest (or even to be intel-
ligible) to persons who now read them many centuries later in a Gothic Europe
where north Africa—­by then a Muslim region—­seemed infinitely remote. Hence
the importance of the recent discovery by the great French scholar François Dol-
beau of a series of sermons by Augustine that had been copied in their entirety in
a late medieval monastery in Mainz. These sermons had not been cosmeticized.
They were complete and full of vivid local details. Some had been star perfor-
mances. One such sermon took over two hours to preach. In the Mainz sermons
(now called the Dolbeau sermons in honor of their discoverer) we can hear again
the voice of Augustine, almost as if on a tape recording.3 But we can also catch
an echo of the voice of the congregations to which Augustine preached. What
we hear is not quite what we expected. Brilliant as a preacher, Augustine faced a

                                        339
                                  chapter 21


populus—­a surprisingly vigorous Christian people—­in front of whom he was not
always at his ease.
    The late antique sermon was an open-­ended occasion. In the course of the
Christian church service, the sermon preceded the high drama of the Mass. It
came just before the solemn procession in which the laity brought their gifts to
the altar. For the unbaptized in the audience (and we know that there were many
such persons) the sermon was the last thing they heard of the Christian faith
before they were invited to leave the church so that the baptized alone could
continue with mysterious rites in which others (unbaptized Christians quite as
much as non-­Christians) had no part.4
    During the sermon, the preacher interacted with his audience in the most
face-­to-­face manner possible. There was no raised pulpit. There were no confin-
ing pews. The congregation stood on the spacious floor of the basilica. They were
free to move around. They would surge up to the edge of the slightly raised area
in front of the apse in order to listen to the preacher. The preacher would come
forward toward them from his seat in the middle of the semicircular bench on
which he and his clergy sat with their backs to the circular wall of the apse. Or
he would step down from the apse into the center of the church so as to preach
beside the altar that stood near the middle of the basilica, set apart by low rail-
ings of wood or carved marble. A mobile lectern of light wood was all that the
preacher needed, to hold the copy of the Bible from which he sowed his words.
Delivered extempore in front of, or in the midst of, a standing audience that
could move as it wished, Augustine’s sermons have rightly been called “dialogues
with the crowd.”5
    They were not always successful dialogues. A long and vivid sermon from
among those recently discovered by Dolbeau has enabled us to glimpse a notable
moment of failure. It happened on January 22, 404, when Augustine was preach-
ing at Carthage. The basilica in which he preached was considerably larger than
his own church in Hippo. It may have had room for two thousand persons. On
this occasion, it was crowded. In order to be heard better and to create a mood of
intimacy, Augustine first stepped down from the apse so as to deliver his sermon
at the altar. But he then saw that a large section of the crowd had already pushed
up to the edge of the apse to hear him from that position. He hesitated for a mo-
ment and then turned away from the altar to make his way back to toward the
apse. The moment he turned, a rhythmic cry went up from the crowd gathered
around the altar. They ordered him to hurry back down and to speak to them there.
Instantly, Augustine turned his back on the hecklers, mounted the raised floor of
the apse, and sat down on the high bench beside his colleague, Aurelius of Car-
thage. This indicated that he refused to preach until order had been restored.6
    It was a brittle and seemingly arrogant gesture on Augustine’s part. He had
pointedly placed the distance of the apse between himself and the populus. His

                                       340
                   the rich, the people, and the city


gesture was met by instant protest from those who remained at the altar, in the
middle of the church. They used the same techniques as were used in the circus
and the amphitheater. An acclamation went up: “Get on with the Mass!”—­which
meant, in effect, “Cut the sermon!”7 The Christian populus of Carthage made
plain what they thought of Augustine’s seemingly dismissive attitude.
   The next day Augustine preached again. He had to explain his behavior to
a congregation who plainly expected him to apologize. He was considerably less
contrite than his listeners thought that he should have been. The sermon was
entitled On Obedience. He made clear that he did not approve of their spirited
heckling:
   I beseech you. . . . Make a distinction between the Church of God and the
   theater. . . . Here, jumping to one’s feet [in a massive surge, as if from the
   benches of the theater: in church, of course, the congregation would al-
   ready have been standing, though they may have swayed ominously as they
   shouted], setting up a rhythmic chant, calling the shots—­may God shield
   your hearts from all that.8
   He preached in vain. The Christian basilicas of Africa were not immune to
the makeshift democracy of a late Roman populus. It was not only the country-
side that had found a new voice within the Christian churches. Urban congrega-
tions used their church to experiment in new, abrasive forms of civic life. The
moment that Augustine entered his own basilica at Hippo or stood up to speak
in one of the spacious basilicas of Carthage, he realized that the crowd gathered
beneath its high, wooden roof was not the united “people of God” that it was
supposed to be. The old divisions of the city had survived. In every church, a
populus was pitted against its ordo. But now the ordo they challenged was not the
town council. It was the bishop and his clergy. The possibility of conflict was in
the air. In church, a majority of poor citizens could jostle and barrack their clergy.
They could also turn their voices against the rich whom they had reason to resent,
in much the same manner as they had been accustomed to doing in the bright
light of day from the benches of the theaters.9 It is against this distinctive back-
ground that we should place the manner in which Augustine approached the rich
in his preaching and offered them an active role in the Christian community.


                      Isti soli vivunt: They alone have a life

                 The Rich, the Poor, and the Populus

But when we turn to Augustine’s sermons we must remember that he was no Am-
brose. His sermons were not rewritten as polished treatises. What we get, rather,

                                         341
                                    chapter 21


is the ad hoc, seemingly inconsequential quality of an extempore speaker, con-
stantly adjusting his tone of voice to the mood of an audience whose presence
we can sense behind his words. Vivid images, snatches of anecdotes from real
life, and condensed phrases are scattered almost randomly in the flow of words.
It is like listening in to only one side of a lively conversation. In this conversation,
whom was Augustine addressing and what did he tell them?
    This section will deal with three groups—­with the rich and with two catego-
ries of the “poor,” which we must keep apart in our minds though they tend to be
blurred in modern usage. Let us first look at what we moderns would call the
poor—­the destitute. Augustine preached regularly on almsgiving to the poor.
His sermons on this topic have been studied with admirable skill by Richard
Finn in his book Almsgiving in the Later Roman Empire.10 Augustine took this
part of his routine duties as a bishop seriously. But the care of the poor was sel-
dom uppermost in his mind. When he wrote to Albina about the incident of
Pinianus in 411, he claimed that in Hippo only “a small number of the indigent”
needed support from the church.11
    When it came to charity to the poor, Augustine did not preach in a notably
heartless society. He recognized that Jews and pagans also gave alms to beggars
and showed sympathy for the weak and destitute quite as much as did many
Christians.12 Nor did he live in a region desperately challenged by the presence of
the poor. Throughout the fourth century, cities such as Hippo and Carthage
were spared the worst effects of famine, unemployment, and disease. It was in
the hill country south of Hippo that real, grinding poverty was to be found. The
members of a village occupied by a sect known as the Abelonii (the Sons of
Abel the Just) were able to reject marriage—­in the manner of the Shakers—­and
still maintain themselves for generations through adopting the children of the
neighboring peasantry. Poor families were only too glad to part with their chil-
dren so as to have fewer mouths to feed. In the 420s families of poor peasants
outside Hippo were quite prepared to sell their children as slaves in order to raise
money.13
    As far as we can see, nothing as terrible as this happened in the cities. In Car-
thage and Hippo, the number and needs of the destitute varied with the seasons.
In the cold months of winter work at the docks and on building projects ceased
and the unemployed filled the streets. In the winter of 410, Augustine wrote to
his congregation in Hippo to urge them that the alarm of the sack of Rome
(which had led to instant hoarding) should not make them less generous than
before in their annual collection and distribution of clothes for the poor. In Car-
thage, late spring was the worst time. Supplies diminished and food prices rose
before the next harvest. Preaching in Carthage, Augustine urged the hands of
charitable Christians to “work” with more than usual zeal by giving alms in that
low season.14

                                         342
                   the rich, the people, and the city


    When Augustine preached about the poor in this manner, his hearers would
have known what category of poor persons he referred to. The poor of the church
and the poor who lived from alms alone were an easily recognizable underclass.
Above these poor stood the majority of the population of the cities. They were
far from a monochrome group. There were many layers of them, ranging from
prosperous artisans and shopkeepers to day laborers. The recent archaeological
survey of Anna Leone has shown that the people of Carthage, as in Rome, ben-
efited from the presence of rich residents and from the regular performance of
great games. The organization of the games led to a proliferation of little associa-
tions, each with their club room and semi-­private baths. Members of the trade
associations played a crucial role in the public life of the city.15 They turned out
on festival days so as to march in processions. Catering to the rich, the bazaar of
the silversmiths was world famous.16 Further down the social scale, the work of
the docks, the preparation and dying of textiles, and the processing of fish for
export (in Carthage and in other African cities) supported a substantial popula-
tion in industrial neighborhoods.17
    These people spoke of themselves as pauperes, as poor. They did so much as
average Americans tend to say that they are “middle class.” For them, the word
pauper did not automatically conjure up the image of a “pauper”—­of a beggar
and a homeless person in need of food, clothes, and shelter. Rather, it conjured
up a contrast. One was poor over against others who were not poor. Pauper was
a relational term; it assumed the presence of its opposite, the rich. In the Roman
cities of Africa, as elsewhere, the poor stood toward the rich in an attitude that
was at one and the same time assertive and fearful.18
    It is important to keep in mind this distinction between the outright poor
and the pauperes to whom Augustine preached in Hippo and Carthage. If we do
not do so we are left with a profoundly polarized image of the late Roman city. As
we have seen, the tendency to treat all pauperes as if they were paupers has contrib-
uted to a warped vision of urban life in this period.19 In reality, the self-­styled
pauperes of the cities were an energetic and far from homogeneous group. They
had their own hierarchy. They were often organized in trade associations. Those
who stood at the head of the associations formed a group of their own. They were
the true plebs media—­the rich plebeians of the city. As we have seen, in Africa
as elsewhere, the Christian churches had drawn on this group for their financial
support. It was also from this group that the churches recruited their clergy. As a
result, the bulk of the clergy of Africa remained close to the social world of the
pauperes who made up the bulk of the populus of every city. They shared their
fears and resentments.
    Bishops were somewhat different. As Claudia Rapp has shown, “a glass ceiling
in promotion” stood between clergymen recruited from humble backgrounds
and the ranks of the episcopate. Bishops were more likely to come from the class

                                        343
                                   chapter 21


of town councillors, as did Augustine.20 But Africa was a land of small towns and
thriving country bishoprics. The glass ceiling in promotion did not block the
ascent of humbler persons into the episcopate as much as it did in other prov-
inces. In Africa, membership in the clergy still offered a carrière ouverte aux tal­
ents to members of the self-­respecting poor. The career of Antoninus of Fussala
is a prime example of this fluidity. His mother and stepfather had been so poor
when they first came to Hippo that they were placed on the poor rolls of the
church. Antoninus himself was, in effect, given to Augustine’s monastery so as
to be housed and fed, much as the peasants in the hills around Hippo gave their
children to the community of the eccentric Abelonians or sold them to slave
dealers. But Antoninus’s activities at Fussala showed that his humble origins did
not stand in the way of his becoming a forceful bishop, capable of establishing
contacts with the great.
    Ultimately, social differences within the Christian clergy were less significant
than was the primary, secular division between the rich and the populus within
the cities of Africa. In cities the size of Hippo and Carthage the populus could be
dangerous. In around 412 the populus of Hippo dragged an imperial official out
of sanctuary in Augustine’s own basilica and lynched him. Merchants and arti-
sans were involved in the incident.21 In 419 the chief commander of the armed
forces in Africa was killed in a riot at Carthage. The ringleaders found sanctuary
in the city’s basilicas. They finally received an imperial amnesty—­but not before
a delegation of African bishops had traveled some 1,800 miles, from Carthage to
Ravenna and then to the foothills of the Pyrenees and back, to plead for mercy.22
    The populus was not only feared, it was consulted. Approval by the populus
was required for the appointment of special tax collectors. Outgoing Procon-
suls of Africa (usually, as we have seen, representatives of the highest nobility of
Rome) found that their tenure of office was subject to the judgment of the peo-
ple, in the form of acclamations or hisses, which were carefully recorded and
publicized.23 Furthermore, Christian congregations began at this time to inter-
vene directly as pressure groups in the politics of the city. In June 401 the Chris-
tian congregation of Carthage protested the appointment to a high office in the
town council of a pagan banker who had only recently been baptized as a Chris-
tian so as to qualify for the office. The Christian populus had chanted that they
would not be ruled by pagans.24 Altogether, the pauperes of major cities were by
no means a group of aimless indigents. They had remained a populus in the old
Roman sense—­a citizen body with a right to shout and riot.
    Augustine faced this populus in his basilica. He may not have faced all of them;
it is difficult to know the exact social composition of a preacher’s audience at this
time. A large number of the working poor may never have found time to come to
church except at high festivals. Beggars would have stayed outside the basilica,
for this was where the money was. Pious Christians gave alms at the church door

                                        344
                   the rich, the people, and the city


or in the courtyard outside the church. As a result, Augustine would have found
himself preaching to the rich (who enjoyed the leisure to take religion seriously)
and to the upper layers of the populus—­to artisans, to members of the guilds, to
small landowners, and to minor town councillors. It was precisely such persons
who felt most acutely the stresses and strains inherent in the social structure of a
late Roman city.
    In this mixed congregation, the rich stood out. They were very much in the
public eye:
   when the poor catch sight of them, they murmur, they groan, they praise
   and they envy, wanting to be their equals, grieving that they can not make
   it. In between the praises of the rich, they say: “These are the only ones who
   matter; these are the only ones who know how to live—­Isti soli vivunt.”25
If anything, it was the presence of such rich persons that made the average towns-
man feel poor. One did not have to be a beggar to come up short against the high
wall of power and status that surrounded the rich. For most of the time, Augus-
tine appears to have preached to relatively prosperous members of the populus
who, nonetheless, still saw themselves as permanently at a disadvantage in com-
parison with the rich.
    Here we are dealing with a characteristically Roman division of society where
power, and the security that came from power, counted for more than mere in-
come. What even the most prosperous members of the populus lacked was not
money—­it was security. They were not poor, but they always lived in fear of im-
poverishment. Impoverishment, not poverty, was the condition that haunted
their social imagination. Like the inhabitants of eighteenth-­century Lyons, the
pauperes of Hippo and Carthage were paupérisables—“impoverishable.”26 They
felt themselves on a slope that always tilted perilously toward the bottom of
society.
    Where fourth-­century Africa may have been different from eighteenth-­century
France was the stark clarity with which members of the populus were able to trace
their misfortunes directly back to the rich and to place a human face upon their
oppressors. We are dealing with relations of power that were more than usually
blatant. Oppressing the poor was a face-­to-­face matter. Indeed, it was an “in the
face” matter. Describing the rich of Rome, Ammianus Marcellinus wrote of how
great senators when approached even by well-­to-­do clients would reject the old-­
fashioned client’s kiss. They would turn their face away “like an ill-­tempered bull
about to charge.” Instead, they offered their knee for adoration, as if their clients
had come to them as suppliants for mercy and not as friends.27 What happened
in the palaces of Rome happened just as openly in the towns of Africa. When the
rich and powerful strode across the forum, surrounded by their brightly dressed
entourage, it was wise to scramble to one’s feet and to bow deeply as they passed.28

                                        345
                                   chapter 21


    These persons were indeed formidable. Their presence was felt in every town.
In the course of the fourth century, an oligarchy of leading town councillors and
holders of imperial privileges had tended to take over the government of their
region at the expense of their poorer and less privileged colleagues on the town
council. They did so by controlling the allocation of taxation. It was they who
determined the impact of potentially crippling levies, privileging themselves and
penalizing others. This was power at its most naked. It was power derived from
implication in the imperial system at its most formidable and most exacting.
    But this power could not be challenged. The imperial tax system was identi-
fied with the emperor—­it was out of bounds to criticism. Ambrose had realized
this in Milan. Augustine observed the same prudent attitude in Hippo and Car-
thage. His image of the rich was deliberately vague. We only learn by inference
how they gained their power and wealth. We will have to wait until the early
440s—­until the height of the crisis of empire caused by the barbarian invasions—­
for a Christian writer, Salvian of Marseilles, to describe and denounce the actual
mechanisms of taxation, which made the inner circle of the town councils the
“tyrants” of their region.29 But he did this in a fiery tract, On the Government of
God, which may not have circulated widely. We may doubt whether he did so in
a sermon, as he stood eye to eye with the rich in his own church.
    What Augustine did refer to were the side effects of the imperial system. He
expected his audience to have no illusions as to the manner in which the life of
the average person depended on two closely related powers—­on patronage and
on potentia (a crushing power to harm others wielded by the rich as a result of
their control of public office). Augustine’s sermons are shot through with refer-
ences to these two forces. It is not surprising that the most convincing study of
the workings of patronage in the late Roman West (by Jens-­Uwe Krause) should
draw so heavily on the sermons of Augustine.30 For the average person, it was
patronage that tipped the balance between prosperity and spoliation.
   Brethren, you know how people boast of their patrons. To those who
   threaten him, the client of a greater patron answers: “By the head of so-­
   and-­so, my patron, you can do nothing against me.”31
These were the “poor,” as Augustine knew many of them. They were not beggars.
Rather, they were, at different times in their life, both vulnerable to impoverish-
ment and zestful in bringing impoverishment on others:
   But perhaps you have been made utterly poor and destitute. You had some
   little family property that had supported you, which was taken away from
   you by the tricky dealing of a rival. You groan, you grumble against the
   times you live in. . . . Yesterday, this person was groaning that he had lost his
   property. Today, backed by a greater patron, he is grabbing the property of
   others.32

                                         346
                   the rich, the people, and the city


   In late Roman conditions, no person could be certain that he would keep clear
of the powerful. For instance, someone might be proud that he would never
value his property so much that he would commit perjury for it. Only the great
did this: “I am a poor man, a plebeius—­a member of the plebs—­one of the crowd,
when could I ever expect to be a provincial governor?” Yet, as Augustine pointed
out, when the occasion came, such a person, though unable to commit the gross
sins of the great, would still be tempted to commit perjury when pressured by a
potens to lie on his behalf in a lawsuit:
   He is a man of power. He can drag up a suit against you, so that you lose
   your land. He has great power at the moment. . . . Indeed, you say: “He
   need only lodge a complaint against me, and I will have my property
   con­fiscated.”33
   Altogether, the pauper of Augustine’s sermons was not usually a beggar. He
was a typical Roman plebeius. He could also be a minor town councillor and a
modest landowner threatened by abrasive forms of power both old and new.
Such persons enjoyed a modest independence, provided that they kept a low
profile. But they had few ways of resisting pressure that came to them from on
top, from great landowners, and from imperial officials. In that sense, plebeians
and minor members of the town councils (such as Augustine’s family had been)
shared a common fate. All of them stood on the razor’s edge of vulnerability
to those above them. It was to the fears and resentments of this group—­not the
poor in the modern sense but those who faced impoverishment—­that Augustine
spoke most convincingly.


                        Tolle superbiam: Get rid of pride

                      Augustine on Rich and Poor

Augustine preached not only to the pauperes. The rich were also present in the
basilica. These were the leading town councillors and major landowners in the
region, the local representatives of the imperial bureaucracy and their staffs, priv-
ileged honorary senators, and, occasionally, military men with their retinues. They
stood out in their bright robes.34 They may have stood at the head of the con-
gregation, nearest to the bishop and his clergy in the apse. These were the “more
honored and respected persons” who stepped up to the apse to negotiate with Au-
gustine in 411 when the crowd was clamoring for the ordination of Pinianus.35
    Bishops took seriously the sensibilities of the rich. In around 400 Aurelius,
bishop of Carthage, rearranged the entrances to major churches so as to enable
the wives of the great to enter through a separate women’s door. They no longer

                                        347
                                  chapter 21


had to make their way to the women’s section by pushing through the crowd,
where they had been exposed to “the comments of cheeky, boisterous slaves.”36
Often the rich put in no more than a token appearance. Augustine was aggrieved
when one local landowner, Romulus, appeared in church at Hippo on Sunday
but left immediately after the service. He did not stay behind to discuss with
Augustine the case of peasants on his estates, who claimed that he had charged
them double rent.37
    The way in which Augustine faced this group throws a vivid light on his pri-
orities as a pastor and as a social thinker. The ideal of the unity of the Catholic
congregation was of paramount importance to him. There were good reasons for
this emphasis on unity. The rivalry between the two churches of Africa offered
Christians a choice of bishops in their city. If one bishop did not please them,
they would go to the other. Members of each church—­faced with the perpetual
opportunity to cross over to the church of its rivals—­needed to be persuaded to
stay together.
    But we have already seen that concern for unity had deep roots in Augustine’s
own thought and worldview. In his sermons of the 400s and 410s we meet very
much the same man whom we met, twenty years younger, in the early 390s,
when he drew up the precepts for his monastery. He had remained a passionate
preacher of unity and concord. But now his concern for unity had widened. The
monastery Augustine had set up and for which he wrote his Precept and his Rule
in 395 was a tiny, cohesive group of possibly no more than twenty persons. Now,
as a bishop, Augustine had to face an entire community. As we have seen, he did
not always do it very well. But he still strove to communicate to his hearers what
he believed most deeply: in heaven they would reach a unity of loving souls in a
City of God of which the tight world of the monastery was supposed to offer a
foretaste on earth. Heaven was a long way away. But a hint of a future glorious
unity could be sensed in the euphoric moments when the entire congregation
(many hundreds of them) chanted the Psalms along with their bishop:
   Now let us hear, brothers, let us hear and sing. Let us pine for the City
   where we are citizens. . . . By pining we are already there; we have already
   cast our hope, like an anchor, on that far shore.38
   The grand theme of the unity of the City of God grew out of Augustine’s
ceaseless “dialogues with the crowds” in the 400s and 410s. It was only later
spelled out with monumental certainty in the pages of his City of God.39
   But the concern for unity came with a price. Augustine’s passion for unity
imposed a reticence on him in his dealings with the rich that other more frankly
populist preachers had not observed. Augustine was no Ambrose. Unlike Am-
brose, he never set himself up in church to denounce the rich as the Ahabs of his
time. The vivid vignettes of oppression, fear, and corruption we extract from his

                                       348
                   the rich, the people, and the city


works were never brought together to form part of a single, targeted denuncia-
tion of the rich, as Ambrose had done in Milan in the 380s.
    Altogether, Augustine kept close to the contours of the possible when facing
a real audience of rich and powerful persons in a late Roman city. There was a
large element of prudence in this attitude. If alienated, the rich could easily go
over to the Donatist church of his rivals. In any case, Augustine was a law and
order man. He did not relish the freedom of the populus. In Carthage, where
the populus was a large and vocal body, he was usually brought forward by his
colleague Aurelius to dampen the enthusiasm of the Christian crowd, not to stir
it up.40
    So what exactly did he offer to the rich? He had no doubt that, as a group,
they had their own besetting sins.

   Certainly, many sins are seen to be particular to the rich. The more actively
   engaged they are, the more they have to administer their properties, the
   more they have to take care of extensive properties, the more difficult it is
   for them not to bring on themselves ever more sins.41

    But there was a remedy for such behavior. Preaching at some time after 411
(at a time when Pelagian views already circulated in Carthage and Hippo), Au-
gustine coined a phrase that may have been an echo in reverse of the brilliant
slogan of the Pelagian De divitiis—­tolle divitem et pauperem non invenies: “Get
rid of the rich and you will find no poor.”42 Augustine’s phrase, by contrast, stressed
not wealth but pride:

   Tolle superbiam: divitiae non nocebunt.
   (Get rid of pride, and riches will do no harm.)43

    In Augustine’s preaching, pride, not wealth, was the true Last Enemy of the
Christian. The real division of the world was not between the rich and the poor.
It was between the proud and those who were enabled by God’s grace to be hum-
ble before God and before their fellows.44 In practice this meant a view of society
where the inequalities created by wealth could be accepted as long as they were
softened by the abandonment of the toxic by-­products of wealth—­arrogance,
violence, and the abuse of power.
    In many ways, Augustine’s message was reassuringly traditional. It drew a firm
line between the traditional “good” rich and the “bad” rich. It also reinforced the
Roman tendency to regard a Concordia ordinum—­a balance between rulers and
ruled in every city—­as the formula for social peace. In the ancient world, it was
agreed that the rich could lead the city provided that they treated those below
them with good nature and that they showed “civic love” by spending money on
games and buildings. To this well-­worn maxim Augustine merely added that the

                                         349
                                   chapter 21


rich should show good nature by abandoning pride and that their generosity
should take the form of giving alms.
   Yet, at the time, Augustine’s emphasis on the renunciation of pride (rather
than the renunciation of wealth) represented a significant shift. We should linger
for a moment on this shift. In the generation that had preceded Alaric’s sack of
Rome in 410, a more starkly economic view of wealth had come to circulate
among radical Christians. This view fostered a horror of wealth in and of itself. It
found memorable expression in the radical writings of the partisans of Pelagius.
Altogether, the traditional common sense on wealth had taken on a more dra-
matic and confrontational tone. All rich threatened to become the “bad” rich.
Augustine reacted against this current. He found a place again in the church for
the “good” rich. He did it through giving the good rich a new role. They were
to act as the pillars of a hierarchical society that functioned for the greater glory
of God. Frank superiorities of wealth and power might exist, but they existed
only on the condition that they were wielded without disruptive arrogance. For
once the rigid stance of pride was removed, wealth and power could be used
without inhibition to promote the concord of a Christian society.
   What this meant, in fact, was shifting the definition of the good rich by seeing
them, first and foremost, as those who wielded power. The good rich were not
only persons who knew how to give but also persons who knew how to rule. For
Augustine, power meant order. In his thought world, order was maintained at
every level of society by firm rule. Heads of families ruled their children and de-
pendents. City worthies ruled the people of their cities. Imperial administrators
and generals ruled their subjects and their soldiers. At the top stood a Christian
emperor, commissioned by God to rule a potentially anarchic society.
   In this hierarchical view of society, the good rich were expected to be also the
good governors. It was a shift with a long future before it. From the time of Char-
lemagne onward, medieval clerics who mined the works of Augustine realized
they were reading the ideological charter of a high-­pitched but cohesive society
not unlike the feudal world in which they themselves lived. Power, not money,
was what mattered. And even power could be taught to be humble before God
and to bend down (from time to time) to hear and to protect the powerless.45
   Given the long-­term impact of this vortex of ideas and the clarity with which
Augustine expressed it, it is easy to delineate what Augustine said. But it is con-
siderably harder for the historian to step back and estimate how what he said was
heard by those who first listened to him in the basilicas of Hippo and Carthage.
   What would have been immediately apparent to any hearer was Augustine’s
determination to avoid an outright confrontation between rich and poor. He
made clear that, as their bishop, he viewed his congregation as an absolute de-
mocracy of hearts, leveled beneath the gaze of God. As a bishop, sin was his
business. And Augustine was relentlessly even-­handed in his treatment of the

                                        350
                   the rich, the people, and the city


sins of both the rich and the poor. The members of each group sinned, even if
each sinned differently:
   Look here, brothers and sisters; in this whole congregation listening to
   this, how many rich people are there? . . . If only there could be as few [who
   go to hellfire] as there are rich people in the human race!46
He insisted that, alas, Hell had room for more than one class. A poor man might
have heard with pleasure the words of the Gospel, that It is easier for a camel to
enter through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven (Matt. 19:24).
   He hugged himself and laughed out loud when it was said that the rich
   will not enter into the kingdom of heaven. “I will,” he said. “These shabby
   clothes will ensure that I do. Those people who do violence to us and who
   oppress us will not get in.”
But even the beggar should be careful:
   Certainly, such people [the evil rich] will not get in. But you too, just see
   whether you will enter. What if, as well as being poor, you are greedy;
   what if you are both weighed down with want and on fire [inside] with
   avarice?47
   Augustine’s emphasis on the primacy of inner states of mind was central to his
ethical thought. But, in church, this insistence was used also as a blocking move.
Augustine wished to discourage the members of his congregation from judging
the rich solely by the external signs of their social status.
   A rich man finds it all too easy to say: Male serve! “You lousy slave!” That
   sounds arrogant. But if he does not say it, he may fail to control his house-
   hold. Frequently, he controls it better by a harsh word than by a savage
   beating. He says this under the pressure of a need to keep his household in
   order. But let him never say it inwardly. Let him never say it deep down in
   his heart. Let him not say it before the eyes and ears of God.48
   Seldom in Christian preaching had the semiotics of power—­which included
the high-­handed habit of command Augustine described—­been judged so lightly.
It was the same with the heavy eating of the rich. Christian moralists—­such as
Ambrose—­had swooped in on this well-­known attribute of wealth and power.
In doing so, they followed a long philosophical and medical tradition of distaste
for the vulgar sensuality of the “bad” rich.49 Augustine, by contrast, accepted heavy
eating as part of the custom of a class. When drawing up his monastic Praecep­
tum in the 390s, he had dealt surprisingly lightly with the weaknesses of the
rich—­their need for special food, special clothing, and special forms of work. He

                                        351
                                   chapter 21


was equally tolerant of these weaknesses in his sermons. Heavy eating was regret-
table; but, compared with worse sins, it was tolerable—­if only for the time being.
Time alone would tell whether God’s grace would cause that particular bad habit
to drop away.50


               “Let him be rich in good works . . . let him share”

Yet seldom had the quid pro quo of this tolerance of the externals of wealth been
spelled out so clearly as Augustine did in his sermons. It was not enough for the
rich to say that they had their heart in the right place:
   God knows, I do not have haughty ideas about myself. And if I shout and
   use harsh words, God knows my conscience, that I say such things from
   my need to exercise control, not because I consider myself a cut above all
   others.
Augustine would not accept this excuse. He pointed out that Paul had not only
said: Command the rich of this world not to be proud (1 Tim. 6:17). They should
also be generous.
   So, what next? Let them be rich in good works. . . . This is not something you
   do behind closed doors. Either it is done, and is visible to all, or it is not
   done. . . . Let them be rich in good works, let them give readily, let them share
   (1 Timothy 6:18). . . . If rich people are like that, they need have no worries;
   when the Last Day comes, they also will be found in the Ark . . . they will
   not form part of the destruction brought by the Flood.51
    Once again, those who listened to Augustine would have picked up an old-­
fashioned message, communicated in the homely wisdom of the Letter to Timo­
thy ascribed to Saint Paul. The Letter to Timothy was not a very exacting text. It
did not demand the renunciation of wealth; it simply cautioned the rich against
the transience of earthly goods and advised them to be generous—­to give readily,
to share. As in the Roman city, so now in the church, the rich were put on parole.
They could be rich—­but they had to be generous. And Augustine went on to tell
them in no uncertain terms not only that they should be generous. He showed
clearly to what causes they should give. Let us end this chapter by turning to
these good causes and to the styles of giving which, in Augustine’s opinion, stood
in their way.




                                         352
                   the rich, the people, and the city


             Gloriosa . . . effusionis insania: Crazy expenditure . . .
                                 as a source of glory

                    Carthage and the Games of 403

Augustine’s sermons were never abstract lucubrations on his part. The discover-
ies of François Dolbeau have shown that the sermon on the relations of rich and
poor that we have just cited formed part of an entire campaign of preaching that
had been conducted by Augustine at Carthage in the last months of 403.52 The
sermons coincided with a major event in the life of the city. Every year, between
October 26 and November 1, the priests of the imperial cult met in Carthage
to celebrate the games that expressed the exuberant loyalty to the emperor of
the provinces of Africa. Not all of these priests were pagans. The office was a title
of honor that had also come to be held by Christians. But the assembly of the
priests at Carthage was an annual reminder of the fact that African upper-­class
society had remained predominantly urban and resolutely secular.53 It basked in
notions of glory and status that owed everything to the past and nothing to
Christianity.
    The games of Carthage were second only to those of Rome. They followed a
pattern of display of which the games laid on by Symmachus for his son (which
had been held in Rome only a few years earlier, in 393 and 401) were a more lav-
ish version. Of all the ceremonials of worldly power that had survived largely
unchanged throughout the fourth century, these games were the most stunning
and unashamedly non-­Christian events that were to be seen in Africa. They began
with venationes, with matador-­like combats with wild beasts. They went on to
elaborate mime dances. They culminated with chariot races. Last but not least
came the solemn bestowal of expensive robes on star performers.54
    These games involved deeply serious matters. As they presided in the amphi-
theater, the priests of the imperial cult wore golden crowns bearing icons of the
emperors. They made vows for the safety of the empire, for the abundance of
Africa, and for the continuing “Good Fortune” of the city. The Genius of Car-
thage had retained a numinous power. She needed no blood sacrifice to keep
her memory alive. She was a majestic presence in the theater, in the amphithe-
ater, and in the circus of Carthage as she presided over the annual explosion of
the games.55
    The games were supposed to be ostentatiously expensive. To appear to court
bankruptcy by lavish giving was a matter of pride.56 This was a moment of glori­
osa effusionis insania—­“crazed expenditure as a source of glory”—­to which the
urban elites of Carthage and the provinces were supposed to look forward with
zest. It was because of this that Augustine preached against the games for hours
on end, over a period of many weeks.

                                        353
                                   chapter 21


    We know of these games only from Augustine’s sermons. Their luxury and
expense may well have gained in the telling. Like Symmachus, Augustine knew
what great games should be like even if, like Symmachus, the games themselves
were not always as great a success as their image suggested. Nor (as we saw in
chapter 4) were they necessarily as heavy a burden on the rich as the rich them-
selves claimed they were. What mattered was that, for Augustine, the games were
utterly appropriate to his own rhetoric of almsgiving. They were the exact inverse
of the pattern of giving he had proposed to the rich when they came to church.
It was not only the amount of money that flowed on these occasions that he de-
nounced: it was the way it flowed and the direction in which it flowed.
    With a sure sense of the psychology of civic display, Augustine seized on the
démesure of the games—­on the heroic scattering of resources that was supposed
to indicate the measureless reserves of love and loyalty the rich harbored for their
city. The games were supposed to be a time of collective madness. They were
characterized by the fierce loyalties of circus factions for their respective chari­
oteers.57 They carried the thrill of death, as the venatores pitted themselves against
wild and agile beasts and the chariots hurtled around the circus. They were a
time for heedless spending by the rich, which was summed up in the distribution
of disproportionately expensive silk robes and money prizes to star performers.
And all of this was thought to have resulted from a dialogue with the populus.
The rich did not simply display their wealth before the people. The people of
Carthage encouraged this spending by the heavy roar of acclamations. This for
Augustine was what was truly intolerable about the games.
   Driven crazy by this and puffed up with pride . . . they even wish to lose
   their fortunes by giving—­giving to actresses, giving to cabaret artists, giv-
   ing to wild-­beast hunters, giving to charioteers. They pour forth not only
   their inherited resources, but their very souls. They draw back with disgust
   from the poor, because the People do not shout for the poor to receive
   largesse. But the People roar for the venator—­the matador—­to have his
   prize.58
The games summed up the attitude of an entire urban society: “crazy expen­
diture is treated as a source of glory and works of [Christian] mercy—­opera
misericordiae—­are held in derision.”59




                                         354
                   the rich, the people, and the city


     Non vides in arcam inanem praepositi tui. Vides certe vel surgentem
    fabricam: You can not see into the empty coffers of your leader; but
      you certainly can see the empty shell of his building as it goes up

                           Giving to the Church

What was at stake, in Augustine’s preaching, was a war of giving. And this in-
volved not only giving to the poor but also giving to the church for other causes.
In these years, Aurelius of Carthage had begun a campaign of building that even-
tually led to the construction of a large cathedral basilica within the city and
another outside it.60 Augustine preached at a time when large churches, still with-
out their roofs, were rising above the city:
   Your bishop may not lack for clothes or need a roof above his head [like
   the poor]. But perhaps he is building a church. You cannot see into the
   empty coffers of your leader; but you certainly can see the empty shell of
   his building as it goes up. . . . May God grant that I do not say this in vain.61
    The campaign of fund-­raising to build churches also included a collection of
money for the support of the clergy. A series of sermons that have recently been
discovered in a manuscript at Erfurt show that Augustine may have been chal-
lenged to justify his appeals in favor of this form of giving. His hearers expected
him to preach about giving to the poor. They felt cheated when a sermon did not
end with the rousing challenge of the prophet Isaiah: “Share your bread with the
hungry, and bring the homeless poor into your houses; when you see the naked,
clothe them (Isa. 58:17). Why then did the bishop take them on a detour by talk-
ing about collections for the clergy?
    Augustine justified his preaching by appealing to the fund-­raising activities
of Saint Paul. It was a primal duty of Christian congregations to support with
material goods the clergy who bestowed on them the spiritual goods of prayer
and preaching. Those who gave to the clergy would receive the same incommen-
surately great rewards in heaven as did those who gave to the poor.62
    But unlike the Manichees whose Elect were supported by the Auditors, and
unlike the “holy poor” among the monks whose right to alms was defended so
fiercely by Jerome, the African clergy who received collections did so in part so
as to serve the community by building churches. Of all the activities funded by
collective giving, building churches involved the greatest sums and had the most
spectacular results. This was an activity that brought together rich and poor alike.
As we saw in our last chapter, churches built in this way were enduring argu-
ments in stone for the divinely inspired zeal of the congregations who had built
them.


                                         355
                                  chapter 21


   They had sprung up all over Africa. Augustine once preached in one such
church:
   The fact that you build a church means, with God’s help, that you build it
   for yourselves. What you give to the poor is different. They come and go.
   This church you build for your own selves. It is the house of your own
   prayers, the house where you all come together.63
Like the Dolbeau Sermons, the sermon that referred to this enterprise did not
find a place in the standard medieval collection of Augustine’s sermons. It is
a relatively recent discovery. Writing in 1937, the discoverer of this sermon re-
ferred to the fact that the church had been built by the contributions of its con-
gregation as “a touching detail.”64 At the time, however, the show of energy be-
hind such building was considerably more than that. It revealed a slow but sure
determination on the part of the African churches to flex their financial muscle.
Any church that wished to be dominant in Africa had to establish generous and
regular giving by all classes, but most especially by their richer members.
   That was why Augustine preached with such gusto against the games. The
rich had to be headed off from the glamour of such occasions. They had to break
with their background as civic benefactors and learn to give to the church instead.
Augustine’s sermons aimed at the creation of new habits of generosity among a
traditional class of heavy givers.
   But (as we saw in chapter 4) we must be careful in interpreting this preaching.
Augustine presented the issue as a zero-­sum game between the upholders of pro-
fane, civic spectacles and a new, Christian ideal of giving to the poor and to pious
causes. As a result of Augustine’s use of oppositional rhetoric of this kind, schol-
ars have tended to assume that the zero-­sum competition between alms and cir-
cuses that Augustine conjured up with such gusto actually happened. They have
suggested that giving to the churches undermined and finally replaced civic bene-
faction. In fact, in Africa and elsewhere, the two patterns of giving continued
side by side for a long time, without the one necessarily draining funds and en-
ergy from the other. In many cities of the Latin West, the end of the games came
more slowly than we might expect. There was no easy transition by which wealth
that had previously flowed into the cities quietly changed course and flowed,
instead, into the Christian churches.
   Something else was at stake. By contrasting civic with Christian giving Au-
gustine was attempting to draw a clear line in the sand. For by 403, the line was
already in danger of being rubbed out. The boundaries between the world of the
civic elites and that of the bishops had become blurred. Augustine stressed the
absolute incompatibility of games and almsgiving. For those who listened to him
the reality had already become more complex. Over the years, the social and cul-
tural gap between the civic upper classes of the cities and the personnel of the

                                        356
                  the rich, the people, and the city


Christian church had shrunk. A generational change had taken place. In major
cities, bishops came to be drawn from the same class as the civic givers.
    We are no longer in the world of the 380s, when Optatus, the Donatist bishop
of Timgad, had erected his great basilica within sight of a capitol repaired by a
group of persons very different from himself. Notables and bishops had begun to
seem interchangeable. In 417 the Catholic Council of Carthage summed up pre-
vious rulings that forbade the sons of bishops from offering public games. Their
fathers had evidently come from elite families before they had entered the clergy.
Their sons had inherited the obligations—­and the extravagant tastes—­of civic
benefactors.65 Augustine could even say that he expected that many who sat in
the amphitheater would eventually sit beside him on the bench of bishops.66
    Surprising details show the extent to which the two groups—­the civic nota-
bles and the bishops—­had drawn close to each other. At the very end of Augus-
tine’s life, in 428, one of his most touching letters among those discovered by
Johannes Divjak (New Letter 2*) was a courteous exchange between Firmus, a
nobleman of Carthage, and the old bishop. Firmus was a figure poised between
two worlds. He had received from Augustine copies of the City of God and ad-
vice on how best to circulate it. He himself had read the City of God as far as book
ten. He had been present for three afternoon sessions, when book eighteen had
been read aloud. In return, Augustine had asked Firmus to send him the school
exercises of his son, a boy whom Augustine called affectionately “our little
Greek.” The old bishop wished to be told the boy’s age and the progress of his
studies. Firmus was married to a Christian wife, though he himself still delayed
his baptism.67 Recently, Firmus’s name has been identified, carved in bold letters
on a seat of the amphitheater of Carthage. He bore the title of vir clarissimus—­he
was an honorary senator. A reader of the City of God and good friend of Augus-
tine, Firmus had sat with his peers presiding over the games of their city up to the
very last days of Roman Africa.68
    Faced by persons such as Firmus, it was important for Augustine and his col-
leagues to carry the war of giving to the highest levels of African urban society.
By the beginning of the fifth century, the churches in Africa were well equipped
to engage in this war. Based on traditions that reached back over 150 years to the
days of Cyprian of Carthage, the bishops of Africa had created and maintained
an impressive ideology of collective giving, both for the poor and for the needs
of the clergy. They had generated a prevailing wind of generosity in the churches.
This generosity reflected the energy that we can sense in the headstrong actions
of the Christian populus all over Africa—­from the creation of country bishoprics
to the lynching of unpopular officials. These had been impressive gains, unparal-
leled in other provinces. But in the last analysis, in Africa as elsewhere, only the
intervention of the traditional rich could raise the local church above the level of
tenacious mediocrity to the glory that such a church felt it deserved.

                                        357
                                   chapter 21


    History had come full circle in Augustine’s Africa. Two centuries before, the
forums, temples, theaters, and circuses that amaze us in the ruins of the Roman
cities of Africa had been created through a surge of giving by the municipal upper
classes. In the words of Ramsay MacMullen: “The physical magnificence of im-
perial civilization rested ultimately on sheer willingness.”69
    Now was the time for the “sheer willingness” of the churches of Africa to
make itself felt. But there was a difference. In the Christian churches both rich
and poor were expected to contribute. There was no fixed class of givers. It is
against this background that we should see the consequences in Africa of the
unforeseen arrival on its shores, after 410, of the super-­rich of Italy, accompanied
by spiritual guides such as Pelagius and his disciples. The views on wealth and on
the human condition held by the mentors of the Roman aristocracy were very
different from those Augustine had preached for over a decade in the churches of
Hippo, Carthage, and the Medjerda valley. They were views that seemed to privi-
lege a group of special givers—­great renouncers or open-­handed families of the
super-­rich, now proud to produce noble virgins. Seen with African eyes, this was
a moment of danger. The spectacular behavior of Pinianus and Melania, Pelagi-
us’s praise of the “natural” nobility of soul of the Anician Demetrias, combined
with the extreme statements of the Pelagian De divitiis betrayed different, more
melodramatic views of wealth that had been nurtured in a specifically Roman
environment at a moment of acute crisis. Now the two views collided for a few
years on the soil of Africa. Let us move forward, therefore, from the time of Au-
gustine’s sermons on the duties of the rich—­such as he had preached in Carthage
at the time of the games of 403—­to the sermons he preached after 413 against
the ideas of Pelagius and of his radical followers.




                                        358
                          Chapter 22
                          •••••
      Dimitte nobis debita nostra: Forgive us our sins
    Augustine, Wealth, and Pelagianism, 411–­417




               “Place your hopes in your own self ”: Augustine
                         and Pelagianism in Africa

In the last chapter we followed Augustine in action as a preacher. In his sermons
of the 400s, he had come to frame a distinctive attitude toward wealth and its
uses in the African churches. The arrival from Rome of patrons and supporters
of Pelagius constituted an unwelcome intrusion. For a moment, Augustine’s
­intense but somewhat isolated world—­the world of African Christianity—­was
 thrown open to views that challenged those to which he had become wedded as
 a result of decades of preaching and activity at Hippo and in Carthage. Let us see
 how Augustine and his African colleagues reacted to this challenge.
     In 411 the shores of Africa were “awash with displaced senators.”1 Some noble
refugees, such as Albina, Pinianus, and Melania, went straight to their ancestral
estates in the hinterland, thereby putting a safe distance between themselves and
a coastline still exposed to the threat of barbarian invasion from Italy. Others
remained in Carthage. Not all of these refugees were Christian. Many were em-
 bittered pagans who had their own views on the disaster that had struck them.
 The uncle of Melania, Rufius Agrypnius Volusianus, was the son of a Roman
 priestly family.2 In many ways Volusianus lived in what was already a post-­pagan
world. He would have exercised no priesthood. His mother was a Christian. But
he continued to harbor grave doubts as to the truth of Christianity. He also
doubted the political advisability of a Christian empire. His criticisms were first
aired in a salon of cultivated gentlemen in Carthage.3 Volusianus voiced the re-
 sentment of pagans, in both Rome and Africa, who believed the fall of Rome had
 happened because of neglect of the worship of the gods. The need to answer
 pagan criticisms led Augustine to embark on the masterpiece of his old age—­the
 “great and arduous work” of the City of God. He wrote the City of God because

                                       359
                                  chapter 22


the views of persons like Volusianus counted for much in African provincial
society.4
    At that time, nobody knew how long the refugees from Rome would remain
in Africa. As a result of the Visigothic invasions in Italy and the related collapse
of the Rhine frontier in Gaul, the political geography of the Latin West had
changed. The western empire imploded dramatically toward the south. All roads
no longer led to Trier, as they had done in the days of Ausonius. Nor was Milan
any longer a safe staging post between Gaul and the Balkans. In a world where
Gaul and even Italy north of the Apennines were zones of danger, Rome and
Carthage were brought face-­to-­face in a manner that had not happened since the
days of the Punic Wars. Africa was now the only rich and loyal province in the
western empire. The future was unknown. In a worst-­case scenario, Carthage
might well have become a “Rome in exile”—­a bulwark of high Romanity that
faced across the Mediterranean to a ruined world. It was crucial for Augustine
to influence the opinions of the noble refugees around whom an alternative to
Rome might emerge. Expatriate Christian nobles from Rome could have settled
down to become the lay leaders of the church in Carthage and elsewhere in Af-
rica. If they protected the ideas of Pelagius, his ideas and those of his followers
would spread throughout the province with alarming speed.
    Nor was Augustine concerned only with the Romans of Rome. He was well
aware that a large and influential floating vote of local figures existed in Hippo,
in the proud little cities of the Medjerda valley, and in Carthage. Many were
small-­town intellectuals, nurtured on Neo-­Platonic and Stoic ideas. In one of the
largest houses of Bulla Regia (a town through which Augustine passed regularly
on his way to Carthage) a mosaic panel lay in the middle of the floor of the din-
ing room. It spelled out in golden letters on a blue background a motto in Greek:
en seautô tas elpidas ékhé: “Place your own hopes in your own self.” The Greek
was not perfect, but the message was plain. It advocated exactly the same degree
of self-­reliance Augustine considered to be a central and heretical element in the
views of Pelagius.5 In Augustine’s eyes, the shadow of Pelagius not only fell over
the Christians of Africa. It also fell over a large middle ground of undecided
pagans for whose minds Augustine had battled inconclusively for decades. A
Christianity patronized by nobles from Rome and supported by converted intel-
lectuals of Stoic background from among the urban elites would have had a very
different flavor from the sort of Christianity Augustine had propounded in Af-
rica for the previous twenty years. Hence the tenacity with which Augustine
pursued the ideas associated with Pelagius and his followers in the course of
what has come to be known as the Pelagian Controversy.




                                        360
                 augustine, wealth, and pelagianism


                Dimitte nobis debita nostra: Forgive us our sins

                     Augustine and Daily Penance

The Pelagian Controversy finally erupted after Pelagius’s Letter to Demetrias (in
413) and the arrival from Sicily of news of the doctrines canvassed in the Pela-
gian treatise De divitiis (in around 414). It could never be a war of ideas alone. It
was a battle that was fought from the ground up. The piety of an entire Christian
region was involved. Augustine decided early on to fight it as a battle to uphold
the pious customs of the African churches. Its opening phases included a cam-
paign of preaching by Augustine in Hippo and in the great basilicas of Carthage.
In these sermons Augustine aimed to persuade his listeners that the ideas of Pe-
lagius and of his more extreme followers were not only misplaced but denied the
most cherished religious practices of the African churches.6 Thus, the denial of
original sin appeared to undercut the practice of infant baptism “for the remis-
sion of sins.”7 Pelagius’s emphasis on free will independent of the grace of God
appeared to deny the solemn prayers of the bishop at the end of every church
service: “May He grant us to persevere in His commandments and to walk in the
right way.”8 The notion that a human being might use his or her free will to live
without sin flouted the daily recitation of the Lord’s Prayer: Forgive us our sins.9
   Nowhere was the appeal to common practices more plain than in the man-
ner in which Augustine approached the subject of wealth and of religious giving
within the Church. He spoke to his hearers on the assumption that he shared
with them the certainty that almsgiving was an obligatory pious practice. He also
insisted that almsgiving had always had an expiatory function. Alms atoned for
sins. The command of the prophet Daniel to king Nebuchadnezzar was a com-
mand to every Christian: Redeem your sins with alms and your injustices by com­
passion on the poor (Dan. 4:24). It was this certainty Augustine invoked incessantly
against the ideas of Pelagius and his followers. Let us see why he did this.
   Augustine may never have read the text of the De divitiis itself. But his in­
formants in Syracuse made sure that he understood its message in terms of tra­
ditional religious practice. The message of the treatise was not so much that the
rich should not exist. It was that they could not be saved. Unless they gave away
everything, their almsgiving would be to no avail.
   A rich man who remains in his riches will not enter the Kingdom of God
   unless he sells all that he has: nor will those be of any use to him [in secur-
   ing salvation] even if he uses them to fulfill the commandments [that is, by
   giving alms].10
  Faced by such views, Augustine expected his audience to agree that to have
denied the rich the chance to save themselves through almsgiving was a serious

                                        361
                                   chapter 22


matter. It touched directly on two central issues: on Augustine’s particular no-
tion of sin and penance, and on more general notions, current in the African
churches as elsewhere, on the expiatory nature of religious gifts.
    There is little need to linger on the first of these issues. By the age of sixty,
Augustine had believed for some time that the life of a Christian was a life of
continual penance.11 He had already made this plain in a vivid image in one of
his sermons of 403. The pious Christian was a human hedgehog. He or she was
covered from head to foot with the tiny, sharp spines of daily, barely conscious
peccata minutissima—­tiny little sins.12 It was to expunge these tiny sins that the
Christian should pray every day Dimitte nobis debita nostra: Forgive us our sins
(Matt. 6:12).
    As Anne-­Marie de la Bonnardière showed in a masterly article written over
half a century ago, this passage in the Lord’s Prayer was crucial to Augustine. He
seized upon it from the opening years of the Pelagian Controversy. It became for
him the touchstone of orthodoxy.13 Recited by the baptized before receiving
the Eucharist, the phrase Dimitte nobis debita nostra—­Forgive us our sins—­left
no room for the Pelagian claim that baptized Christians could live without sin.
To Augustine, the prayer was a daily reminder of a daily state of sinfulness, which
cried out for daily forgiveness. To deny this was to strike at the very heart of his
religion. By the year 415, Augustine’s notion of what the Christian society of the
future might look like was simple in the extreme: it consisted of being able to
hear the thunder of thousands of persons beating their chests, every day, as they
recited the Lord’s Prayer and remembered their sins.14


           “Let the hands go round and round to work the pump”:
                         Daily Sins and Daily Alms

Overwhelmingly interested as we are in the history of the Augustinian notion of
sin and its effects on Christian subjectivity in all future ages, we have tended to
overlook the concrete, financial corollary of his insistence on daily penance for
sin. Like all other Christian preachers of his generation, Augustine never doubted
that prayer for forgiveness should be accompanied by almsgiving.15 Of all the
practices he expected his hearers to take for granted, the link between almsgiving
and expiation was the one most solidly installed in the back of their minds. It was
a source of hope for the average Christian. Writing against popular errors con-
cerning the Last Judgment, in the second to last book of the City of God, Augus-
tine reported that perhaps the most tenacious popular error of all was the belief
that Christians who gave alms would never, no matter what their sins, end up in
the perpetual fire of Hell. They might pass through this fire for a time; or they
might be released from it at given times. But, unlike those who did not give alms,

                                        362
                  augustine, wealth, and pelagianism


they would never end in the fire of Hell forever without hope of remission.16
Like many of the popular misconceptions disapproved of by Augustine, this was
by no means a view limited to the uneducated. Paulinus of Nola, for instance,
seems to have taken such a view for granted. Like little drops of water, alms ac-
companied by prayer on behalf of the dead somehow dampened the fires that
raged around sinners in the other world.17 For most believers, a good Christian
was an almsgiving Christian.
   Augustine had serious reservations about many aspects of this popular belief.
He did not believe that the power of alms alone would save hardened sinners in
the other world. But, as far as this life was concerned, he wholeheartedly accepted
the view that linked almsgiving to the forgiveness of sins. He made clear in his
sermons that almsgiving provided the “wings” that brought the Dimitte nobis of
the Lord’s Prayer up to heaven.18 Without such wings no prayer could fly.
   Faced by Pelagius, Augustine pulled the traditional notion of almsgiving as a
remedy for sin into the powerful gravitational field of a notion of the need for the
daily expiation of sins that was implied in the daily recitation of the Lord’s Prayer.
“Daily”—­cottidiana—­was the ever-­recurrent word Augustine used, whether he
spoke of sin, of prayer, or of almsgiving. The human condition demanded this.
The soul was a leaking vessel on the high seas. Little trickles of daily sins con-
stantly seeped through the timbers, silently filling the bilge with water that might
yet sink the ship if it were not pumped out. And to man the bilge pump was both
to pray and to give alms:
   And we should not only pray, but also give alms. . . . Those who work the
   bilge-­pump lest the boat go down do so [chanting sea shanties] with their
   voices and working with their hands. . . . Let the hands go round and
   round. . . . Let them give, let them do good works.19
   Altogether, when he came to preach against the Pelagians, Augustine placed
behind the largely unreflecting practice of expiatory giving the heavy weight of a
view of human nature that made daily expiation a necessity. Religious giving was
part of daily life because daily life itself was defined by sin. It took place against
the noise of the steady creak of the bilge pump of prayer, fasting, and alms-
giving.20


     “May he have salvation from his sins”: Expiatiory Giving in Africa

The rich of Africa heard this message with a certain relief. Indeed, their expected
reaction to Augustine’s preaching fits in very well with the realities of their social
condition. Even if they were good Christians, none of them suffered from the
vertigo of wealth that had swept through Christian Roman families of the super-­

                                         363
                                  chapter 22


rich. Pinianus and Melania were rare birds. But their actions had provoked and
corroborated a widespread critique of wealth in Roman circles, addressed to some
of the richest persons in the empire. The local landowners of Africa were differ-
ent. They had no wish to be told to renounce their wealth in its entirety, as the
author of the De divitiis urged that they should do. The Christian message they
had continuously received from their bishops (Catholic and Donatist alike) was
not that they should renounce their wealth but sacralize it by giving it on a regu-
lar basis to the church.
    A century of confrontation between the two churches of Africa had created
something of a lifeboat mentality among the rich supporters of either church.
Each local church had needed constant collective support. A fierce sense of the
autonomy of the wealth of the church in Africa had built up over the years. It had
created a mood that did not expect ostentatious, one-­off personal acts of gener-
osity to the church, such as had led Paulinus to rebuild the tomb of Saint Felix
at Cimitile or Pammachius to found the splendid church that bore his own name
at Rome. Rather, if the rich were to use their wealth, they were to do it on a
regular basis and with a low profile. For this reason, it was best that giving
should be associated with regular penitential habits the rich shared as fellow sin-
ners with all other members of the congregation. Giving to the Christian com-
munity “for the remission of sins”—­and not for one’s own glory—­was the surest
remedy for pride. It also reassured the ever-­vigilant Christian populus that those
who led the community in wealth did not lead it with the habitual arrogance of
the rich and powerful. To give in expiation of sin marked out the gift as a humble
religious transaction, not as a gesture of self-­promotion. It muted the profile of
the benefactor.
    We should, of course, always remember that Africa was a large place. Not ev-
eryone from every region accepted the studiously subdued image of the good
Christian giver to which Augustine appealed in his sermons. Further to the west
from Hippo, leading figures in provincial society (such as the great Moorish gen-
erals of the time) had no qualms whatsoever about erecting votive shrines that
bore their names and those of their family. Such a person was Flavius Nuvel, who
built a basilica at Rusguniae, in Caesarean—­that is, eastern—­Mauretania (on the
coast, twenty miles east of modern Algiers), along with his wife and family: “He
has [now] dedicated the basilica which he promised with a vow and offered it to
God.” A semi-­independent prince, Flavius Nuvel was the Paulinus of his region.
He had even been able to obtain and install in his basilica a fragment of the True
Cross that had been brought all the way from the Holy Land. The building made
clear that Nuvel and his family enjoyed the protection of God. It did not declare
that they were sinners.21
    By contrast, Augustine had preached a somber democracy of sin. This meant,
in practice, that he left room among the possible lay donors to the church for

                                       364
                 augustine, wealth, and pelagianism


persons with lesser fortunes than grandees such as Nuvel. All could give because
all were equally sinners. And the gifts of all would be equally acceptable to God.
Each gift, of whatever size, worked equally to expiate the sins of the donor. This
attitude encouraged relatively humble persons to come forward as donors to the
church. Such was Umbrius Felix, a schoolteacher in the little town of Mina (mod-
ern Ighil Izane, Algeria), far to the west of Hippo, on the inland road that crossed
Caesarean Mauretania. In an inscription carved between two rosettes, he wrote
in 408 ad:
   from the Gifts of God and Christ, Umbrius Felix, the magister, made this.
   He has repaid his vow to God. Let prayer be made for him and may he
   have salvation from his sins.22
   Augustine was not alone in thinking in this way. The notion of constant ex-
piation provided background noise to the building activities of many bishops.
At Tipasa, bishop Alexander placed at the entrance of his basilica an unusually
elegant and explicit inscription:
   Clausula iustitiae est martyrium votis optare.
   Habes et aliam similem, aelemosinam viribus facere.

   (The highest pitch of righteousness is to wish for martyrdom. You have
   another like it: to give alms to the best of your ability.)23
    And all this could be cheap. As we saw in chapter 4, the Christian notion of
the incommensurability between the gift and its heavenly reward fostered an
attitude that favored regular, small donations. Each gift, however small, was
charged with a magic all of its own. In the words of a later inscription from a
church at Tigzirt (on the coast of Mauretania, in modern Algeria): “Seek heaven
with a pious heart, through [donating] a few cubes only of mosaic.”24


   “If you wish to have a memorial forever”: Renunciation, Endowment,
                           and Provincial Society

As always with Augustine, there was a practical side to his deep musings on sin,
grace, and free will. His doctrine of the need for daily expiation, summed up in
the phrase Forgive us our trespasses in the Lord’s Prayer, served to empower the
pious practices of the average rich member of his congregations.
   This was a doctrine that spoke to the habits of a class that had come, over the
years, to rally to Augustine’s church in Africa. It was not a doctrine that had
meant much to the pious aristocrats Melania and Pinianus when they first ar-
rived in Africa. Up to 411, their notion of renunciation had involved the dizzy

                                        365
                                  chapter 22


scattering of gold. Wealth was there to be “vaporized.” Nothing did this more
effectively than turning it, as quickly as possible, into the most liquid (and por-
table) of all substances—­golden coins—­and sending it as far from home as it
could go to the imagined ends of the earth.25
   The bishops of Africa would have none of this. Augustine makes only one
appearance in Gerontius’s Life of Melania (the ugly incident in Hippo having
been excluded). In the passage in question, we see how, in coming to Africa,
Melania and Pinianus entered a very different zone of Christian piety. Regular
endowment meant more to the local bishops than did the spectacular but spas-
modic acts of giving to which they had been used in Italy:
   When the blessed ones decided to sell all their property [in Africa], the
   most saintly and important bishops (I mean blessed Augustine, his brother-­
   bishop Alypius, and Aurelius of Carthage) advised them saying, “The money
   that you now furnish to monasteries will be used up in a short time. If you
   wish to have a memorial forever in heaven and earth, give an estate and its
   income to each monastery.”26
    We do not know to what extent the young couple put this advice into prac-
tice. In any case, they left Africa for Jerusalem within a few years, in 417. They
spent the remainder of their wealth in the Holy Land and in Egypt. The great
noble ladies of the Anician house also left Africa. They returned to Rome the
moment that peace returned to Italy. After 417 the Catholic churches in Africa
buckled down to make the best they could of what they had. They drew on the
“sheer willingness” (to use Ramsay Mac Mullen’s phrase) that had already been
built up over the previous generations among the local laity. These reserves of
willingness had become considerable. A new class of persons began to bring
wealth to the churches. Their emergence in African society at this time was a
relatively recent development that was connected with a change in the structures
of landholding in the province. Let us see how this happened.
    Africa had always been associated, in the Roman mind, with the massive
landholdings of the emperor and of the nobility of Rome. These estates were
imagined at the time (and continue to be imagined by modern scholars) to have
been latifundia. We tend to think of them as vast, autonomous tracts of land
that were as seemingly endless as the somber chaparral of southern Texas, with
its huge ranches and stunted towns. Given such widespread ideas about Africa,
it was easy for the biographer of Melania, writing in distant Jerusalem in the 450s,
to imagine that his heroine had been ensconced in one such grandiose estate
outside Thagaste.
    But in many parts of Africa (and especially in the Medjerda valley, which Au-
gustine knew well) the reality on the ground was significantly different from the
stereotype.27 In the course of the fourth century, a vigorous provincial society had

                                        366
                 augustine, wealth, and pelagianism


grown up under the shadow of these immense blocks of land—­and, ultimately,
at the expense of their absentee owners. As in Ireland or Hungary in the nine-
teenth century, land owned by a few great, absentee landowners had fostered the
growth of an entire class of lesser figures, drawn from local society. This class was
made up of tenants on long leases, of administrators on behalf of absentee land-
lords, and of entrepreneurs involved in the mobilization of labor and the sale of
agrarian products. These men, of course, still towered above the pauperes—­the
small farmers and townsmen of their region. Most had family property of their
own. Many came from the elites of the cities. But they were not the great lati­
fondistas that modern historians frequently imagine them to have been. In fact,
they preyed on the latifondistas. They fell on the land of the emperor and of the
Roman nobiles and turned much of its profit to their own advantage.28
    New forms of leasing had made this possible. In the course of the late third
and fourth centuries, the great landowners (led by the emperor) came to prefer
the stability offered by long-­term tenancies over the rapid, revolving door prac-
tice of five-­year leases. Such tenancies were known as tenancies for emphyteusis—­
for “the planting up of the land.” They seem to have encouraged the growth of
new cash crops. In many areas, they were associated with the spectacular exten-
sion of olive cultivation.29 They attracted improving landowners drawn from local
society.
    We know of one such landowner. This was the Donatist bishop of Calama
(modern Guelma, in Algeria), Crispinus. Crispinus’s notion of improvement
was not everybody’s notion. The moment he obtained the emphyteutic lease of
an imperial estate, he rebaptized eighty of its previously Catholic peasants. By
doing this he put the Holy Spirit back into them, by baptizing them properly. It
was all part of the reorganization of his new property.30 Augustine, of course,
was duly shocked. But Crispinus’s action was a sign of the times. Town coun­
cillors, bishops, and local landowners were enabled to become leading figures in
their region through enterprising use of a new system of leases that gave them
access to the land of great absentee landowners. It was a situation that tended to
pit local figures against the distant grandees whose lands they had virtually made
their own in return for rent.
    These people needed to commemorate themselves; they now did so in the
churches. Whatever they may have thought about the Catholic church associ-
ated with the party of Augustine and his colleagues (for many local notables were
former Donatists), the imperial laws issued after 411 had ensured that it was now
the only church in town. Wealth that had been divided between two churches
now flowed into only one. The result was yet another surge of building. On the
floor of one such new basilica—­the basilica that may have been built around this
time at Cuicul (modern Djemila, in Algeria)—­we meet the provincial rich of
Africa who had contributed to it. Mosaic panels celebrated individual donors’

                                        367
                                   chapter 22


gifts that had enabled the laying of an extensive pavement. As we have seen, such
panels were common in the churches of northern Italy. They were rare in Africa.
(African inscriptions had tended to give prominence to the bishop as the admin-
istrator of sacralized wealth collected from many donations.) The names of the
donors on the panels in the basilica of Cuicul were a concise gazetteer of the
gentry. The titles they used echoed faithfully the local hierarchies that had been
created by the imperial system. They were a commentary on the structuring of
local African society first revealed to us, sixty years previously, by the stone in-
scription of the Album placed in the town hall of Timgad in the 360s. But they
are now placed on the floor of a Christian basilica. Flavius Paulus was an honorary
senator and former tribune; Flavius Felix was an honorary senator and former
head of a provincial government office; Iulius Adeodatus was a priest of the im-
perial cult. This proud civic title, associated with pagan cult, was taken for granted
by its holder. He plainly saw nothing wrong in flaunting it on the floor of a
Christian basilica! Two others were simply viri honesti, respectable town coun-
cillors such as Augustine and his father had once been.31 The mosaic gives us a
glimpse of the face of the rich within the churches of Africa in the last decades
of Augustine’s life.
    Augustine and his colleagues had given such persons a doctrine for the long
haul. Suffused by a sense of the daily need to expiate sins, the “sheer willingness”
that had always been expected of the rich in Africa had lost much of its vividness.
It could not be associated either with the startling démesure of civic prodigality
or with the new and equally startling scenarios of Christian ascetic renunciation.
But what it had lost in vividness, pious giving had gained in a sense of an indefi-
nite future, driven by the perpetual motion of the need to expiate sin. Giving
to the church and to the poor could never be a spasmodic, one-­off business. Sin
was permanent. Its momentum was almost subliminal. For (as Augustine pre-
sented it) personal sin was linked to a shared, unplumbed complicity in the sin
of Adam—­a vast sin from the very dawn of time that had infected the whole
human race. For this reason, religious giving also had to be permanent, regular,
and devoted to the advancement of a collective venture in salvation. The un-
imaginable scale of this venture (as Augustine conjured it up in the pages of the
City of God) did justice to the majesty of the rise, in Africa and throughout west-
ern Europe, of a new institution in the form of the Catholic Church. It is to the
place of the church in society both in Africa and elsewhere that we must now
turn by following the years of mounting crisis throughout the Latin West (asso-
ciated with the sack of Rome and the collapse of the Rhine frontier), which co-
incided with the dénouement of the Pelagian Controversy, from around 415 to
the death of Augustine in 430.



                                         368
                          Chapter 23
                          •••••
                             “Out of Africa”
      Wealth, Power, and the Churches: 415–­430




    “A new heresy . . . secretly spreading its tentacles”: Pelagius between
                   Africa, Palestine, and Rome, 415–­17

There was a saying among the ancient Greeks and Romans: Ex Africa semper
aliquid novi: “Out of Africa there is always something new.”1 In the 410s and
420s, the churches of Africa, with Augustine as their spokesman, brought yet
another startling set of novelties from their strange land. The rallying of the
church of Africa behind Augustine against the views of Pelagius involved ma-
neuvers that were unprecedented in the history of Latin Christianity. An entire
provincial church gathered in councils attended by up to two hundred bishops
so as to condemn the views of a single lay teacher. No less surprising was the man-
ner in which the bishops asserted that they could derive an entire set of theo-
logical doctrines from the day-­to-­day practices of their own church. Matters that
had previously been regarded as impenetrable and as open to disagreement among
experts—­such as the relation between grace and free will, the exact nature of
original sin, and the exact meaning of the baptism of children—­were handled
with peremptory certitude by Augustine and his colleagues. Theological conclu-
sions of unusual rigor were derived from simple rituals, such as infant baptism
and the recitation of the Lord’s Prayer.
    Most striking of all was the confidence with which the bishops of Africa
claimed that others should share their certainty on these issues. Having met in
solemn council in 416 to condemn the ideas associated with Pelagius, they
passed on their judgment to the bishop of Rome and to the emperor as if they
expected their views to be ratified without further question.2 Africa had spoken
with unprecedented, massed conviction. The issue was whether anyone else would
listen to the novel dogmatic statements that came—­very much as new things—­
out of Africa.

                                       369
                                   chapter 23


    Between 415 and 418, it seemed as if nobody would listen. Up to 418, Augus-
tine heard nothing but bad news. The fate of Pelagius lay beyond his control and
that of his colleagues. Pelagius had gone straight from Africa to Palestine, where
he received a mixed reception. He was met by the hostility of Jerome. Jerome’s
enmity may have been related to Pelagius’s close relations to Pinianus and Mela-
nia the Younger, who was the granddaughter of Melania the Elder, the famous
patroness of Jerome’s enemy Rufinus. Pelagius was also followed by accusations
from the West, but they did not impress the local Palestinian bishops. Pelagius
was cleared of heresy and accepted as orthodox at a council held at Diospolis
(Lydda/Lod, in Israel) on December 20, 415.3
    In early spring of 416, one of the first boats to sail into the harbor of Hippo at
the end of the winter closure of the Mediterranean carried a pamphlet written by
Pelagius. In this pamphlet, Pelagius announced to the world that he had been
cleared of heresy by the bishops of Palestine. A fragment of the sermon with
which Augustine greeted this unwelcome news has recently been discovered. It
shows him reacting instantly to the challenge from Pelagius. From then on, the
gloves were off. As he told his congregation on that occasion, “There is a new
heresy lurking about, and secretly spreading its tentacles far and wide.”4
    Augustine could no longer ignore the views of Pelagius. His heresy had to
be quashed. Immediately, two councils were summoned—­one of the bishops of
Numidia at Milevis and one at Carthage. They sent to Innocent, bishop of Rome,
a list of the views of Pelagius and Caelestius. As we have seen, the Africans pre-
sented their list of errors in the expectation that such errors would be instantly
condemned.
    But Innocent did not wish to be hurried. He was reluctant to condemn a man
known for his Christian zeal and for his relations with leading Christian families
of Rome, such as the Anicii. Faced by a united and indignant church in Africa,
he agreed that if such thoughts were being entertained by anyone, it was, indeed,
a serious matter. But he hinted that it was up to him (and not to the Africans) to
judge whether Pelagius actually held them. He would decide for himself. He
elicited a statement of the faith from Pelagius. Caelestius, Pelagius’s leading dis-
ciple and a more radical figure than Pelagius, reappeared in Rome.
    Then, in March 417, Innocent died. He was succeeded by Zosimus. Like In-
nocent, Zosimus wanted to be the judge of this case. But while Innocent had
been an old, experienced man, capable of biding his time, Zosimus was a new
bishop in a hurry to get things done. In the late summer of 417, a gathering to
investigate the ideas of Pelagius took place in the courtyard of what is now the
modern church of San Clemente. This was a titular church, named after an un-
known Clemens. But it was already associated in the popular mind with Saint
Clement, the disciple of Saint Peter. It was an eminently suitable place for the
successor of Saint Peter to give judgment. Zosimus exonerated both Caelestius

                                         370
                   wealth, power, and the churches


and Pelagius of the charges leveled against them. In September 417 Zosimus’s
letter arrived in Carthage. The African bishops received a lecture on the evils of
false testimony and on the dangers of over-­rigid theological speculation. It was a
calculated snub. Zosimus treated the African bishops as a group of doctrinaire
heresy hunters in a strange land.
    Characteristically, Augustine and his colleagues replied by calling a yet larger
council. A “universal” council of over two hundred bishops was abruptly sum-
moned to Carthage by Aurelius. The council sent bishops to Italy. But they did
this so as to seek judgment from another, more reliable source. The bishops
avoided Rome and went directly to the imperial court at Ravenna. They secured
from the emperor an outright condemnation of both Pelagius and Caelestius.5



     “Who judge it to be a sign of plebeian baseness to think the same
       as everybody else”: Roman Society and the Condemnation
                              of Pelagius, 418

Looking back a few years later, the followers of Pelagius were convinced that Aly-
pius of Thagaste had brought a gift of eighty Numidian stallions to bribe leading
courtiers in order to secure the condemnation of their hero. If this was true, it
was a well-­timed gift. The ravages of the Visigoths and Vandals in Spain had cut
off the supply of fine horses that had been provided by the ranches of Lusitania
on which Symmachus had drawn for his games twenty years previously. Eighty
stallions was a lavish gift. A horse cost a minimum of twelve solidi. Even if there
was no truth in this accusation, the rumor itself showed that, in the eyes of the
world, the church of Africa was not only a church very certain of its opinions but
a church experienced in the ways of the court. It was now also a very rich church.
The recent absorption of the estates of the Donatist church had left it uniquely
wealthy. To outsiders it seemed as if the longstanding economic dominance of
Africa in the economy of the western Mediterranean had been transmuted into a
theological dominance also, due to the lobbying power of rich African bishops.6
   It has proved easy to agree with the supporters of Pelagius that the appeal of
Augustine and his colleagues to the imperial court at Ravenna was a high-­handed
and corrupt maneuver. It is often assumed that their intervention alone secured
the condemnation of Pelagius. Making vivid use of a metaphor from a soccer
game, Brinley Rees, the translator of the letters of Pelagius, has said that

   the match [between Pelagius and Augustine] may well have ended in a
   draw; instead, it went into “extra” time and at the end of that Augustine
   and his team won with the help of questionable decisions made by the ref-
   erees and the touch-­judges.7

                                        371
                                  chapter 23


Basically, in appealing to the emperor Augustine and his African colleagues had
not played fair.
    Though this view is common among modern scholars, it does not do justice
to the complexity of Italian local politics and to the involvement of the emperors
themselves in the affairs of Rome. It is, therefore, to Rome and not to Ravenna
that we must turn in order to understand the sudden swing of opinion that led
to the final condemnation of Pelagius and his followers.
    The Rome to which the Roman refugees returned and in which Caelestius
made his appearance before bishop Zosimus in 417 was not the Rome of pre-­
410. It was not an entirely ruined city. But it was a city whose nerve had been
shattered by the famine days of the Gothic siege of 409 and by the methodical
depredation of the Gothic sack of 410. The different groups within it—­the
upper nobility, the lesser nobles (many of whom were government servants), the
well-­to-­do plebeians, and the clergy—­had seldom shared the same interests. This
had not mattered greatly in more prosperous days. Now each of them was con-
cerned to get back on its own feet, on its own terms.
    The nobles faced a formidable governmental task. To keep Rome quiet had
been difficult enough in the days of Symmachus. Now this task was rendered
more intractable by the dislocation of the imperial annona and by the drop in
income from the estates of the nobles in southern Italy as a result of the Gothic
invasions. At the time, neither recession seemed irreversible. The great estates
would regain their yield (provided that they regained their manpower that had
been dispersed by war and through capture by the barbarians). The annona was
reorganized. But the strain of the effort was plain in these years.8
    Furthermore, the Christian members of the nobility had come to be divided.
In previous decades they had become accustomed to in-­fighting among fellow
Christians. Leading families acted as the patrons of increasingly radical teachers.
The division of Roman families between the supporters of Jerome and of Rufi-
nus in the 390s was exacerbated as these families inherited other, yet more as-
sertive spiritual guides. As we have seen, Pelagius stepped into the slot once oc-
cupied by Rufinus. Furthermore, it seemed as if the leading Christian family of
Rome—­that of the Anicii—­had also supported Pelagius. Religious factionalism
linked to the Christian aristocracy and its clients had become a major feature of
upper-­class life in Rome.
    Factionalism of this kind was a matter of immediate concern to emperors
who resided in Ravenna. We tend to think of Ravenna as a distant court city,
occupied by the emperor and his servants, while Rome lay deserted.9 But in the
generation after 410, the exact opposite was the case. Ravenna was not a true al-
ternative to Rome. It was not a governmental capital, totally removed by dis-
tance and by ethos from Rome, as Trier and Milan had been. Rather, Ravenna
was a co-­capital with Rome. Ravenna was the northern focus of an ellipse of im-

                                       372
                   wealth, power, and the churches


perial power that straddled central Italy and the Apennines. The other focus was
Rome.10 We should bear this in mind when we judge the actions of the African
bishops. To go to Ravenna was not to bypass the bishop of Rome in seeking a
purely “secular” judgment on a religious matter. That is a modern assumption.
For the emperor and for many upper-­class residents of Rome, theology and due
order in their city were not separate issues. The one had to be solved so as to
ensure the other. If the bishop of Rome failed to bring about consensus, the em-
peror and his advisors would do it for him.
    It is, therefore, not surprising that, on April 30, 418, the Praetorian Prefect,
Flavius Junius Quartus Palladius, received an imperial edict that brushed aside
bishop Zosimus’s acquittal of Pelagius and Caelestius. The imperial edict con-
demned them both by name as “the nefarious originators of a new heresy.” They
must leave the city. Their followers—­clergy and laity alike—­could be denounced
by any person. Their teachings had damaged the peace “of our most holy City.”11
    Palladius was not a distant courtier, attached to the emperor in the faraway
marshes of Ravenna. We know from an inscription made public in 1928 (that
seems not to have been considered in the context of the Pelagian Controversy) that
Palladius had been a link between Rome and the court. His palace stood at the
foot of the Aventine Hill. The inscription was set up outside this palace. It stated
that he had represented the Senate to the emperor on four occasions.12 More im-
portant, Palladius may well have been the same Palladius who, in the terrible years
of 409–­10, had presided over attempts to make all senators contribute equally to
collections of money with which to buy the safety of the city from the Goths.13
    If that is the case, then Palladius would have seen the Christian aristocracy at
its worst. The Anicii had protected their vast wealth by refusing to make any
contribution to the common fund. Faltonia Proba was even believed by her en-
emies to have opened the gates of Rome to the Goths. The young Pinianus and
his wife, Melania the Younger, had decided to sell up their fortune at just the
time when a part of it was needed by the Respublica for the common good of
Rome. Palladius (if he was the same person) was in no mood to forgive yet fur-
ther factionalism among the nobles.
    Thus, Pelagius and Caelestius were not condemned only so as to please the
Africans but also for having led a disruptive faction in Rome. They were pre-
sented in the imperial edict as a group that claimed, on the basis of their perfec-
tionist theology, to be superior to everybody else:
   Judging it to be a sign of plebeian baseness to think the same as everybody
   else, and a signal mark of expertise to destroy what has been approved of
   by all in common.14
The draconian edict fits all too well into the tense mood of the time. After 410 a
lifeboat mentality had developed in Rome. Divisions of religious opinion were

                                        373
                                  chapter 23


a luxury inherited from a more affluent age. They had no place in a city that had
been shaken by barbarian invasion.


    “In almost the entire West a dogma has been pushed forward that is
     no less idiotic than it is impious”: Julian of Eclanum, 418–­ca. 450

Faced by an imperial edict that claimed to bring order back to an anxious city,
the varying groups in Rome capitulated. Zosimus did an about-­face. The clergy
of Rome also rallied against Pelagius. Many leading priests and deacons had pre-
viously supported him. They included future bishops of Rome—­Celestine
(422–­32) and Sixtus (432–­40).15 Even the bearer of letters from Rome to Car-
thage, the young acolyte Leo, may well have been the future Leo the Great (440–­
61).16 The switch of allegiances among these well-­placed clergymen made plain
that they wished the clergy to maintain their position as the true Third Estate
of Rome. As clergymen, they were prepared to accept the hardline doctrines laid
down by fellow ecclesiastics—­by the African bishops—­rather than to follow the
views of Pelagius, a layman whose principal protectors had been laypersons from
the upper aristocracy.
    The only consequential opposition to the ideas of Augustine came from out-
side Rome. Julian, the young bishop of Eclanum, in southern Italy, refused to sign
the document condemning Pelagius. It is worthwhile lingering for a moment
on this remarkable person. His career shows the impressive cultural resources on
which a Latin clergyman of good family could draw.17
    Eclanum was a small city in the hills behind Campania, about ten miles from
Beneventum. Now known as Mirabella Eclano, it looked out to the dry, rolling
hills of Apulia (modern Puglia) and to the road that led from Rome to Brindisi
and the East. Julian belonged to a relatively new social group—­an aristocracy of
clergymen. His father had been a bishop, and his two sisters were nuns. He was
born into a circle of clergymen that had recently established itself on the edge
of Campania. This was the region Symmachus had regarded as his favored land-
scape of the heart in the 370s and in which Paulinus of Nola had settled in 395.
We first meet young Julian in 407, when Paulinus wrote an Epithalamium for
him. This poem was written to celebrate Julian’s marriage to the daughter of Ae-
milius, the bishop of Beneventum.18 At that time, the young man was already
destined for the priesthood. Bishop Aemilius, Julian’s father-­in-­law, was a good
friend and the social equal of Paulinus. Socially, Julian’s marriage to the daughter
of Aemilius may well have represented a step upward for the young man. It had
been made possible through the tight bonds established between members of a
regional clergy, despite their original differences in wealth and status.19


                                       374
                  wealth, power, and the churches


    At some time, perhaps in the mid-­410s, Julian was ordained bishop of Ecla-
num. Either before or after his consecration, he impressed the Christian nobility
of his region by giving alms to relieve the needy during a food shortage—­caused,
perhaps, by the passing of the Visigothic armies in 411–­12.20 Seen from the
outside, by an admiring gentry, Julian would have resembled the town council-
lors, whose public spirited rallying to the repair of their native Beneventum after
an earthquake in 375 had been celebrated forty years previously by the young
Symmachus.
    These details of Julian’s life and background have helped give the young
bishop of Eclanum an agreeably old-­fashioned air.21 But Julian was not an aristo-
crat of the old school. He was a clergyman from a generation in which the clergy
had begun to create for themselves a high culture of their own. He was part of
the world that drew on the scholarship of Jerome and Rufinus and exploited the
new opening to the Greek East associated with the growth of Latin pilgrimages
to the Holy Land.
    Julian was shocked by the victory of Augustine’s ideas. He thought that the
clergy of Rome and the bishops of Italy should have supported Pelagius. Instead,
they had succumbed to a putsch masterminded in Carthage. In his opinion, they
had been forced by fear of the imperial laws to subscribe to a declaration of faith
that amounted to a denial of free will, to a demonization of marriage, and to the
victory within the church of a neo-­Manichaeism propounded by Augustine,
who was known to have once been a Manichee. In the words of one of Julian’s
many appeals to his episcopal colleagues, the bishops of the Christian West had
allowed themselves to be bullied and bamboozled: “In almost the entire West a
dogma has been pushed forward that is no less idiotic than it is impious.”22
    Julian was exiled in late 418. Like Cicero before him (in 51 BC), Julian took
the road to Brindisi and hence to Cilicia. But he did this as an exiled bishop and
not, like Cicero, as a Roman governor. He settled down in relative comfort as an
expatriate. He became a follower of the great Greek exegete Theodore of Mop-
suestia. He adapted rapidly to a new and congenial intellectual environment. His
polemic against Augustine was the fruit of an unexpected and felicitous joining
of East and West.23
    Julian was a rare bird. He was a Latin writer who learned remarkably quickly
to think like a Greek. This enabled him to offer to his readers in the Latin West
a glimpse of the rich intellectual world of the eastern Mediterranean of which
Augustine and his colleagues in Africa had remained stubbornly ignorant. An-
tioch and Cilicia were regions that had long nurtured sunnier views of the human
condition. These had been elaborated in reaction to the spread of Manichaeism
from further east. Julian applied the anti-­Manichaean arguments developed in
Antioch in such a way as to demolish the views of Augustine on original sin.24


                                       375
                                   chapter 23


   For the next ten years, Julian wrote unceasingly. He succeeded in piling tome
after tome on Augustine’s desk—­four volumes of Julian to answer one of Augus-
tine’s (in mid-­419) and a further eight, which arrived in Africa in 427–­28, finally
causing the old, sick man to abandon all other tasks so as to respond to Julian’s
withering attack. In this continuous flood of ridicule, the description of Augus-
tine as Patronus asinorum—­“Lord of the Donkeys”—­was only the least offensive.25
Having haunted the old age of Augustine by his voluminous attacks, Julian later
returned to Italy. He died in Sicily around 450.26
   Quite apart from the relentless intelligence he demonstrated in his attack on
Augustine as a neo-­Manichee, Julian showed acute political sense. He began his
campaign by approaching a powerful layman. In 419 Valerius was a count at the
imperial court and on his way to become Master of the Cavalry.27 He was the
man to whom Alypius of Thagaste was said to have brought the gift of eighty
Numidian horses. Still a young man, Valerius wished to found a family. Julian
went out of his way to ensure that Valerius knew that, when it came to sex and
marriage, Augustine had remained an out-­and-­out Manichee. Sex, to Augustine
(so Julian claimed), was no natural instinct. It was a demonic urge, planted irre-
vocably in the human body. Even when begotten in lawful wedlock, children
were a result of “the Devil’s gift.”28 Married laypersons such as Valerius should
think twice before supporting so outrageous a view of married intercourse as
that proposed by Augustine and his crypto-­Manichaean followers in Africa.
   It is easy to dismiss Julian’s portrayal of Augustine’s thoughts on sex and mar-
riage as a malicious caricature.29 But what mattered at the time was that it was a
caricature directed to a non-­clerical audience. It was the presence of married lay
readers, such as count Valerius, that gave a distinctive tone to the final decades of
the Pelagian Controversy. This was the last great debate in the Latin West, be-
tween the fifth century and the Reformation, to be conducted before an audi-
ence that included influential and cultivated married persons on issues (such as
sex and marriage) that directly touched their own lives.


                         Cogita unitatem: Think unity

                Augustine, Wealth, and the Church

In the 420s, both Julian and Augustine knew that large books mattered. In the
increasingly dislocated conditions of the Latin West, imperial laws and ecclesias-
tical pronouncements had little power in themselves. Modern scholars (project-
ing back into the later empire the image of a modern totalitarian state) some-
times think that major controversies in early Christianity could be closed by an


                                        376
                  wealth, power, and the churches


imperial ukase. They claim that state power alone tipped the balance between
Augustine and Pelagius, with sad results for all future ages. Both Augustine and
Julian knew better than that. They knew that imperial laws were only the open-
ing shots. A bitter war of words to sway public opinion was bound to follow.
    This was particularly the case when it came to the application of laws on re­
ligious matters. Despite the high-­flown intolerance of their language, imperial
edicts against heresy took second place to overriding, frankly secular concerns.
What had always mattered most for the imperial government was the gigantic
annual spasm connected with bringing in the taxes. Laws on religion were never
imposed as resolutely as were laws on taxation.
    If laws against heretics were unpopular or seemed irrelevant, they lacked bite.
They were often ignored for decades on end. They had to have public opinion
behind them if they were to be enforced. Public opinion meant, in effect, the
opinion of the educated class who applied the laws as governors or as heads of
their cities. Hence Julian’s choice of the recipients of some of his most vehement
works. As courtiers and administrators, laypersons—­and not the clergy—­still
held the keys of power. And laypersons worried about marriage.
    They also worried about wealth. Augustine saw this clearly. His letters to
powerful officials in the 420s placed great emphasis on his notion of the Catho-
lic Church as an all-­embracing institution and on the possibilities for the pious
use of wealth within it. Images of the good Christian rich, which Augustine had
already framed in his sermons of the 400s, were now passed on to high-­up poli-
ticians and generals on active service. Through being summed up in carefully
composed letters from around 417 onward (and not simply scattered as so many
“seeds of the Word” in sermons), Augustine’s view of wealth came to be part of the
common sense of wealth throughout the late Roman and early medieval West.
    Put very briefly: Augustine rendered wealth unproblematic because its ori-
gins were held to be opaque. Like grace itself, wealth was a phenomenon Augus-
tine had removed from human scrutiny. Wealth was among the gifts of which
Saint Paul had written: But each one of you has his own gift from God (1 Cor. 7:7).
Augustine wrote this (in 418) to Boniface, the future Count of Africa (the head
of the armed forces in the region). He treated Boniface’s official rank, physical
courage, and wealth as, all of them, equally gifts of God. They were gifts to be
used in the service of the Catholic Church.30 To treat a political office and the
wealth attached to it in the same way as a personal charisma (which is what Paul
had meant by “gift”) might strike a modern reader as illicit. It was not so for Au-
gustine. For him, wealth, like everything else, derived from the hidden providence
of God. The only issue, then, was how, like any other gift of God, wealth might
be used for the collective good of the church. It was a bracing message for an of-
ficer stationed on the Saharan frontier of the empire.


                                       377
                                   chapter 23


    Such a view of wealth depended on a strong sense of the majesty of the Catho-
lic Church. Wealth gained meaning and solemnity through being used to serve a
worldwide institution with a grandiose future. In 417 Augustine wrote a similar
letter to another politician, Dardanus, a former Prefect of Gaul. Dardanus was
now living in retirement. He did so prudently, behind the walls of a fortified vil-
lage named Theopolis—­“City of God” (or “City protected by God”). Theopolis
lay in a seemingly remote and dreamlike valley of the Alpes Maritimes (at Saint-­
Geniez, east of Sisteron). But it was close to an escape route into Italy through a
network of minor mountain passes.31 Dardanus needed security. In 413 he had
suppressed a usurpation through a bloodbath of the Gallic nobility. He was even
supposed to have killed the usurper with his own hands. Dardanus was later
known to his admirers as a vir strenuus. He was a hard man for hard times. Dar-
danus had stood firm for the emperor of Ravenna.32 Augustine reminded him of
a yet more splendid institution to which he should be loyal: cogita unitatem—­
“When you think of where God dwells, think of the unity of the gathered saints
[massed in heaven].”33 Dardanus could best serve God by placing his wealth and
power behind the unity of the Catholic Church on earth.
    Augustine’s justification of wealth came at the right time. In a world that had
been unexpectedly shaken by renewed civil war and by barbarian invasion, there
was no point in denouncing the rich for the manner in which they had gained
their wealth. Those whose wealth had survived the shocks of this new crisis were
unlikely to feel guilty about what little of it was left to them. The radical critiques
of wealth and the wealthy associated with the preaching of Ambrose and with
the Pelagian De divitiis were out-­of-­date. Such radicalism had been the product
of an age of affluence. It had played on the disquiet of the comfortable rich of the
fourth-­century age of gold. It had less effect on persons who now faced the pros-
pect of losing everything.
    As we will see in our next chapter, by 420 the age of gold was well and truly
over. As the empire unraveled and lost its power in the western provinces, an em-
phasis on the need for firm local hierarchies came to the fore. This took the form
of attempts to establish stronger vertical links with one’s own dependents, such
as had not been considered necessary in an earlier age. The fourth-­century age of
gold had been characterized by extensive and impersonal forms of absentee land-
ownership that depended on the support of a strong, unified empire. Now was
a time for retrenchment and for the strengthening of local roots. Dardanus’s for-
tification of Theopolis was a sign of the times. Solidarity was at a premium. In a
society that strove to hang together, the worst sin was pride, not avarice. If the
nobility was to survive, they had to mobilize the loyalty of those beneath them.
They had to learn to stoop to conquer—­and they did so in a manner now taught
them by the bishops and clergy of the Catholic Church. As Kate Cooper has


                                         378
                   wealth, power, and the churches


pointed out, letters and treatises of advice to leading laypersons—­to men and
women alike—­became a regular feature of the literature of the Latin West. These
treatises were no longer written in favor of the renunciation of wealth. They were
about the correct use of wealth as an instrument of power.34
   Augustine’s writings at this time formed part of this change of viewpoint. He
made clear that the best way to stoop to conquer was to join the throng of fellow
believers of all classes in the Catholic Church and to do so as a sinner along with
other sinners. Writing against Julian, Augustine presented his victory over the
ideals of Pelagius as a victory of the common man over an icy and elitist perfec-
tionism. There was room in Augustine’s image of the church for distinctly average
sinners:
   Who indulge their sexual appetites, although within the decorous bonds
   of marriage. . . . Who hold on to what they possess. Who give alms, if not
   very lavishly. . . . But who, through all this, see themselves as small and God
   as glorious.35
    Such persons were encouraged to put their money where their heart was. A
community of sinners was to be a community of givers. Not everyone did this in
the spirit that Augustine intended in his famous sermons on almsgiving and ex-
piation. The epigraphy of Italy, Gaul, and Spain in the fifth and sixth centuries
shows that many continued to give and to build for thoroughly un-­Augustinian
reasons. They offered their wealth as part of a vow. They wished to bring glory
to their local church as they had once brought glory to their city. They wished to
ensure that they and their family would not be forgotten. But, in the writings
and sermons of his old age, Augustine had caused the wind of Christian piety to
set in a distinctive direction. In later centuries, the joining of generosity to the
expiation of sin would become the prevailing breeze throughout the churches of
the West.
    Small details show this turning of the wind. Already in the late 430s, when
the fiery Salvian of Marseille looked back to the days of Paulinus of Nola, he
chose a verse that came from the poem Paulinus had asked Sulpicius Severus to
place under his own portrait, which Sulpicius had placed beside that of Saint
Martin in the church at Primuliacum. Martin was the saint and Paulinus was the
sinner. For Salvian, Paulinus was the right sort of sinner. He knew how to expiate
his sins by giving. He showed that it was possible “to redeem sins through scat-
tered coins.”36
    Altogether, what Augustine offered was an attitude by which wealth came to
be accepted on a “no questions asked” basis provided that much of it was spent
within the church to redeem sins. Many writers and preachers all over the Latin
world could have thought what Augustine thought. This is not surprising. Au-


                                        379
                                   chapter 23


gustine did not strive for novelty on the issue of wealth and expiation. In his
writings and sermons he had always been careful to stick close to the inherited
conglomerate of notions he shared with readers and hearers in both Africa and
elsewhere. But he had put all of this into memorable words. In certain circles,
these words remained. We may first meet Leo, the future bishop of Rome, as a
young acolyte who brought letters to Carthage in the summer of 418. A loyal
reader of the works of Augustine, Leo had no doubts on the issue of wealth.
When Leo became bishop of Rome in 440 and began to preach on wealth and
almsgiving, it was to Augustine that he turned:
   For even earthly and material riches come from His generosity. . . . For
   riches are good. They greatly add to the bonds of human society when
   owned by the benevolent and the generous. . . . Many use wealth, whether
   come by justly through inheritance, or gained in any other way, as an in-
   strument of piety.37
By this time, Augustine’s ideas had crossed the Mediterranean. No longer confined
to Africa, they were becoming part of the common sense of Latin Christianity.
How had this come about?


      “We groan in vain for those poor persons”: Bishops and Society
                    between Africa and Italy, 419–­28

For those of us who are used to conventional biographies of Augustine, which
stress the significance of his irrevocable return from Milan to Africa, it comes
as a surprise to learn that this was by no means what happened to his friends.
Between 419 and 428, Alypius, now a bishop in his seventies, along with other
colleagues, hovered for years on end around the imperial court. He did not do
this only to extort legislation against the Pelagians. He was charged with bring-
ing to the ears of an all-­too-­distant emperor repeated news of the social woes of
Africa.
    This fact had not been known until recently. In 1975 the Austrian scholar
Johannes Divjak discovered a hitherto unknown collection of letters from the
last decades of Augustine’s life. We have already seen what a rich store of infor-
mation these letters contained. They include both the full story of Antoninus,
bishop of Fussala, and the delightful letter Augustine wrote, in his very last years,
to Firmus of Carthage. But, most important of all, the Divjak Letters (as they are
usually called) have allowed us to witness a silent but decisive change in the pace
of the relations between a major provincial church (the church of Africa) and the
empire to which it was subject. Many of these letters were cast in the form of
commonitoria. They were drafted as memoranda that would serve as the basis for

                                        380
                   wealth, power, and the churches


pleading at the imperial court. They were drafts for the petitions Alypius and his
colleagues brought to the emperor and his advisors at Ravenna.38
    They were written so as to attract the attention of the emperor. For this rea-
son, they make alarming reading. They carried the voices of distant Christian
communities to governmental circles in Rome and Ravenna. They not only il-
lustrate the distance between Italy and Africa but reveal a more profound inner
distance. Though favored at Ravenna, the African bishops still faced an admin-
istration that was only nominally Christian. The Roman state had changed very
little. Its profane energy had in no way diminished, or become any gentler, since
the days of Ambrose.
    The Divjak Letters are full of complaints about the high-­handed manner in
which clerical privileges were brushed aside. Sanctuary in Christian churches did
little to protect fiscal debtors. A letter of Augustine to Alypius, in mid-­March
420, made plain that those who owed money for unpaid taxes were unceremo-
niously dragged out of the churches where they had sought refuge. Bishops and
their staff who resisted the tax officials were sued for obstructing “necessities of
state.” Those who could not seek sanctuary were pillaged: “We groan in vain for
those poor persons, to whom we can offer no help.”39
    In the same letter, Augustine also reminded Alypius to point out to the court
that fiscal oppression had sapped the clergy of Africa. Town councils and trade
associations found themselves too poor to allow any of their members to serve
in the church. The little groups that had been the pride of the cities were being
ground down by “the hard dealing of high up officials.”40 Augustine suggested
that defensores—­legal advocates authorized to challenge tax abuses—­should be
set up in Africa, as they had been set up in other provinces. Augustine recom-
mended that bishops suggest reliable laymen as candidates for this office.41
    In 428 Augustine forwarded yet more alarming news from Africa. Slave deal-
ers had invaded the province, raiding isolated villages in the hills behind Hippo.
They captured free Romans and sold them overseas. (They probably sold them
directly across the sea to the Italian owners of great estates, whose labor force had
been dislocated by the Gothic invasion and the sack of Rome.) Augustine added
that only a few of these captives had been legally sold to the dealers by their par-
ents. To sell one’s children in this way was a grim expedient usually connected
with times of famine. It was barely legal. As a bishop, Augustine was always anx-
ious to work within the limits of Roman law. He consulted a local lawyer on the
validity of such sales.42 Most of the victims, however, had been free Roman citi-
zens, snatched without even the formality of a legal sale. Alypius was urged to
search the archives of Rome for laws that could be applied to the slave dealers in
such cases. But most important of all, the emperor in Italy—­six hundred miles
away from Africa across a heaving sea—­must be made aware of “this evil of Af-
rica, the news of which, I cannot believe, is silent even where you are now.”43

                                        381
                                   chapter 23


   Ground down by illness and by the dogged defense of his own reputation
against Julian of Eclanum, the old rhetor took the time to sketch for Alypius the
former lawyer the phrases that might yet stir the court:
   Barbarians are resisted when the Roman army is in good condition for fear
   that Romans will be held in barbarian captivity. But who resists these trad-
   ers who are found everywhere, who traffic, not in animals but in human
   beings, not in barbarians but in Roman provincials? . . . Who will resist, in
   the name of Roman freedom—­I do not say the common freedom of the
   Roman state but of their very own selves?44
    Altogether, the Divjak Letters document a significant change in the “tone” of
Latin Christianity both inside and outside Africa. They reveal only too clearly
the limits of the possible for Christian bishops. They had to work in a society
where public life still bore a resolutely profane face. Even if the balance of privi-
lege might seem to have tilted toward the Catholic Church in the previous de-
cades, the balance of raw power had not done so. Taken with other evidence, the
Divjak Letters give no support to standard narratives of the triumphant rise of
Christianity in the Latin West. The Catholic Church did not come to replace the
failing empire in a smooth and uncontested transition. As we shall see in subse-
quent chapters, the Respublica—­the Roman state—­remained a profane institu-
tion whose sense of its own majesty and traditions of hard rule owed nothing to
Christianity. In the course of the fifth century, the Roman state handed over very
little to the bishops. Eventually the empire went down fighting beneath the un-
loving eyes of many Christians, who considered it an empire that had failed to
give effect to their own aspirations for a Christian society.
    Given their studiously alarmist tone, the Divjak Letters tend to be read as
texts that document a mounting and ineluctable crisis in African society. This
was not the case. There was hardly a single abuse mentioned in them that had not
already made its appearance at an earlier time. But one change had happened. In
the 420s the bishops had become more ambitious. They moved with greater ur-
gency (though not necessarily with greater success) into areas of taxation, slavery,
and sanctuary, which they had not entered previously.45 Over the decades, they
had come to sense their power as a pressure group. The imperial condemnation
of Pelagianism had been obtained through their skill in lobbying the court—­a
skill they had previously shown in the defeat of their Donatist rivals in Africa
after 411. But the laws against the Pelagians and the Donatists were only one side
of the coin. The other side was a growing confidence that bishops who arrived at
Ravenna faced an empire ruled by “Christian princes” where they could expect
that their views would be heard.
    This was the great mirage of the late 420s. The rhetoric of an empire ruled by
“Christian princes” grew in strength at this time. Signals from the court encour-

                                        382
                   wealth, power, and the churches


aged such a view. In 426 the great votive church of John the Evangelist was built
by the empress Galla Placidia in Ravenna. She did this so as to celebrate her re-
turn to power after a short-­lived civil war. The splendid new church (whose origi-
nal decoration, alas, no longer survives) was as much an extravagant display of
gratitude to God for His protection in a time of danger as was the shrine of Cim-
itile that had been erected by Paulinus of Nola thirty years earlier. But this was
no longer a personal ex-­voto. It was intended to be a statement of the union of
church and empire. It stood beside the palace. Its apse was ringed by portraits of
the imperial family since the days of Valentinian I, crowned by an image of Con-
stantine. Such a sight was calculated to cheer a bishop arriving with petitions
from the provinces.46
    But, as the Divjak Letters have shown, not all of these petitions were an-
swered. For the bishops were not the only pressure group at work at this time.
They had to compete with lay rivals—­with bureaucrats, landowners, and town
councillors. As a result, the administrative structure of the empire remained
opaque to Christianity. Bishops had no more direct control of the crucial busi-
ness of tax collection than they had enjoyed forty years previously, in the days of
Ambrose. They were still marginal to the workings of the Roman administrative
machine.
    This is demonstrated in small but revealing details. In a brilliant recent article,
Avshalom Laniado has shown that a law ascribed to the year 409, which ap-
peared to scholars to have given Italian bishops a place in the committee charged
to elect a defensor for their city, had been misdated. It had usually been dated to
409 and placed in Italy. But Laniado shows that it was, in fact, a law of the early
sixth century that had been wrongly dated in the Code of Justinian. This means
that scholars have projected backward, onto the western empire of the time of
Augustine, a role for the bishop that only emerged a century later and in the east-
ern (not the western) parts of the empire.47
    Laniado’s study is devoted to this one detail alone. But it brings a significant
adjustment to our perspective on the role of the church in society in the Latin
world. Though now ruled by ever more demonstratively Christian emperors, the
business of the Respublica remained largely closed to Christian bishops. In the
west there was as yet no regular machinery by which a bishop could take part
in the affairs of his city as a peer and colleague of the traditional civic elites. In
the very last days of Augustine’s life, we are still looking at a compartmentalized
society. The Christian church remained pinned into a niche of its own in late
Roman society. It was kept there by the sheer weight of a profane Roman state
and by the robustly secular attitudes of those who ran it.
    This was a situation that most persons who had grown up in the second half
of the fourth century took for granted (Augustine and Alypius among them).
The Christian bishops still had less impact than they might have wished on the

                                         383
                                 chapter 23


public life of the empire. But, at the time, this shortfall of Christian influence
in crucial matters such as taxation and sanctuary was accepted as the price the
churches were prepared to pay for enjoying the overall protection and privileges
provided by a seemingly solid empire.
    However, this situation would not last forever. The fifth century would prove
to be a time of unpleasant surprises, the most unpleasant of which was the real-
ization that the empire itself was far from solid. Starting around 405–­6, the
weakness of the empire was revealed ever more clearly, decade by decade. Within
a few decades, even Africa was involved in the common disaster. In the very last
year of Augustine’s life, in 429, a Vandal army suddenly appeared before the walls
of Hippo, having crossed the straits of Gibraltar and swept unopposed and
largely unobserved for nine hundred miles through western north Africa. A de-
cade later, in 439 (nine years after the death of Augustine in 430), the unthink-
able happened. Carthage fell to the Vandals. In the words of Quodvultdeus, the
successor of Aurelius as bishop of Carthage, it was the end of an age: “Where is
Africa, which was for the whole world a garden of delights?”48
    It is time to turn away from Africa to consider the crisis of empire that had
already engulfed the provinces of the northern Mediterranean. In order to do
this, we must return to Gaul around the year 400.




                                       384
                           Chapter 24
                           •••••
       “Still at That Time a More Affluent Empire”
       The Crisis of the West in the Fifth Century




            The Iron and the Clay: Civil War and the “Barbarian
                            Invasions,” 405–­39

This chapter will deal with the general crisis of the western empire throughout
the fifth century ad. It will describe the onset of the crisis that reduced the em-
pire, within a generation, to a shell of its former self. It will then linger on the
adjustments the wealthy of the provinces most affected by this crisis were forced
to make (and the opportunities many of them seized) in an increasingly region-
alized world. It will end by pointing to the survival of the empire in some of these
regions and to the loyalty it could still inspire in many figures before the empire
itself vanished from the West, leaving some of its most vocal supporters in a frag-
mented world deprived, for the first time in half a millennium, of an imperial core.
    The chapters that follow this one will be devoted less to the end of an empire
than to the end of an age of Latin Christianity. They will introduce the reader
to landscapes that remained in imperial hands throughout most of the fifth cen-
tury. They will describe the brilliant and controversial circles associated with
Marseilles and with the island of Lérins in Provence; the fiery tracts of Salvian of
Marseilles; the Rome of the Senate and the popes; and the countryside of south-
ern Italy. The last two chapters (chapter 28) of this book will view the West as a
whole in an age without empire. They will sketch the emergence of a new Chris-
tianity. The first of these two chapters will describe the manner in which the
Christian churches became aware of their own, great wealth and the steps they
took to protect and display it. The last chapter (chapter 29) will survey the Latin
Christian world of the sixth century. It will trace the manner in which the weight
of wealth, in the hands of new donors of a post-­imperial age, caused Christianity
itself to take on a new and sharper profile, very different from the religion we first
met two centuries before in the hesitant days around 350.

                                         385
                                  chapter 24




                      Map 4. The Crisis of Empire, ca. 450 ad


   But now let us turn to the beginning of the crisis from which all this derived.
We must do so by returning to Gaul. In the middle of the fourth century, a trav-
eler from the East (who was probably a Syrian) wrote of Gaul: “It is a very great
province, and for that reason always needs to have an emperor present. It pro-
duces an emperor of its own.”1
   This seemingly naïve description was doubly accurate. A strong emperor was
needed in Gaul in order to keep watch over the Rhine from Trier. When such an
emperor was lacking, the local armies instantly proclaimed a usurper, so as to fill
the threatening vacuum of power. The absence of an emperor was a signal for
usurpation and civil war. This had already happened twice in the first part of the

                                       386
                           the crisis of the west


fourth century. By contrast, the reign of Valentinian I at Trier, from 364 to 375,
had been a moment of peace and prosperity. The steady flow of goods and taxes
to Trier fostered the affluence of the villa owners of southern Britain, Gaul, and
Spain known to us through archaeology and through the works of Ausonius,
whom we met in chapter 12.
   After the death of Valentinian I, Gaul began to feel again the chill of imperial
absence. The center of gravity of the Roman world swung south and east—­
toward northern Italy, the Balkans, and Constantinople. Once again, emperors
were proclaimed in Gaul. Each was committed to defending his title by engaging
in an empire-­wide civil war. Twice in six years (with Maximus, in 388, and again
with Eugenius, in 394) emperors from Gaul found themselves forced to strip the
garrisons of Britain and the Rhine in order to wage war in Italy. These troops
were fed into the meat grinder of major battles with fellow Romans—­the eastern
armies of the emperor Theodosius I (379–­95). Only a skeleton force of profes-
sional troops remained along the northwestern frontiers of the empire. The pro-
vincials held their breath.2
   One such provincial was Sulpicius Severus (whom we have met as the friend
of Paulinus of Nola and the author of the Life of Saint Martin). In around 400–­
404 he finished a world chronicle in the quiet of his villa at Primuliacum, be-
tween Toulouse and Narbonne. He viewed his times with alarm. He wrote that
the Roman empire was “once the strongest of all empires.” But now it was the
weakest. Like the great statue in the Book of Daniel, it was an empire with feet of
clay. It was doomed to disintegration.
   For it is not ruled by any one, single emperor, but by many emperors, who
   are always divided by military confrontations and by conflicts of basic
   interests . . . while the soil of the Roman empire has been occupied by for-
   eign or rebellious nations. . . . in such a way that barbarian tribes have come
   to be mixed up with us [like fissile clay inserted into the iron of a Roman
   order] in our armies, in our cities and throughout our provinces.3
    In 405 Sulpicius was proved right. Civil war mixed with the “clay” of ill-­
absorbed barbarians (who were used in lieu of regular troops by contending
Roman emperors) created the perfect storm. It raged for a generation through-
out Britain, Gaul, Spain, and Africa. Sulpicius himself survived. But he and those
like him emerged to find themselves in a world from which their leisured way
of life (the product of strong rule and of an aggressive fiscal system) had vanished
for good.
    The story of this perfect storm can be told briefly.
    On December 31, 405, a large confederacy of barbarian groups—­Vandals,
Sueves, and Alans, drawn originally from the middle Danube (and with little pre-
vious contact with Roman populations)—­crossed the Rhine near Mainz. They

                                        387
                                 chapter 24


came to plunder and (for all we know) to seek employment.4 The armies of Brit-
ain created an emperor to deal with them—­Constantine III. Constantine pinned
the barbarians down in northern Gaul. His main concern, however, was to estab-
lish himself as the rightful emperor of the West. In 407 he moved quickly south
(as the emperor Maximus had done, for the same reason, twenty years earlier) so
as to invade Italy. In the next year, the murderous confederacy from across the
Rhine reappeared in Aquitaine, the richest region of Gaul, already known to us
as the homeland of Ausonius, Paulinus of Nola, and Sulpicius Severus. A tsu-
nami of violence swept over southern Gaul. The barbarians had found their way
into “the very bowels of the Roman empire.”5
    But the barbarians had not fought their way to the south. They were there
because Constantine III needed them. He had discreetly relocated them from
the north to southern Gaul so as to use their violence in his civil war. Like any
other desperate army at a time of civil war (Roman troops included), they were
paid for their services by license to plunder.6
    In October 409, the same groups crossed the passes of the Pyrenees into
Spain. Again, they had not moved of their own accord. They had been invited by
yet another usurper, now set up in Saragossa. Vandals, Alans, and Sueves fanned
out across the wide spaces of the Iberian peninsula. They looted the country-
side and shook down cities. These depredations are usually referred to, somewhat
dramatically, as the “barbarian invasions.” They were no such thing. They were
“collateral damage” brought upon the provinces by contending emperors. The va-
garies of civil war, and not any headlong momentum of “invasion” on their part,
accounted for the movements of barbarian groups at this time.7
    Many “barbarians” were little more than freelance pillagers and highwaymen,
such as had always appeared in the Roman provinces in times of disorder. They
were like the gangs of slave traders who had raided the mountain districts around
Hippo in these same years. Outside Tarragona, for instance, one band of “bar-
barians” robbed a priest of the case of books that he was carrying and then took
them to the nearest town (Lérida) to see if they could find a purchaser!8 These
random gangs were troublesome, but they were hardly the bloodthirsty caval-
cades that we imagine when we speak of “barbarian invasion.” Archaeological
surveys of the area around Tarragona show that throughout this period of up-
heaval, the countryside remained populous and productive.9
    But the more usurpers there were, the more conglomerations of barbarian
military manpower converged to offer their services. The confederacy of the
Vandals, Alans, and Sueves that had come down from the north was soon met
by another barbarian group, which had come up from the south. Having sacked
Rome in 410, the Goths moved out of Italy into southern Gaul. They also
claimed to come as the servants of emperors. They supported a usurper of their
own for a few years. Then they allied themselves with the “legitimate” emperors

                                      388
                           the crisis of the west


of Ravenna. Moving into Spain, their superior numbers enabled them to wipe
out most of the Alans and an entire subtribe of the Vandals. In 418 they were
rewarded by being settled in Aquitaine. This was, in many ways, a state-­sponsored
land grab. Direct access to landed estates (and, perhaps, some scholars speculate,
to tax revenues) was the most acceptable form of all of the license to pillage that
had been extended by rival emperors to other barbarian militias in lieu of pay.10
The settlement of the Visigoths in Aquitaine was their bonus for having partici-
pated on the right side in a decade of civil war.
    A state of imminent civil war also provided the background to the most ex-
traordinary exploit of all of this time. In 429 the Vandals of King Genseric crossed
from southern Spain into north Africa. (This was in the last year of Augustine’s
life.) Boniface, the Count of Africa (the commander of the only Roman forces in
the province), had been a correspondent of Augustine. In 429 he was engaged in
a confrontation with rivals across the sea in Italy. With his back turned on the
hinterland of Africa, he was taken totally by surprise when the Vandals suddenly
emerged from the west. Again, in September 439, Genseric took Carthage at a
time when the relief of the city had been held back because of divisions at the
court of Ravenna.11 Altogether, it was civil war—­and no bloodthirsty drive of
their own—­that had moved barbarian militias from one end of the Roman West
to the other in under a generation.
    The loss of Africa marked the end of an era. Civil war waged by novel means—­
that is, through the use of barbarian militias—­had destabilized the provinces of
Britain, Spain, and Gaul. But the Vandal conquest of Carthage did more than
this. It broke the “tax spine” of the western empire.12 In the words of Jill Harries:
“The battle for Gaul [and, one might add, for Britain and Spain] had been lost
in Africa.”13
    Already in the 430s, articulate contemporaries knew that they lived in a gen-
eration that had seen the end of a belle époque. When, in 431, the emperor Valen-
tinian III chose to please the Senate of Rome by honoring a Roman worthy of
the age of Symmachus—­the great pagan, Nicomachus Flavianus, who had died
in 394—­there was an element of a nostalgia trip about the gesture. The long in-
scription that was placed on the base of the statue of Flavianus in the Forum of
Trajan emphasized the manner in which he had used his high offices to preserve
and increase “the wealth of what was still at that time [adhuc] a more affluent
Empire [Respublica].”14
    By 431 the tax revenues of the empire had probably dropped by 50 percent.
After the loss of Carthage, they dropped further. The Respublica was left with a
quarter of the resources it had enjoyed under the emperor Valentinian I. The
empire had suffered a dramatic loss of revenue. More serious still, what had been
crippled was the motor force of hard government from on top, which had enabled
wealth accumulated through taxes to be turned into seemingly unchallengeable

                                        389
                                   chapter 24


social hierarchies by the wealthy in the glory days of the fourth-­century age of
gold. The great machine that had made the rich so very rich had stalled.


                Indigne invidioseque: Improperly and spitefully

           Factionalism and Impoverishment: The Case
                  of Paulinus of Pella, 376–­4 59

It is easier to describe the stages of this debacle than to say what exactly had hap-
pened to west Roman society in these crucial thirty years. Here the sources do not
help us. When they looked back from mid-­century, vocal Roman writers tended
to blame everything on the barbarians. In 452 a chronicler wrote in the Mediter-
ranean city of Marseille that, after 405–­6, “the madness of hostile peoples tore all
Gaul to pieces.”15 Given the inherited prejudices of all educated Romans against
barbarians, and given the behavior of the armed bands who had been granted
license to pillage the civilian population by warring Roman emperors, this melo-
dramatic view is not surprising. It has always proved easy to string together a se-
ries of blood-­curdling quotations from contemporary authors who described the
hardships suffered by the Roman population at this time.16
    But this catalogue of woes is essentially superficial. It does not, in itself, ex-
plain the profound changes in Roman provincial society itself that set in around
the 410s and had become irreversible over much of the West by 450. What we
call the “barbarian invasions” are better seen as the jets of water that suddenly
announce the breaking of a dam. The real collapse of the dam came from within.
The “clay” of barbarian military groups established on Roman territory acted
as the catalyst for an abrupt reshuffling of social hierarchies among the Romans
themselves. We are dealing with a social edifice which, even in its glory days, had
been capable of changing at a touch. It is the edifice, and not the barbarians who
touched it, that deserves our attention.
    First of all, we should never underestimate the factionalism of the Roman
provincial elites when faced with a situation of civil war. When civil war was
mixed with the dangerous “clay” of barbarian bands, the local elites were far from
being content to remain the passive victims of barbarian violence. They pitched
in with gusto to despoil each other. We can see this in the case of the author of an
autobiographical poem, Paulinus of Pella.17 Paulinus was the grandson (through
his mother) of none other than Ausonius of Bordeaux. He had been born at
Pella in northern Greece in 376, where his father had held a governmental post
that had been secured for him by Ausonius in the heyday of his influence at the
court of Trier in the 370s. Paulinus was an “empire brat.” As a baby, he had been
in Carthage, where his father was proconsul. He had passed through Rome. On

                                         390
                          the crisis of the west


his return to Bordeaux, he inherited a palace and set to work improving his wife’s
properties in Aquitaine.
   This all happened before 405. Paulinus looked back to those “days of old-­
world peace” with calculated nostalgia.18 Seldom do we see so clearly an author
creating for himself the gilded image of an ancien régime. In those happy days, he
had hunted with his father. He had begotten children with his slaves. (Never, he
assures us, had he raped a woman nor had he accepted the favors of a freeborn
girl.)19 In describing his lifestyle at that time, Paulinus made his own the cramp-
ing coyness of his grandfather Ausonius.
   This was what suited my status as one who looked for moderate satisfac-
   tions, delightful but far removed from self-­display: A house equipped
   with spacious rooms, each suited to a different season of the year. A rich
   and attractive table, many servants, and young men at that . . . silver plate
   distinguished for its refinement, not for its mere mass. Workmen skilled in
   various crafts to meet my commissions. Stables filled with well-­conditioned
   beasts and coaches to carry me around safely and in style. But I was less
   concerned to expand these things than to preserve them. I was not exces-
   sively anxious to increase my revenue nor to seek out high office.20
    But, for Paulinus as for so many other Roman provincials, the villa owner’s
ideal of a restrained life on the land, uninvolved in politics, was somewhat of a
pose. The moment the chance of imperial office came his way, Paulinus (like the
old Ausonius at the court of Trier) jumped at it. He found an emperor on his
doorstep. The emperor Attalus had been set up in 414 by the Visigoths in south-
ern France. Paulinus rallied to Attalus, who made him Count of the Sacred Lar-
gesses. This post involved Paulinus in the ugly business of handling the proper-
ties of proscribed persons. In times of civil war, business was more than usually
brisk in that department.21
    Unfortunately, Attalus was no Valentinian I. He was bankrupt. Short of pay,
angry Visigoths burned Paulinus’s palace in Bordeaux. Paulinus wrote so vividly
of this burning that a reader might be expected to believe that all of Bordeaux
had been set on fire by the barbarians. This was not the case. We are not dealing
with widespread destruction. Rather, what Paulinus of Pella described was a
thoroughly Roman event—­the torching of the house of an unpopular official.
(The house of Symmachus’s father had suffered the same fate in Rome forty years
previously.)22
    In the long run, Paulinus’s luck ran out. He ended his life as a poor man,
partly dependent on the charity of the church of Marseilles. His plot of only four
iugera, perched on the rocks outside Marseilles (even when it went with a town
house and was supplemented by ingenious rental arrangements), compared badly
with the 1,050 iugera of his grandfather Ausonius’s “little inheritance” outside

                                       391
                                  chapter 24


Bazas.23 But, if Paulinus was impoverished, it was not because of the passing of
the barbarians through Aquitaine. It was because of the factional violence among
Romans themselves in a time of civil strife. In 388 his namesake, Paulinus of Nola
(who had been a friend of Ausonius), had almost lost his own life and property
in a similar situation when he was caught in the backlash of the civil war that
followed the usurpation of Maximus. A civil war had always been a time of mas-
sive confiscations and for the settling of scores between local notables. In the
studiously bland language of an imperial law issued in 416, Paulinus of Pella’s
progressive expropriation had been just one of those things that happened in­
digne invidioseque—­“improperly and spitefully”—­in times of civil strife.24


                Local Romanness against Central Romanness

Paulinus’s account of his career is so vivid that we forget when it was written and
for what purpose. It took the form of a poem titled Thanksgiving to God the old
man wrote at the formidable age of eighty-­four in 459. It was written to thank
God for having enabled him, Paulinus, to establish good relations with the court
of the Gothic king now established in his former home city of Bordeaux. Pauli-
nus’s sons had previously returned to Bordeaux: “Both were fired with the desire
for freedom which they thought they could find in greater measure at Bordeaux,
albeit in collaboration with the settled Goths.”25
    One of Paulinus’s sons was no more successful as a politician than his father
had been. The Gothic court was not an easy place. “Tossed between the good
friendship and the anger of the king,” he had been as thoroughly despoiled as his
father had been. But this was not done by the Goths. It was done by his fellow
Romans.26 Yet it had not been for lack of trying. Romans quickly learned that
they could make their fortunes at barbarian courts in the fifth century (if on a
smaller scale) much as they had done at the court of emperors in the fourth cen-
tury: “For we know of many who have flourished through the favor of the
Goths.”27 Ultimately, it was the development of barbarian courts (such as the
Gothic court first at Bordeaux and then at Toulouse) to which enterprising young
Romans might turn—­and not the colorful rampages of the first decade of the
barbarian invasions—­that sealed the fate of an imperial order in the West.
    What needs to be explained, therefore, is the relative ease with which, already
by the late 450s, local barbarian strongmen (such as the Goths at Bordeaux) had
come to use their armies to create alternative power structures to those of the
empire. It is the digging in of the barbarians—­and not their first (imagined)
head­long progress through “the very bowels” of the empire—­that poses the real
problem to historians of the Roman West in its last century. With remarkable
speed, local power blocs appeared. In each, a royal court emerged as a center of

                                       392
                           the crisis of the west


patronage and government. Not all of these power blocs were set up by barbar-
ians. Some were ruled by self-­consciously “Roman” figures—­such as emerged in
northern Gaul and, perhaps, among the competing tribal regions in Britain.28
But they were all disturbingly isomorphic, on a smaller scale, to the Respublica—­
the legitimate Roman empire. It was the creation of these alternatives to empire
that changed the rules of the game by which the wealthy became wealthy in a
new age.
    How did this happen? The answer lies, perhaps, in the strong regionalism of the
provinces of Gaul and Spain—­and even more so of Britain, where pre-­Roman
tribal identities may have reemerged. Local nobilities had always drawn their
wealth from relatively small catchment areas. Their ambitions had tended to cen-
ter on their province alone. This regionalism reached back to the very beginning
of the empire. The Roman empire in the West had always been a federation of
regions. The appearance of the barbarians dislocated the mechanisms by which
this federation had been held together for so many centuries. In the words of
Guy Halsall, “The key factor in the break-­up of the Empire was the exposure of a
critical fault line between the imperial government and the interests of the re-
gional elites.”29
    In many ways, the fourth-­century age of gold had been unusual. An active impe-
rial court had created a service aristocracy that was more fluid and more tied to the
imperial center than had ever been the case previously. As we saw, the world of
Ausonius was not a world of self-­contained owners of latifundia who were able
to “sit out” periods of civil disorder. It was a world of courtiers and of courtiers
manqués. Even on the wide plateau of Spain, the basis of the wealth of those who
owned the great villas of the fourth century came from their implication in a
network of imperial tax collection. An aristocracy created, to a greater extent than
ever previously in Roman history, by close involvement with state power was
bound to change when this state power changed—­when it weakened, when it
withdrew, and, above all, when it was replaced by other, more local power blocs.
    What the relatively small armies of the Goths, Sueves, and Vandals (and later
the Franks and the Burgundians) offered to the regional elites was what the sons
of Paulinus of Pella sought at the Gothic court in Bordeaux—­a return to wealth
through service at a center of state power. But this time it was a local center.
In effect, barbarian kings and their armed retinues offered the regional elites a
Rome at home. These little Romes were largely run by local Romans. They drew
to themselves courtiers and litigants from the region. They proved more acces-
sible as a source of justice and wealth than was the increasingly impoverished
Respublica—­the legitimate empire that now ruled Gaul from a distance, across
the Alps in Ravenna and Rome.
    We are dealing with a powerful reversal of the mechanisms set in place in the
West under Constantine and his successors. In the fourth century, the presence

                                        393
                                  chapter 24


of an imperial court in the West had enabled the wealthy to partake in ever wider
pyramids of influence. They held office throughout the empire. They owned land
in many provinces. In the fifth century, the emergence of local courts worked in
the opposite direction. In many parts of Gaul, Spain, and Africa, late Roman
society was miniaturized. Regional elites dug themselves in around local centers
of military power. They did so in a world whose horizons had shrunk and where
the opportunities for widespread enrichment (even in the service of an active
barbarian king) had, with very few exceptions, closed down to the level of a sin-
gle region.
    Reviewing the history of the fifth-­century West, Peter Heather has described
the process of the fall of the Roman empire in terms similar to those of Halsall.
The end of the empire was the story of the “destruction of central Romanness.”
But what replaced this “central Romanness” was not barbarism but forms of
“local Romanness”—­a social order that had grown from the ground up as the
Roman regional elites opted for local leaders, local armies, and local systems of
patronage, all of which were offered by barbarian kings and their followers.30


                 Tuitio . . . communis: A common refuge to all

           Violence and Society in the Fifth Century

What was it like to be a “local Roman” at this time? It is important to redress the
anti-­barbarian bias of our texts by emphasizing the Roman side of the equation—­
the violence of Romans to each other and the zest with which the Roman re-
gional elites of the former imperial West collaborated with barbarian warlords to
create for themselves new centers of government. But this process did not bring
peace. The creation of rival courts around rival leaders led to a state of unresolved
political instability in Gaul and Spain. A climate of violence spread across Gaul
and Spain in the course of the fifth century.
    This climate of violence, rather than any notable slaughter or the sack of any
large cities, was what slowly but surely changed the face of Roman society. The
last true “barbarian invasion” happened in 451, when the armies of Attila the
Hun entered Gaul only to be defeated in a major battle at the Catalaunian Fields
(near Chalons) by Count Aetius, who led an alliance of the Roman and the Visi­
gothic armies against the Huns. After that last great war, Gallic society was left
to grind itself into a new shape in what the French historian Fernand Braudel
(speaking of a similar phenomenon—­the rise of piracy in the early modern Med-
iterranean) has called “an age of undeclared wars.”31 How had this situation come
about and what were its effects?


                                        394
                          the crisis of the west


    In negotiating with barbarians in the early decades of the fifth century, Romans
flattered themselves that the barbarians could be treated as farmers manqués—­
they could be quieted by gifts of land. This calculation ignored many factors.
Young warriors liked to fight. Kings needed to fight so as to maintain their pres-
tige against competing brothers and aristocrats. All needed the wealth that came
from war. And this wealth was best obtained through little wars. The goal of most
of these wars was not extensive conquest. The Visigoths of Aquitaine (about
whom we know most) regularly went on campaign for strictly limited aims—­to
assert control of a neighboring region here, to shake down or to occupy a single
city there. For this reason, the Visigothic campaigns (like those of the Sueves
who had established themselves in northwestern Spain) were largely wars of nerves.
A campaign up to the walls of a city would end with the systematic pillage of the
rich countryside around it. This was how the Visigoths set to work outside Bazas
(the former hometown of Ausonius) in 414:
   The enemies ravaged the villages [or villas] all around. They set fire to farm
   buildings. They ruined vineyards and grain fields by driving livestock into
   them.32
    This carefully administered violence to the land was calculated to cause the
inhabitants of a region or a city to reconsider their loyalties. They would open
their gates or would offer to buy off the invaders. There was usually a faction
within the city that favored such a course. In 453 a church council in Angers laid
down that a cleric who had played a role in betraying his city to the enemy was to
be not only excommunicated but barred from public banquets. This was the ul-
timate ostracism, imposed by a little community in a time of little wars.33 But it
also showed that there were always people ready to collaborate with barbarians
for the sake of peace and quiet.
    Wealth came from plunder and, above all, from a lively slave trade.34 The
terrible scenes Augustine had portrayed in Africa, in the late 420s, became nor-
mal in the Gaul and Spain of the later fifth century. Not all captives ended up as
slaves in distant lands. Rather, the culmination of a successful little war con-
sisted in selling back to a pillaged region its own inhabitants. As a result, the
Christian pious act of ransoming captives came, in Gaul, to be more than a ges-
ture of sending contributions to a distant frontier, as had been the case in the
fourth century. It became an intensely local matter. It involved the healing of
the social fabric of an entire war-­torn region through the return of its workforce.
Christian charity ensured that farmers and slaves were brought back to their for-
mer masters.35
    Looking down from northern Britain, Patricius (our Saint Patrick, who had
already served his time as a slave in Ireland) saw Gaul as a land of ransoms:


                                        395
                                   chapter 24


   It is the custom of the Roman Gallic Christians to send suitable holy per-
   sons to the Franks and to other tribes with so many thousands of solidi so
   as to ransom baptized captives.36
It was through ransoms, rather than through any other pious actions, that the
wealth of the wealthy was deployed in the churches in this time of brutal little
wars. For ransoms implied liquidity. Large sums of cash or bullion had to be
made immediately available in a way that was beyond the means of the more
modest members of the local congregations. Hence the praise of the lady Euge-
nia on her sarcophagus in Marseille: “With her wealth she freed captives from
the chains imposed by violence and brought those driven away back to their
lands.”37
   One suspects that it was the spoils of little wars and money raised from ran-
soms that account for the fact that the Visigothic territories along the Garonne
valley, from Toulouse to Bordeaux, remained an oasis of prosperity. It is only in
this region that villas appear to have survived. They were paved no longer with
haunting scenes of pagan mythology but with exuberant designs of flowers and
vegetation. These patterns were well within the powers of local craftsmen, who
reproduced them with unusual zest. The “Aquitainian sarcophagi,” though noto-
riously difficult to date, may well have come from this period. Carved in stone
from local quarries, they signaled the emergence of a distinctive local form of
prestige goods. They were adapted to family mausolea and to displays of upper-­
class burial around the tombs of saints. They no longer looked to the great mar-
ble sarcophagi of Rome for inspiration. It was an art of local Romans for local
Romans. They may serve as a reminder that a province such as Aquitaine could be
both prosperous and already “post-­Roman” (by fourth-­century standards) under
barbarian management.38
   At the same time, the Christianity of Gaul changed its texture as a response to
the new levels of instability. It is not as surprising as it seems that the age of the
barbarian invasions of Gaul coincided with a golden age of church building. As
we will see in a subsequent chapter, these new cathedrals were directly linked to
the need to maintain the morale of the inhabitants of the cities in a world where
they were often called upon to withstand sieges.39 Within these cathedrals Chris-
tian preaching came to emphasize, above all, the value of cohesion.
   It was pride and envy, not wealth, that were most abhorrent to Gallic preach-
ers in this period. There was good reason for their emphasis on those two vices.
In the unstable conditions of Gaul, pride and envy translated only too readily
into factionalism. And factionalism, as we have seen, was what exposed Romans
to each other quite as much as it exposed them to the barbarians. Let us take the
example of a set of anonymous sermons known as the sermon collection of “Eu-
sebius Gallicanus,” which have recently been studied in detail by Lisa Bailey. They


                                        396
                           the crisis of the west


were preached in the Rhone valley at the end of the fifth century. It is no coinci-
dence that they should have emphasized a need for solidarity among ordinary
Christians that was as exacting as any imposed on monks. The inhabitants of
little cities facing the prospect of siege were as cramped and as dependent upon
each other as were the monks in any monastery.40
    One preacher of the mid-­fifth century, Valerianus of Cimiez (a hill town
perched above the Roman road that passed Nice), went out of his way to control
even sarcasm and witticisms among his flock. It was unwise to make jokes about
the physical traits of one’s fellow citizens—­to call a man of swarthy complexion
“Mr. Silver Shine” or an elder compatriot “baba.”41 Revenge for such a slight
might take the form of treason. Looking back from a later time, the inhabitants
of Trier believed that their city had once been betrayed to the barbarians and
sacked because of the anger of a leading citizen who had been provoked by a
coarse joke at the expense of his wife.42
    Christian sources provide vivid and uniformly self-­congratulatory evidence
for the role of the church in maintaining the morale of the cities of Gaul in this
time. Christian hagiography presents us with images of heroic bishops standing
on the walls of their cities and of great Christian basilicas filled with refugees in
search of sanctuary. But these incidents were exaggerated in retrospect. There
was only so much that the Christian churches could do. Laypersons (and espe-
cially the wealthy, who owned properties outside the cities) had to fend for them-
selves. Many did this none too badly. But it is harder to follow what they did in
the face of crisis. Only by using archaeology as well as written sources can we
reconstruct something of what was happening.
    In the first place, the landowners had to act quickly if they were to preserve
their properties. They had to become more resolutely local than they had been in
the fourth century. What was needed now were not large incomes, gathered
from many regions, but power on the spot. The great age of absentee landowner-
ship ended. Paulinus of Pella simply gave up all hope of gaining revenues from
his mother’s estates in distant Greece:
   For there were extensive farms, well-­stocked with numerous peasants, scat-
   tered but not too widely separated, which even for a prodigal or careless
   lord might have provided an abundant income.43
Paulinus’s failure to draw on these distant lands marked the beginning of his
decline into poverty. As a contemporary writer in Provence observed:
   Men rendered conspicuous by official honors, placed at the top of the em-
   pire by occupying high posts, with revenues drawn from everywhere and
   properties that stretched throughout the Roman world . . . now appear to
   us figures in a fairytale.44


                                        397
                                  chapter 24


The world of the super-­rich, associated with persons such as Petronius Probus,
had well and truly passed.
    But we must remember that in Gaul and Spain there had been few such per-
sons, even at the height of the age of gold.45 As we saw, the rural landscape of
these provinces had not been dominated by the vast estates of absentee land-
owners or even by latifundia owned by local figures. It was largely owned by
competing petty noblemen, whose villas clustered around the towns. They were
comfortable but not outstandingly wealthy. Modern archaeological surveys have
enabled us to measure the horizons of the possible for such persons. To take one
example: careful excavations of the rubbish tip of Quinta das Longas (in Lusita-
nia; now in Elvas, in southeastern Portugal) have shown that it was possible to
have an elegant, even a recherché villa and yet to eat on dishes produced by re-
gional potteries.46
    In the fourth century, the owners of a villa such as Quinta das Longas were
representatives of the local elites. They were the little big men whom we met in
chapter 1. We have attempted to glimpse their features (alas, not always success-
fully, given the state of our evidence) beneath the glare of publicity generated by
the Christian members of the super-­rich, such as Paulinus of Nola and the two
Melanias. For such petty noblemen, the fifth century was not necessarily an age
of catastrophe. It opened up new opportunities for them. In many regions, they
found themselves no longer overshadowed by grandees connected with an empire-­
wide system. Service at a barbarian court gave them a degree of local power they
had not enjoyed previously to such an extent. The fifth century was the age of the
little big man.
    But this process happened at a cost to both their standard of living and, to a
certain degree, their Romanness. It is remarkable how quickly the villas built or
rebuilt in the fourth century disappear from the archaeological record in the
course of the fifth century. As we have seen, in many regions villas had shown most
clearly the footprint of wealth in the countryside. With the “end of the villas” it
is as if the wealth of an entire class has vanished from our radar screen.47 Although
it may have been accumulated with more difficulty and on a less massive scale,
wealth had not vanished. But it had lost its clearly recognizable Roman face. No
one attempted to shine in fifth-­century Gaul and Spain through building a villa.
Service at the barbarian court, the maintenance of a townhouse in cities such as
Mérida, Toulouse, and Bordeaux, and a reliable retinue were what was needed.
With this went a slow but sure change in lifestyle. In a less secure age, skills de-
veloped in hunting changed easily into skills of cavalry warfare. Armed retinues,
both for self-­protection and to assert equality with barbarian kings and their army,
cost local Romans as much as mosaics and private bathhouses had once done.48
    In many regions distant from the centers of power a prestige-­full burial seems
to have replaced the villa as the way in which wealth was put on show. Both in

                                        398
                          the crisis of the west


northern Gaul and in the Duero valley, burials with grave goods, which scholars
had once associated only with Germanic barbarians, have been shown to be the
work of Romans. On such occasions, the members of the local elite were put on
display throughout their funeral. They lay on their biers adorned with status sym-
bols that still carried echoes of an earlier, more affluent age—­military brooches
and buckles in northern Gaul, hunting equipment and horse harnesses in Spain.
The dominus might still wish to be seen as a great hunter. But this dominance
was no longer expressed through great mosaics and sarcophagi, which had shown
him as the mythological lord of the hunt in fourth-­century Spain, in southern
Gaul, and in southern Britain. A graveside ceremony was enough. The rest of the
income of a local big man may have been spent on warfare and on building up
supporters through gifts and feasting.49 Altogether, we now face a world where it
is harder to distinguish rich from poor in the archaeological record. For in many
regions of the West the rich had lost the strident attributes of wealth that had
rendered them so gloriously visible in the fourth century.50
    Those who wished to remain rich knew that their first priority had not changed
since imperial times. They had to control their labor force. This had always been
difficult in times of violence. We can only guess at the scenarios of retrenchment
and control that were adopted. Recent archaeological surveys have offered scat-
tered hints of what may have happened on the ground. The region outside Béziers,
for instance, shows a marked falloff of dispersed settlements and the emergence
of a few, large conglomerations in the course of the fifth century.51
    Some landowners went so far as to offer fortifications to their peasantry. Dar-
danus, the former Prefect of Gaul, opened up the road to the upland valleys east
of Sisteron in the Alpes Maritimes. He and his brother left a public inscription
beside the road to proclaim their feat. The model village (as we saw in the last
chapter) was even called Theopolis (City of God)—­Dardanus had placed it under
the protection of God: “They furnished walls and gates, which, established on
their own estate, they wished to serve as a common refuge to all.”52 A ruthless
and unpopular servant of the Roman state, Dardanus had every reason to wish
to feel safe. But the language of the inscription makes plain that this was no pri-
vate castle in the making. Dardanus’s fortification of Theopolis was presented as
an act of loyalty to the empire. The walls had been put up for the public good. In
doing this, Dardanus used a language of public building which, up till then, had
been more common in the forum of a city. Now Dardanus was prepared to set up
a grand inscription that advertised his care for mere villagers.53
    Dardanus knew that if he had not provided this fortification, the inhabitants
of a rich upland valley might have scattered farther into the hills. Their labor
would have become lost to him and his heirs within a generation. A recent sur-
vey in Spain enables us to trace this danger as it emerged on the ground. The
survey studied the plain of the Jarama and the plateau land between Toledo and

                                       399
                                   chapter 24


Madrid. There is no evidence of depopulation or of destruction in this area.
Rather, what we see is what in the long term would have spelled the ruin of a
landowner of late Roman style: a population that had once been held in place
through a network of villas, which in turn had linked them to the city and its tax
collectors, slowly but surely scattered into informal groupings of low-­profile farms
and villages. The villages remained stratified. These were no happy communes
of equals freed from the burden of rents and taxes. But the old mechanisms of
extracting these rents and taxes had unraveled. Once the farms and villages had
broken loose from the tight net spread by the villa, it was next to impossible to
extract from them the high level of wealth that had supported the affluent resi-
dences of the fourth-­century age of gold.54


    New Romans for Old: From the Bacaudae to Sidonius Apollinaris,
                          430–­ca. 480–­90

Altogether, by the mid-­fifth century we are looking out on a new West. Beyond
the Alps, Gaul and Spain had broken up into a mosaic of differing regions. The
Respublica still survived; impoverished though it was, it remained the largest
single political unit in Europe. It was unshaken in Italy and was still a vivid pres-
ence in southern Gaul. Geographically, we are in a world that had returned to
the days of the Punic Wars in the third century BC. At that time, Italy and the
rim of the western Mediterranean had faced Africa, while at their back a vast,
uncontrolled hinterland stretched behind the coastline to the north and west.
Now, in the fifth century ad, central Romanness—­in the form of the legitimate
Roman empire, the Respublica—­reached up from Italy to hold the Mediterra-
nean shores of southern Gaul and eastern Spain. But this enclave of central Ro-
manness based on the Mediterranean was ringed to the north and west by gray
zones of local Romanness that had emerged in much of Gaul and Spain, while to
the south lay a formidable rival—­the Vandal kingdom of Carthage.
   Vandal Carthage showed exactly what ruthless state power could still do. As
far as we can see, the Vandal state was not based on any tacit arrangement be-
tween local Romans and a barbarian court, as happened with the Goths of Bor-
deaux and Toulouse. Major Roman landowners in Proconsular Africa and Byza­
cena were abruptly dispossessed so as to leave a glacis around the hinterland of
Carthage that was occupied by Vandal warriors alone.55
   Worse than that: the Vandals did not hide the fact that they were Arian and
not Catholic Christians. Within a decade, Catholic bishops were exiled as “her-
etics.” The Vandals even used the former anti-­Donatist laws that had imposed
exile on Donatist bishops after 411. Vandal rulers applied these laws unchanged


                                        400
                           the crisis of the west


to the Catholic clergy. By a strange (and not wholly undeserved) irony of fate,
many of the friends of Augustine (notably Possidius of Calama, his biographer)
ended their lives as exiles in Italy. They had been driven from their cities by the
same laws against heresy that they had petitioned for, thirty years before, in
order to drive out their Donatist rivals.
    What is revealing is that the African cities did nothing to protect their bish-
ops. In the 430s and 440s, as in the 420s, the cities of Africa had remained ro-
bustly secular. Despite decades of preaching by Augustine and his colleagues,
they had not become massively Catholic cities. Their town councillors now found
themselves in a dilemma. They were forced by a strong Vandal state of Arian
views to choose between loyalty to their Catholic bishops and clergy (as Catho-
lic believers) and the loss of their lay privileges, or conformity to the new regime
and the retention of their status in their hometowns. Conformity to Arian rule,
in effect, enabled them to continue to be loyal to the little respublica of their own
city. This was what had always mattered most for them. Not surprisingly, they
chose the city over the altar. They did not rally to support the Catholic Church.
Nor did they become zealous Arians. Accustomed to politic conformity by the
suppression of Donatism only a generation earlier, the lay elites of Africa kept
a low profile. They left the two groups of clergy—­Catholic and Arian—­to fight
it out between themselves while they governed their little cities as they had al-
ways done.56
    The failure of the African elites to stand up for the Catholic Church deserves
to be stressed. It showed how precarious the position of the church still was in
many regions. Despite a vocal Christian literature that celebrated the merging of
church and city in Gaul and Spain, this alliance may have come more slowly than
we think and certainly more slowly than the bishops and clergy wished.
    Yet the paradox of the Vandal kingdom is precisely that, after these draconian
measures, what remained of the Roman society of Carthage and eastern Africa
(the old provinces of Proconsularis and Byzacena) settled down to thrive with
indecent vigor. Large palaces appeared in the city. Roman officials staffed the
Vandal administration. Roman shipowners helped man the Vandal war fleets.
This was probably more profitable to them than had been the annual effort to
stir into action the great dinosaur of the annona fleet that had once sailed from
Carthage to Rome.
    Not all subjects of the Vandals sailed the seas as pirates. Freed from the levies
connected with the annona for Rome, African ceramics and African wines flooded
into the market throughout the eastern Mediterranean. The ancient link across
the southern Mediterranean between Africa and the Levant, which had charac-
terized Punic Carthage, was revived in the fifth century. Our word “vandalism”
was derived from the Vandals, who came to enjoy an odious reputation in later


                                        401
                                  chapter 24


ages. Yet they had not brought destruction to Africa. Rather, through their com-
mercial outreach the Vandals of Carthage “presided over something of an Indian
summer for the ancient economy.”57
    Latin poets came to frequent the Vandal court. They praised the Vandal ruler
as a “Sun King.” They inscribed elegant verses on still-­functioning suburban
bathhouses. If the old world lived on anywhere, in the West, in a manner that
would have been recognizable to fourth-­century villa owners, it was in the pirate
city of Carthage and its surrounding countryside.58
    This extreme option—­as well as the gray zones in Britain, Gaul, and Spain
where the emperor’s writ no longer ran—­would have been known in southern
Gaul. They form a backdrop to one of the most remarkable phenomena of this
period: that is, the rallying of loyalty to the legitimate empire—­usually spoken of
as the Respublica—­in those areas where imperial rule had continued. An influen-
tial segment of Gallic upper-­class society rejected forms of local Romanness. They
opted instead for the “central Romannness” represented by the surviving empire,
depleted though this empire had become.
    It is important to note this phenomenon. We have spent much of this chapter
examining the way in which whole regions of Gaul and Spain opted slowly but
surely for forms of regional government that tacitly excluded the empire. But
this was an almost covert process—­a somewhat shameful open secret. It can only
be reconstructed with difficulty, as it left little trace in Roman sources. Only
very few writers (the remarkable Salvian among them) referred to the awkward
fact that there were now “Romans out there”—­illic Romani—­who prayed never
again to become subjects of the Roman state.59 What we more usually hear in the
sources of this time is the voice of a vocal faction committed to the Respublica—­to
the structures and attitudes of the Roman empire as it had been inherited from
the fourth century and as it would survive (if only, outside Italy, in a series of
increasingly embattled enclaves) until the late 470s.
    We are dealing, in effect, with the emergence of a new style of Roman patrio-
tism. In the fourth century, the Roman empire had been seen as a universal em-
pire. It had no challengers other than barbarians outside its frontiers. It was a
true orbis terrarum, a “civilized world” as vast and as seemingly immovable as the
universe itself. By the mid-­fifth century in the West, this universal empire sur-
vived in Gaul and Spain only as a constellation of enclaves. Central Romanness
was no longer a given; it had become an option. But it was an option for which
many writers voted with their pens. Confronted by widening pockets of local
Romanness, these enclaves were breeding grounds for a distinctive kind of hyper-­
Romanity. If anything, this hyper-­Romanity increased in intensity as the impe-
rial enclaves themselves shrunk over the decades.
    Nothing shows more clearly the fierce intransigence with which upholders of
the surviving imperial order viewed their world than their reaction to one of the

                                       402
                          the crisis of the west


most mysterious phenomena of the age—­the Bacaudae. On the subject of the
Bacaudae, learned fantasies (largely but by no means exclusively of the Marxist
persuasion) have flourished. We still do not know who the Bacaudae were. Some
have treated them as a peasant jacquerie; others have seen them as local landown-
ers who resorted to violent means to defend their region in a world bereft of
imperial protection.60 The word itself is Celtic: it may come from baga, “war-
rior.” We do not even know whether a Bacauda was a person or a happening—­
like the Fronde in seventeenth-­century France. Nor do we know whether it was
an urban event (perhaps the equivalent of a tax riot) or an exclusively rural move-
ment, as most scholars have tended to assume.61
     But we do know one thing. We know how the Bacaudae were perceived by
others. Two chroniclers (Hydatius, bishop of Chaves in northern Portugal, and
the anonymous Marseilles author of the Chronicle of 452) are the only sources
who make frequent mention of their activities at this time. These activities are
recorded for Gaul in 435, 437, and 448 (in the Chronicle of 452) and in Spain for
441, 443, 449, and, once again, in 454 (by Hydatius). Both authors referred to
their suppression with undisguised satisfaction. In Spain, in 443, a general “broke”
their “insolence.”62 In Outer Gaul (the northern provinces bordering Britanny
and the English Channel) a leader called Tibatto led the region to “secede from
membership of the Roman order”—­a Romana societate—­in 435. He caused “the
slaves of almost all Gaul to conspire in a Bacauda.” Two years later, in 437, the
“commotion” was suppressed, “with much slaughter.” This event was recorded
with evident satisfaction by the Chronicle of 452.63
     Nowhere did either author pretend that the Bacaudae were barbarians. They
had been Romans. For almost the first time in the history of the Roman empire,
Roman armies took the field not against barbarians or the armies of a rival em-
peror but against Roman subjects. These disaffected Romans were declared to be
“public enemies”—­“suicidal rebels” against whom a war of reconquest was to be
waged. It was a war (often waged by barbarian troops in Roman pay) of which
most writers in the territories of the Respublica approved wholeheartedly.64
     Altogether, forced on to the defensive by so many unwelcome and alternative
ways of being Roman, which now ranged from an abandoned Britain, through
ill-­defined zones of unrest in Gaul and Spain, to the pirate capital of Carthage,
the Respublica in its last decades was by no means dead. But it was not a pretty
thing.
     Indeed, the Respublica had become, in many ways, an ancien régime. Derived
from the ambitious state of the fourth century, the fifth-­century empire, as it im-
pinged on Gaul, lacked the cohesion between its top and bottom levels that had
made the empire of Valentinian I formidable but flexible. What had happened in
the crisis of the third century recurred in fifth-­century Gaul. A split developed
between what Jean-­Michel Carrié (talking of the end of the third century) has

                                       403
                                  chapter 24


called the milieux dirigeants, the inner circles of government, and the “governing
classes” at large.65 Ruthless generals sent from Italy allied with Gallic families
who had already clambered onto the imperial bandwagon in the days of Valen-
tinian and Theodosius. These families expected to retain a monopoly of high
offices in Gaul. They were considerably less open than before to the “governing
classes” as a whole—­that is, to persons recruited from the lesser nobility of the
cities. They did not promote them. They did not listen to their views. The control
exercised by these privileged families over the higher levels of the administration
created “a situation in which politics had become the preserve of the already
powerful.”66
    As a result, the social mobility that had energized the imperial administration
in the fourth century dried up. To opt for the Respublica in the latter half of the
fifth century was not to opt for the Roman empire as it had been in the days of
Constantine, Valentinian, and Theodosius. It was to support a more than usually
proud and top-­heavy system, deeply wedded to a sense of its own excellence.
    It is against this background that we can best appreciate the career and writ-
ings of Sidonius Apollinaris (430–­ca. 480–­90). Born in Lyon, Sidonius spent
most of his life in the imperial enclaves of the Auvergne and the Rhone valley; he
also went to Italy twice. Yet it was part of the literary genius of Sidonius that he
ensured that his “Rome”—­the Rome of a hyper-­Roman, who viewed the world
through narrow slits—­has become to a large extent our Rome. For Sidonius pre-
sented what remained of the empire as a model society that was worthy of un-
questioning loyalty. To be loyal to Rome was to be loyal to civilization itself. As
a result, it is Sidonius’s Rome that we see pass, majestically and tragically, into
the imagined twilight of a barbarian age. Yet, as we read his letters and poems, we
can glimpse the many alternative forms of being Roman that already pressed in
around him. It was this alternative, more provincial form of Romanness that
would win out at the end of his life.67
    We first meet Sidonius at Arles in 449. As a nineteen-­year-­old boy, he had
stood in a solemn row of figures swathed in glittering robes behind the throne
of the consul of the year (the general Asterius, who had crushed the Bacaudae
in Spain eight years before). Sidonius was careful to record that, though a young
man, he stood close to the consul’s throne. For
   my father, father-­in-­law, grandfather and great-­grandfather had glittering
   careers, holding urban and praetorian prefectures and masterships at court
   and in the army.68
   Sidonius’s background made him very much a representative of the inner
“governing circles” who stood at the top of the fifth-­century Respublica in Gaul.
For him, high office in the service of the empire was the one sure criterion of sta-
tus. The other clear landmark was high culture. Ideally, the two converged. On

                                        404
                           the crisis of the west


the occasion of Asterius’s consulship, the stunning visual display of high officers
of state gathered around the consul was echoed by the speech of a famous orator:
   The consular robe, soaked in Tyrian purple, with embroidered palm-­leaves
   crackling on its fringes, was enhanced by a speech yet more richly colored
   and more suffused with gold.69
   The heir of Pliny and Symmachus, Sidonius also knew how to depict a land-
scape of the heart. He conjured up his beloved Clermont more vividly than Sym-
machus ever did for his Campania:
   The cultivated plain where waves of wind undulate across the grain . . .
   gentle to travelers, fruitful to the tiller, delightful to the hunter, where the
   ridges of the mountains encircle the plain with pasture, the lower slopes
   with vineyards, lowlands with villas and the rocky peaks with forts.70
    As a writer, Sidonius had a gift for making time stand still. We walk around
his own villa and those of his friends as if they were just as they had been in the
fourth (or, indeed, in the first) century ad.71 It is only occasionally that we no-
tice small details that show that the times had changed. Sidonius’s bathhouse
was no longer painted to create a magic world like that of Sidi Ghrib in fourth-­
century Africa. Its walls were covered only with plain plaster on which he had
written short verses.72
    Sidonius ended his life as bishop of Clermont. He did so because he was a
victim of the factionalism of Roman politics. In 469 his career in the Respublica
came to an abrupt end under suspicion of association with a traitor. As Jill Har-
ries has shown, Sidonius’s consecration as a bishop was no happy promotion to
a spiritual honor that was considered interchangeable with his worldly dignity. It
was not a triumphant shift from the toga to the miter, as many have imagined. It
was a comedown.73
    It is to Sidonius’s credit that, despite this setback, he rose to the occasion with
a vigor which (of course!) he took care to render memorable through many vivid
letters. When he became bishop, Clermont was still within the territories of the
empire. Yet even when he attempted to defend Clermont from absorption into
the expanding Gothic kingdom of King Euric, he met with opposition within
Clermont itself.74
    We know why. Many local Romans saw no great advantage in being subjects
of the emperors. Their relatives and peers were already making good careers at
the Gothic court. In 478 Sidonius wrote to one such Roman—­Namatius. Nama-
tius was not a servant of the Respublica. He was serving Euric as admiral of the
Gothic Atlantic fleet stationed at Bordeaux. A local figure with a tinge of nobility
(such as Ausonius had once been), Namatius did not treasure family memories
of high office in the Respublica that dated from the age of gold, as Sidonius did.

                                         405
                                  chapter 24


Indeed, Namatius did not need the Respublica to make him feel great or even to
make him feel Roman. It was enough for a man of energy and intelligence such
as himself to follow “the standards of a victorious people”—­the Goths, who now
represented the only viable state in southern Gaul.75
    Such persons were devout Christians. They exemplify the piety of the new
class of rich that had formed around barbarian courts. They were not interested
in building villas. They were not rich enough to build the shimmering new basili-
cas that had begun to decorate the cities of Gaul. But they did know how to put
their money into relatively cheap demonstrations of Catholic piety. Above all, as
good Catholics, they knew a saint when they saw one. Such a person was Count
Victorius. He was Euric’s first military commander in Clermont after the city
had been handed over to the Goths. Like Namatius, he had risen as a military
leader in Gothic service. When a holy hermit (who had come all the way from
Mesopotamia to Gaul) was on his deathbed, Victorius bent over the dying
man: “He bent his office low, as low as his own knees.” He was careful to weep.
He paid for the cost of a reverential funeral. Writing in 477, after the Respublica
had vanished in the West, Sidonius was pleased to observe such piety in the new
governor of Clermont.76 Victorius was also careful to leave his mark on the sur-
rounding countryside. He set up a row of columns at the popular rural shrine of
Saint Julian in Brioude (to the south of Clermont). He brought relics of Saint
Lawrence to a church he built on an estate.77
    It is more than likely that Victorius considered that these acts of devotion
were done for the atonement of his sins. There were many who thought that such
atonement was needed. Writing a century later, Gregory of Tours remembered
Victorius’s pious donations with approval. But he added a further anecdote. Vic-
torius arrested the “senator” Eucherius, a former “illustrious” man from the days
of the old empire.
   One night he ordered him to be dragged from the prison in which he had
   been placed, and, having tied him next to an ancient wall, he ordered this
   very wall to be pulled down on top of him.78
It was a lesson in post-­imperial politics, Romano-­Gothic style.
    Sidonius died between 480 and 490, after the empire had vanished from the
West. On his sarcophagus, he made no mention of his bishopric. His offices in
the Respublica and his literary activities were what mattered for him. Nor did he
date his death by the reign of any local king. Instead, he dated his death by the
reign of the eastern emperor, Zeno. Sidonius considered Zeno, as emperor at Con-
stantinople, to be the sole surviving head of the legitimate Roman empire.79
    Sidonius’s descendants, by contrast, took to the new politics of local Roman-
ness like ducks to water. His son, Apollinaris, led out the militia of Clermont to
fight for the Goths against the Franks at the famous battle of Vouillé in 507.80

                                       406
                            the crisis of the west


His grandson, Arcadius, played an important and sinister role at the Frankish
court. He helped the sons of Clovis get rid of their young nephews, who might
claim the throne. It was Arcadius who appeared before the boys’ grandmother
carrying a sword and a pair of scissors. He gave her the choice of having them
tonsured as clergymen or killed. Only one opted to be tonsured.81 This hap-
pened in the 520s; a lot can happen in one hundred years. Only a century before,
in the 420s, Augustine was still alive, petitioning the imperial court about the
slave trade in Africa. Genseric was still in Spain. Galla Placidia’s great votive shrine
was being built beside the palace at Ravenna. The Respublica had only just begun
to feel the first tremors that preceded its collapse in Gaul, Spain, and Africa.
    It is important for us to understand the texture of the fifth-­century West as a
whole before we deal in detail with the manner in which wealth was thought
about and used in the new age ushered in by the developments we have de-
scribed. But it is important for us to have this panorama in mind for another
reason. Not only did a general crisis overcome the western empire in the fifth
century, but the crisis itself was viewed and judged by a remarkable succession of
Christian authors who wrote in the imperial enclave of Provence and in the south-
ern valley of the Rhone. These writers are a listening station for us. It is through
them that we can still hear the voices of a world in crisis. Their writings touched,
in vivid and pertinent ways, on every aspect of the relation between Christianity
and society. So let us now turn, first, to the “saints”—­to the Christian intellectu-
als of Marseilles and to the monk-­bishops from the monastery of Lérins—­and
then to the most remarkable personality of all to emerge from this circle—­Salvian,
the priest of Marseilles.




                                         407
                          Chapter 25
                          •••••
                           Among the Saints
           Marseilles, Arles, and Lérins, 400–­440




                             The Sancti of Provence

Up to the end of the empire in the West—­until the 470s—­Provence and the
southern valley of the Rhone (from Lyons to Arles and Marseilles) remained an
imperial enclave. The region also stood out as a distinctive cultural and religious
landscape. In this chapter, we will follow the debates among Christian intellectu-
als in Provence—­mainly of monastic background—­on topics that ranged from
the nature of wealth in the monastery, through the qualifications for leadership
in the churches, to the fate of the foundering empire. In the next chapter, we
will consider the Roman empire in the West in the early 440s as viewed from
Provence by a vivid and idiosyncratic author—­Salvian of Marseilles.
    The cities of Provence welcomed newcomers from less secure parts of Gaul.
Some time in the 420s or 430s, Paulinus of Pella finally decided to make the best
he could of his new poverty by settling in Marseilles. He added that he had been
drawn there by his love for “the many saintly persons”—­the sancti—­who lived
there.1 This was very much the right thing to say about Marseilles and the Chris-
tian intellectuals who lived there. Fifth-­century Provence as a whole was marked
by vibrant overlapping circles of “saints.” Marseilles itself stood between an “is-
land of the saints”—­the monastery of Lérins (modern Ile Saint Honorat, three
miles off the coast of Cannes)—­and the city of Arles, at the mouth of the Rhone.
For over half a century, from the 420s to the 470s, the constant competition be-
tween these three centers made southern Gaul the most vibrant region of Chris-
tian writing in the western Mediterranean.
    Each center was different from the other. Arles was not intended to be a city
of saints. It was the “little Rome of Gaul.” Throughout the fifth century, Arles was
the secular heart of what remained of the Respublica in Gaul and eastern Spain.
The city was crowded with governmental buildings. It was a center of frankly

                                        411
                                   chapter 25


worldly pageantry. The secular nobility of Gaul were encouraged to gather regu-
larly at Arles, in their full finery of silk and cloth of gold, to lend their massed
presence to the sort of ceremonies of state the young Sidonius Apollinaris still
witnessed in 449.2
    By contrast, Christian intellectuals—­priests, monks, and laymen alike—­
gathered at Marseilles. Marseilles had emerged unscathed from the disorders
that followed the invasion of 405–­6 and the subsequent collapse of imperial rule
in much of Gaul and Spain. It reverted to the role it had played when first settled
by Greeks in classical times. It became an emporium for foreign goods. Mar-
seilles also regained some of the reputation the old Greek colony of Massilia had
once enjoyed. It became a place for leisured eccentricity, an Athens of the West.3
    Lérins was a different matter. It was the most successful of a series of island
monasteries that had been deliberately chosen for their sheer “horror.” Spiritual
Counts of Monte Cristo, the upper-­class converts to the monastic life who lived
at Lérins and on similar bare islands claimed to have brought a touch of the awe-
some desert of Egypt to within sight of the Côte d’Azur.
    The persons connected with these three very different centers were held to-
gether by an unusually tenacious upper-­class culture. The sense of a shared cul-
ture made it easy for upper-­class monks to move from a monastery to the episco-
pate or to the priesthood—­from Lérins to Arles, to Marseille or to the little cities
of the Alpes Maritimes and the valley of the Rhone. To name only the most
prominent of these lateral promotions from desert island to the bishopric of a
major city: in 426–­7 Honoratus, who had been abbot of Lérins since 410, be-
came bishop of Arles until his death in 428. In 430 his relative Hilarius (best
known to English speakers as Hilary of Arles) moved from Lérins to Arles to
become bishop until his death in 449. Some abbots boasted connections with
the higher nobility of Gaul. But connections in high places may have been excep-
tional, if not invented. What mattered more than such claims to nobility was the
literary culture that all protagonists had in common. This culture held together
the differing layers of the provincial elites of Provence much as it had held to-
gether the variegated elites of Aquitaine in the time of Ausonius.4
    The reputation of Lérins was as much the creation of a literary movement as
of an ascetic experiment. Even when they were thought of as cut off from the
world by the vast silence of the sea, the abbots of Lérins kept in touch with a circle
of friends and admirers that embraced all of Provence and much of the Rhone
valley. Honoratus was said to have “poured the honey back into the bees’ wax of
his tablets” by the charm of his letters.5 Hilary, Honoratus’s successor as bishop of
Arles, went out of his way to be seen plaiting baskets in the manner of the great
monks of Egypt.6 But this did not deter him from being the center of a literary
circle, made up of cultivated and politically active laymen. He even received for-
mal panegyrics from local poets—­one of whom, called Livy (!), was quite pre-

                                        412
                     marseilles, arles, and lérins


pared to say that “if Augustine had come after you, he would have been thought
a lesser figure than you.”7
    In such circles we do not feel, as we do when reading the sermons of Augus-
tine, a Christian culture resting on an oceanic shelf of weekly preaching to so-
cially mixed congregations. Rather, we are looking at the culture of a leisured
class, close to that of Paulinus of Nola, of Sulpicius Severus, or of the patrons
of Jerome and Pelagius. Letters of exhortation; panegyrics of recently deceased
monastic heroes; pamphlets carefully dedicated to like-­minded patrons—­often
written under an assumed name (the sure sign of an “in group” who could be
trusted to recognize the pen names of their friends):8 these were the principal
products of the circles of Lérins, Marseilles, and Arles. Created in this way by
competing literary cliques, the evidence for the Christianity of Provence has
rightly been characterized as at one and the same time “extraordinarily dense and
extraordinarily one sided.”9
    Altogether, we are faced with a phenomenon we did not find in Africa but
we did find in Rome. A remarkable group of persons were committed to drastic
changes in their own lives. Yet they were not recluses. They remained surrounded
by a wide penumbra of lay supporters. Some of the sancti may have been bound
by blood to high-­placed persons. They certainly shared their culture. But it was
not simply a matter of a common background. An intense religious relationship
was involved. Upper-­class laypersons treated the monks of Lérins as sancti—­
living saints, holy men. They were bound to them by a strong psychological bond.
They entered into a spiritual exchange through which the sancti received rever-
ence and material support from laypersons, who received their blessing in return.
This bond was always more vibrant—­and less predictable—­than were the nor-
mal bonds of shared class and culture because it was based on a sharp sense of the
unresolved opposition between the sacred and the profane.
    For this reason, the relations between the “saints” and laypersons of similar
class and culture were not without their problems. The writings that came from
Marseilles, Lérins, and Arles concentrated to an unusual degree on defining the
uneasy boundary between the new demands of the ascetic movement and the
average Christianity of well-­to-­do secular persons.
    The unspoken presence of a cultivated Christian laity as patrons and admirers
put constant pressure on the monks and monk-­bishops of Provence to empha-
size the drastic tenor of their own, ascetic life. It provoked constant debate as
to which Christianity was authentic and which was a half-­hearted compromise.
Equally vigorous was the debate among monks themselves as to who were true
monks and who were tepid amateurs. This situation generated arguments on al-
most every aspect of Christian behavior and of Christian society—­from the na-
ture of grace and free will to the fate of the Roman empire. Furthermore, the need
for consequentiality among the “saints,” in their pursuit of the highest standards

                                      413
                                  chapter 25


of ascetic Christianity, accounts for the radicalism that runs like a live current
throughout the Christian literature of Provence, from the works of John Cassian
in the 420s to the denunciations of the Respublica itself by Salvian in the 440s. It
is to these challenges that we must now turn. They took many different forms.


       Ne . . . inhaeserit ei vel unius nummi contagio: Lest there remain
                       in him the infection of a single coin

                      Wealth and the Monastery

The first and, in retrospect, the best-­known challenge to come from the sancti of
Provence came from a mystery man who had only recently settled in Marseilles.
John Cassian may originally have come from the farthest end of the Latin world—­
from Scythia, the Dobrudja region of modern Romania, where the Danube
flows into the Black Sea. He had traveled in Egypt and the Middle East at the
end of the fourth century and came to Gaul at some time in the 410s. He claimed
to be the bearer of the authentic spiritual goods of Egypt. Cassian tells us next to
nothing about himself. He made his own the total anonymity he expected of a
true monk.10 His first treatise, De Institutis Coenobiorum, was written in 420–­24.
Usually called Cassian’s Institutes, it is best translated as “Basic Rules for the
Foundation of a Monastery.” It was addressed to a Provençal bishop (Castor of
Apt) who wished to found a monastery.11 A little later, between 426 and 428,
Cassian wrote his Collationes (Conferences).12 These were a collection of spiritual
sermons ostensibly elicited by Cassian and by his companion Germanus from
various wise monks of Egypt, whom they had visited a generation earlier in the
380s and 390s. With these Conferences, Cassian reached out to the islands along
the coast. One set of Conferences were dedicated to Honoratus, the abbot of
Lérins. A further set went to the monks on the Iles d’Hyères.
    In all his writings, Cassian claimed to offer the real thing. He invariably com-
pared the haphazard and fissile monastic experiments of Gaul unfavorably with
the uncanny solidity of the monasteries of Egypt. In Egypt alone, so Cassian
claimed, something of the original fervor of the Primitive Church was still alive.
Relics of the brotherly love, based on the abandonment of wealth and on the
sharing of goods that had characterized the Jerusalem Community of the first
Christians, were still to be found among some monks in the depths of the mon-
asteries and hermitages of Egypt.
    As we saw, the Jerusalem Community, as described in chapters 2 and 4 of
Acts, had haunted Augustine in his early experiments in the monastic life. For
Augustine, that moment of total sharing had been linked to the shared ecstasy
of the coming of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost. It was an ecstasy of brotherly love

                                        414
                      marseilles, arles, and lérins


toward which Augustine’s monks labored painfully in this life. But it remained a
dream for the future, one that would come to fruition only in a Heavenly Repub-
lic beyond this world. For Cassian it was no such thing. Deep community linked
to prayer and contemplation was a living experience among some monks of
Egypt. He wrote his treatises to ensure that the living experience of community
(similar to that of the earliest Christians) he had found in Egypt could be trans-
ferred to the monasteries of Gaul.13
    But how would this be done? Like the writings of other sancti in Marseilles,
Cassian’s works were polemical tracts for their time. They were not a dispassion-
ate travelogue of the monasteries of Egypt but a mirror held up to the monks of
Gaul. Especially in his Institutes, but also in his Conferences, Cassian used the
example of the monks of Egypt to mount a consequential criticism of the half-­
hearted monastic experiments he had observed in Gaul. This criticism concen-
trated on the issue of wealth and poverty in the monastery.
    As Richard Goodrich has pointed out in a perceptive study of Cassian, the
principal target of his criticism was the gentlemanly attitude toward wealth that
had characterized the monks of Gaul.14 From the days of Saint Martin onward,
monasticism in Gaul had been modeled to a large extent on the leisured life of
the villa owners who had protected and admired Martin. Cultivated advocates
of asceticism had continued to live from the revenues of their estates or (if they
had renounced these estates by giving them to the church, as Sulpicius Severus
appears to have done) from annuities paid by the church. Monasteries were also
kept afloat by the pooled donations of well-­to-­do members. Basically, the monks
did not have to think about money because money would always be there. In
effect, they practiced “unwealth”—­a life of restricted needs in a stripped-­down
villa. They continued the same sublime indifference toward wealth that had long
been associated with the ideal of otium in aristocratic and philosophical circles.
But indifference toward wealth was not the same as having no wealth what­
soever. In Cassian’s view, such persons could never be real monks. For they had
spared themselves the sharp taste of real poverty.
    In Cassian’s opinion, monasteries could survive and thrive only if the issue of
wealth was resolved in the very first steps taken by the monk who wished to enter
a monastery. The postulant must come to the door of the monastery already
stripped of his worldly goods. No portion of his former wealth was allowed to
enter the monastery, not even in the form of a pious donation.15 Augustine had
admitted such donations. Similarly, from time to time the altar at Lérins would
be piled with goods, money, or documents brought to the monastery by well-­
to-­do recruits.16
    This was not what Cassian wished to happen. He insisted that the monk should
enter the monastery sterilized of wealth. Not even “the infection of a single coin”
was allowed to adhere to him.17 He was admitted to the monastic community by

                                       415
                                   chapter 25


a ceremony that stressed the fact that he did not own even the clothes that he
stood up in. He received directly from the hands of the abbot a uniform, neutral
robe.18 It was a foundational ceremony, as awesomely irrevocable as the vesting
and rewarding of an officer in the late Roman army. But here the largesse of the
abbot was the gift of total poverty. Henceforth, the monk depended for his
clothes and rations on the monastery, in which the abbot was a little emperor.
   Cassian offered his readers an inside tour of a monastery stripped bare of
riches. And he did this so as to present a community stripped bare of the dire
willfulness of the rich. To surrender wealth was a sine qua non. But this dispos-
session was always seen as a synecdoche of a surrender of the self that was in-
tended to be even more drastic than the surrender of personal wealth. Self and
wealth were fused; true renunciation involved both. The monastic life
   consisted in the despoiling of the self from all property and in a total strip-
   ping down, so that, apart from the will of the abbot, hardly any will should
   be alive in us.19
Dispossession meant “de-­dominization.” The monk ceased to be a dominus of any
thing and of any person. Most of all, he ceased to be the dominus even of him-
self.20 In this Cassian was “the great equalizer.”21 All monks were equal, because
equally dependent on the will of their abbot.
    We must remember that Cassian was writing for well-­to-­do readers and for
recruits to the monastic life drawn from the provincial elites. For such aspirants
to the monastic life Cassian insisted on a leveling down that admitted no half
measures. By contrast, Augustine had been quite prepared to offer concessions to
upper-­class recruits in matters of dress, food, and work schedule. Cassian offered
no such thing. From the very beginning, the monk should learn “not to be
ashamed to be leveled to the poor, that is, to the body of the brotherhood.”22
    Accustomed as we now are to the notion of monastic poverty, as practiced for
centuries under the Rule of Saint Benedict, it is easy to forget how very drastic
this view of the ideal monastery must have appeared to fifth-­century readers.
Read with Roman eyes, Cassian’s ideal monastery resembled a slave barracks.
Under the eye of the abbot, every monk was expected to jump to his task with
alacrity “in a way that no slaves ever showed in the service of even the most harsh
and over-­bearing lord.”23
    Cassian’s ideal monastery was, indeed, a very strange place. In it, free men
became slaves and the wealthy became paupers. Everything that a Gallic farmer
had good reason to dread in times of war and famine; everything that a noble-
man made destitute by barbarian violence and by civil war might experience: all
the social ruin of Gaul was turned, as if by a kind of magical inversion, into the
basis of a perfect society. One wonders, indeed, whether voluntary impoverish-
ment of so drastic a kind did not hold a special, almost unconscious appeal to

                                        416
                      marseilles, arles, and lérins


members of a class that had recently experienced so much involuntary impover-
ishment. Compared with the great fear of total financial ruin brought about by
civil war and barbarian plundering, monastic poverty that brought former aristo-
crats down to the level of the poor was, at least, a state that was freely chosen.24
     In Cassian’s view of the monastery, the monk had not only stepped down-
ward (as Paulinus of Nola had done, with his dark robes, unwashed body, and
ill-­cut hair) to follow the abjectio, the stepping down of Christ. Cassian’s monk
did more than cancel out in himself all previous denotators of wealth and status
while still carrying with him tantalizing hints of former grandeur. He had en-
tered a monastery so as to realize what he really was before God—­the equivalent
of a total social shipwreck:
   He was a refugee immigrant in this world, a landless man. He should think
   of himself as an estate-­born slave and odd-­jobs-­man of the monastery
   rather than presume that he was the owner of anything at all.25
    Stripped of wealth, the monks of Cassian’s monastery were expected to work
to support themselves by the labor of their hands. There was an element of bra-
vado in this claim. The monasteries of Egypt never became economically self-­
sufficient. Nor did the monasteries of Cassian’s Provence. Monks might follow
Cassian by becoming totally poor. Regular, hard work might become increasingly
prominent as the sign of a true monastery. But total economic independence
from the outside world always remained no more than a dream.26
    Cassian insisted on the myth of monastic autarky largely so as to drive home
his challenge to the tepid monks of Gaul. In Cassian’s opinion, the monk was the
exact opposite of the leisured rentier. He was the only productive member of
society. He depended on himself to feed himself. Everyone else was like a beggar,
living on the agape—­the handouts—­of others. Landowners collecting rents; em-
perors collecting taxes: compared with monks, they were all parasites, expecting
to be fed by others.27
    For Cassian, monks were the one exception to the dire rule of human society.
For millennia, society had been characterized by the exploitation of the weak by
those who did not wish to work. Ever since the Days of the Giants before the
Flood (the biblical equivalent of the Age of Bronze, which brought to an end the
original social innocence of the Golden Age in pagan thought), the powerful
had “preferred to base their lives on plunder rather than live from the sweat of
craftsmanship and labor.”28
    It is important to note the harsh tone with which Cassian spoke of society
outside the monastery. He viewed the social structures of the lay world with no-
tably disabused eyes. Like the Pelagian writer of On Riches, he gave little cre-
dence to the widespread idea that personal wealth was a providential gift to its
owner. When Cassian described the manner in which the great Egyptian hermit,

                                        417
                                  chapter 25


Abba Moses, gave alms, he did not present him as the administrator of wealth
sent to him by God. Abba Moses gave alms, frankly, in order to remedy a little the
inequities of an unjust society:
   inequality will continue to rage [until the end of time] due to those who
   occupy those things which have been granted [by God] for the use of all in
   common for their own use alone—­and do not even use them.29
    But what mattered for Cassian was not that social inequality (shocking
though it might be) should vanish from the world. What concerned him was
that no trace of such inequality should linger in the sterile environment of his
monastery. For this reason, the very radicalism of Cassian’s views on monastic
poverty brought an old-­fashioned debate on wealth to a halt. This debate was,
quite literally, left at the monastery’s door. The old distinction between good
wealth and bad wealth did not apply in a monastery: it was a place where no
wealth existed.
    If avarice was denounced, it was done so only as a function of the total dispos-
session of the monk. Cassian followed the ravages of avarice with microscopic
precision. But the avarice he observed had nothing to do with gold and wide
acres. It was a chill ghost within the self. It could lead monks to shameful acts—­
petty thefts; manic fits of overwork; the pathetic hoarding of food or small coins;
a miser’s terror of old age, illness, and the onset of penury. These personal temp-
tations of the monks were so bizarre and so humiliating that Cassian—­who wrote
without a hint of embarrassment about sexual temptations and wet dreams—­
thought that it was better that laypersons not read his chapters on avarice in the
monastery.30 But these disquisitions on the vice of avarice bore no relation to
the bad rich outside the monastery, as these had been excoriated by Ambrose and
by Pelagian writers.
    This marks a change. Only two decades earlier, the Pelagian movement had
shown what storms could arise when ascetic demands for total renunciation were
allied with a consequential body of social criticism. Pelagian tracts were known
in Marseilles. Some were still admired as models of ascetic exhortation. But Cas-
sian’s single-­minded concentration on monastic poverty put the issues that those
tracts had raised out-­of-­date. The storm clouds parted. The two issues—­wealth
and renunciation—­ceased to be so vehemently intertwined. In order to foster
renunciation, one did not have to launch an attack on Roman society as a whole,
as the Pelagian authors of On Riches and On the Christian Life had done.
    For Cassian, renunciation, true renunciation, was for experts only. He wrote
for them. For those who read Cassian on monastic poverty, his critique of wealth
could not be seen as directed at society in general. It was a call for utter conse-
quentiality to would-­be monks in their own ascetic vocation. Later writers from
Marseilles, such as Salvian, were merciless in attacking half-­hearted converts to

                                       418
                      marseilles, arles, and lérins


the religious life who thought that they could be good monks and good clergy-
men while keeping control of their own money. Such persons were dismissed by
Salvian as monstra—­as freaks. They were demi vierge ascetics.31 Alas, our friend
Paulinus of Pella (who cheerfully combined professions of dedication to God
with descriptions of his most recent real estate ventures) would have appeared to
Salvian as one such freak.
    But this was a radicalism voiced by professionals judging other professionals.
Cassian’s call to poverty barely affected persons in the world; they were not
called upon to make such all-­or-­nothing choices. The Christian common sense
of wealth was sufficient for them. It was possible to be a member of the good rich
provided that one did not claim to be a monk. Generosity, a sense of solidarity,
and the giving of alms for the forgiveness of sins were virtues that were expected
of the laity. They were virtues that continued to be praised in secular persons in
fifth-­century Gaul as, indeed, in all later centuries. Only in the narrow confines
of a monastery was it now considered necessary to face the eye of a needle—­to
contemplate the total renunciation of wealth. Wealth no longer needed to be a
source of widespread, ill-­defined anxiety. The wealthy were now offered a clear-­
cut choice of roles. Either one remained rich and became a pillar of the church as
a donor and almsgiver, or one betook oneself to a monastery.
    But now let us turn to the island of Lérins to see how real monks related to
real laypersons in the Provence to which Cassian had brought the News from
Nowhere of the wealthless monastery.


                        Circe’s Island: Lérins, 400–­449

When, in around 428, Cassian dedicated books eleven through eighteen of his
Conferences to the abbot Honoratus, the monastery on Lérins had already ex-
isted for over twenty years. In the opinion of its admirers (an opinion the exigent
Cassian may not have entirely shared), this monastery had already brought Egypt
to the edge of Gaul. Chosen in around 400–­410 by Honoratus as the site for his
monastery, Lérins was a low-­lying, offshore island, rendered difficult of access
by reefs and a strong current. Its sweltering, snake-­infested flatland had attracted
him. The squalor of the island—­the bleak absence of human cultivation—­was
held to resemble the deserts of Egypt.32
    The reality, however, was somewhat different. Not all offshore islands of the
Mediterranean were deserts or needed to remain deserts. The close neighbor of
Lérins—­Lero, the present-­day Ile Sainte Marguerite, separated from Lérins by a
narrow strait—­had boasted villas, makers of rafts, and even a cult center duti-
fully frequented by Ligurian pirates.33 Lérins quickly ceased to be a desert. It
became a miniature, monastic version of Lero.

                                        419
                                  chapter 25


    This happened for a variety of reasons. Manual labor was obligatory for all
monks. What may well be the first rule of Lérins—­the Rule of the Four Fathers—­
insisted on six hours of labor each day, despite the “murmuring” of monks who
may have found this pointedly “Egyptian” regulation surprising.34 But a success-
ful monastic settlement on Lérins was only possible because well-­to-­do recruits
brought their own slaves with them. These slaves were expected to settle down as
“brothers” to their former masters.35 Their labor was brought to bear to turn the
squalor of Lérins into the equivalent of an intensively cultivated villa. The imag-
ined desert island became one of a chain of island villa sites that stretched across
the entire northern shore of the Mediterranean, from the Balearic Islands to the
Adriatic coast of modern Croatia.36 Furthermore, monks entering Lérins were
encouraged to make oblations to the monastery—­a practice of which Cassian
certainly disapproved.37 In his own small and intensely cultivated estate, cut off
from the mainland by the sea, the abbot of a monastery such as Lérins did not
have to face the problem of the evaporation of his labor force, which drove a lay
landowner, such as Dardanus, to lavish walls upon his peasants in the upper val-
leys of the nearby Alpes Maritimes as much to keep them in place on his estates
as to defend them. A labor force made up of obedient monks was quite as effec-
tive as any gang of slaves.
    For these reasons, Lérins emerged at a time when older ascetic lifestyles, fre-
quently tied to villas in the open countryside, were endangered by a rising tide
of violence. Sulpicius Severus, the friend of Paulinus of Nola, may well have been
a victim of this change. His villa at Primuliacum seems to have lain close to the
main road between Toulouse and Narbonne. In the peaceful last years of the
fourth century, Primuliacum had been a “spiritual caravansary,” a perfect joining
place for like-­minded ascetics within easy distance of major cities. But, after 406,
as war bands roamed the roads, to be close to a major highway was the wrong
place to be. The monastery-­like settlement at Primuliacum, with its baptistery
and twin churches covered with pictures and inscriptions, was lost without a
trace. Sulpicius himself may have found himself forced to join the clergy in order
to gain a living.38
    This change affected more than one individual. The cult of Saint Martin in
Gaul had been largely fostered by a network of leisured villa owners such as
Severus. This cult fell almost completely silent for over half a century until it was
revived in the 460s at Martin’s grave at Tours.39 By contrast, the intensely orga-
nized “island of the saints” at Lérins, hemmed in by the sea and careful to main-
tain an “Egyptian” image of industry, stood out ever more prominently as the
security and affluence of an earlier age vanished from large parts of Gaul.
    Within a decade, the monks of Lérins came to colonize the churches of
Provence. Honoratus moved to Arles in 428. His relative Hilary, also from Lérins,
became bishop of Arles in 430. Others soon followed to other sees. One such

                                        420
                      marseilles, arles, and lérins


was Eucherius. Eucherius had been a lay admirer of monks. He had first settled
with his wife on neighboring Lero, much as Paulinus of Nola had settled with his
wife, Therasia, at Nola. He later crossed the water to Lérins. He became bishop
of Lyon in 435. Maximus, another former abbot of Lérins, became bishop of
Riez in 433, as did his successor as abbot, the brilliant Faustus, who went to Riez
as bishop in 468. Their careers proved that Lérins was a Circe’s island. It was a
place of “astonishing transmutations.” Circe had turned men into pigs. Lérins, by
contrast, turned sinners into saints and then, in a manner equally magical, sent
them out into the world as bishops.40
    This fact is well-­known, but it is not easy to explain. Modern scholars have
advanced the notion that because the monks of Lérins came from aristocratic
backgrounds, it seemed natural to them not to treat the monastic life as a life-
long commitment but rather as analogous to the traditional spell of withdrawal
from public life associated with the aristocratic ideal of otium. Loyalty to their
hometown and to the traditions of government associated with their class led
them back to the cities of Gaul as bishops. In their capacity as bishops, the prod-
ucts of Lérins are supposed to have set about maintaining an austere Christian
version of the Roman way of life in precisely the regions where this way of life
was being threatened by barbarians.41
    Modern scholars have a soft spot for the monks of Lérins. Their writings on
each other and on the spiritual life appear to “breathe the spirit of the educated
Roman upper class.”42 They strike modern readers as unusually measured, at times
even bucolic. Their descriptions of the saints of Lérins are often praised because
they are mercifully free of the miracle stories that usually thrived in an ascetic
environment—­whether in distant Egypt or around the person of Saint Martin.43
Altogether, the monks of Lérins tend to be seen as among the last—­and, per-
haps, the nicest—­of the “last Romans.” Last but not least, it is widely believed
that the remarkable constellation of monk-­bishops associated with Lérins was a
sign of the future—­an encouraging one. It showed that aristocratic and ascetic
values could merge, thereby opening the way for the triumphant colonization of
the Gallic church by members of the Roman senatorial aristocracy in the course
of the fifth and early sixth centuries.44
    This view has much to commend it. But it misses something of the sharpness
of the age. It suggests altogether too simple an image of southern Gaul as it passed
through the crises of the 420s and 430s. In the first place, we must remember the
complexity of the Gallic aristocracy at this time. We should not be lured into
following too literally the aristocratic discourse contained in the writings of the
circle of Lérins. These writings emphasized the high position in society that ab-
bots, monks, and bishops were supposed to have enjoyed before they abandoned
the world to become monks. Hints of high status heightened the value of their
renunciation. Furthermore, monastic leaders were presented as having passed

                                        421
                                  chapter 25


effortlessly from worldly nobility to a yet higher, spiritual nobility as abbots and
bishops. In a later generation, writers would emphasize the smooth—­indeed the
providential—­transition of their heroes from high status in the world to high
status in the church.45
    But we should be careful not to take such rhetoric too literally. The notion of
nobility it put forward was studiously vague. As in the days of Ausonius, “nobil-
ity” in Gaul was a fluid concept. It was claimed by many and (as the case of Auso-
nius himself makes plain) it tended to be inflated in retrospect. We need to be
more careful as to what exactly had been the social status of the main protago-
nists of the monastic movement associated with Lérins. Honoratus and Hilary
may have come from well-­placed local families, attached to the little “senates”—­
the town councils—­of their cities. In the Rhone valley, such town councils came
to speak of themselves in the fifth century as “councils of the noble.”46 The hori-
zon of these self-­styled nobles seldom reached beyond their province. At most,
they might hold land in other provinces in Gaul and be linked to other Gallic
cities. But they had never been members of the empire-­wide class of the super-­
rich, which had been so prominent in the fourth century.47 For them, the world
of multiprovincial aristocrats, such as Paulinus of Nola, already belonged to a
belle époque that had passed forever in the first quarter of the fifth century.
    Furthermore, as we have seen, the links between the provincial nobility and
the grandees who controlled the upper echelons of the Respublica had become
weaker than they had been in the fourth century. An adversarial relationship had
developed between the real power brokers of the empire (those who came from
privileged Gallic families, such as the families of Sidonius Apollinaris and his
friends) and a lesser nobility. It was they—­and not the great families close to the
court—­who had borne the brunt of barbarian violence and ruthless civil wars.
It has been rightly suggested that many of the founding members of the Lérins
circle had come to Provence as refugees. But they had not all fled from the bar-
barians. In many cases, their families may have been thrown loose (as Paulinus
of Pella had been) by the vehement infighting of Romans themselves in the de-
cades of civil war that followed the great raid of 405–­6.48 A streak of resentment
runs through the writings of the sancti. It was directed against the upper eche-
lons of the nobility and their allies, the high-­ups in the imperial administration,
who were the effective rulers of fifth-­century Gaul. The anger of the lesser no­
bility emerges most clearly in Salvian’s denunciations of the high officers of the
empire.
    In a society whose upper classes were fractured in this way there was a certain
a jaggedness in the relations between the first generation of Lerinians and the lay
world around them. Their own rhetoric of nobility renounced and found again
attempted to patch over an all-­too-­real hiatus between their monastic persona
and the profane world with which they found themselves confronted. The monks

                                       422
                      marseilles, arles, and lérins


of Lérins may have been aristocrats in their own small way. But they entered the
social world of southern Gaul as isotopes of Egypt. On their “Circe’s island” they
had made themselves starkly different from the normal aristocrat. Indeed, their
value to those who wielded real power in the governmental center at Arles was
precisely that they were not like the other lesser nobles from whose ranks they
came.


     A hairy man, girded up with a belt of leather (2 Kings 1:8): Monks
                                as Bishops

In the later 420s, governmental circles in Gaul needed the right sort of bishops.
They could no longer afford to be indifferent as to who headed the Christian
congregations in the cities. Bishops had been involved in the civil wars of the
410s. When Constantius, the head of the armed forces for the court of Ravenna,
crushed Constantine III in 411 and settled the Visigoths in 418, he included the
bishopric of Arles as part of his settlement of southern Gaul. He may even have
lavished a new Christian basilica on the city, called the Basilica Constantia.49 He
set up “his” bishop in Arles—­Patroclus (412–­26). But Patroclus was too close
to government circles for his own safety. In 426 he was murdered by an officer
from a rival faction in the military. In an age used to violent controversies in the
church, Patroclus was one of the very few bishops ever to be assassinated. It was
time to look for a safer sort of bishop.50
   The safer sort proved, in the short run, to be the odder sort. The high-­ups
went for the monks of Lérins. This is not altogether surprising. The careers of
Martin and Priscillian already showed that when wealth spoke in the churches of
the West, it often spoke in favor of ascetics and mavericks. The wealthy and pow-
erful supported such figures precisely because they were both like themselves and
yet utterly different. As ascetics, they had made themselves the antithesis to the
average member of their own class. They represented a notion of the holy that
was starkly opposed to the profane world.
   This cliff face of difference was crucial. It ensured that holy men were holy
and that they could bring blessing and empowerment to laypersons who desper-
ately needed it in dangerous times. In the case of the rapid transfer of two out-
standing monks from Lérins—­first Honoratus and then Hilary—­the common
links of family and class (though present) may not have weighed so heavily with
their lay patrons as did religious considerations. In a monk from Lérins they
found an Elijah for their own, troubled age: A hairy man, girded up with a belt of
leather (2 Kings 1:8). Such persons were not perceived as being anymore mem-
bers of the “upper” class. In the well-­chosen words of Pascal-­Grégoire Delage,
they stood for an “out class” heavily endowed with spiritual power.51

                                        423
                                 chapter 25


    But there was more to the presence of a former monk as bishop than the ex-
pectation of the occasional blessing. With Honoratus as bishop, the laity could
be sure that their souls and those of their kin and loved ones would truly benefit
from the gifts they had offered to the church. Honoratus’s prayers on behalf of
the dead made these endowments effective in the other world. This was not only
because of the efficacy of his prayers. Honoratus’s parsimony as a former monk
made sure that wealth given to the church for the benefit of the souls of the dead
would not be dispersed or wasted on mere display.52 The administration of church
property by monk-­bishops was guided by a horror of excess. This horror did not
derive directly from Cassian, who wrote only about monasteries and not about
the goods of the church. But it was based on a starkly minimalist attitude toward
the handling of wealth that had been honed to a new sharpness by Cassian’s writ-
ings on monastic poverty.
    Somewhat paradoxically, monk-­bishops proved to be enormously successful
fund-­raisers. They were successful because they were reputed to have had no con-
tact with wealth. Their hands were clean. Hilary of Arles (430–­49) continued
to work in the fields when he was a bishop, “though not physically suited for it,
as he came from a distinguished family and had not been brought up for such
things.”53 He constructed machines with which to drain the salt-­pans along the
coast.54 The fact that he had “taken on rustic labors for the sake of Christ” was
even mentioned on his tombstone.55 This studied display of self-­sufficiency on
the Egyptian model only served to heighten the flow of gifts to the church. A
later writer remembered Hilary with pride: “He did not only hold on to the
wealth which the church then had, but he expanded this wealth through many
inheritances given by the faithful.”56
    Yet, despite his reputation in lay circles as a man to be trusted with wealth,
there was a terribilità about Hilary the monk that fits ill with the notion of a
nobleman morphing effortlessly into a bishop. He came to Arles from Lérins
as a prophet to awaken Provence.57 He used his lay connections to the full so as
to turn the see of Arles into a mega-­metropolitan see. But he did this so as to
impose his own high notions of ecclesiastical order. He brought a whole new
network of bishoprics into existence along the fringes of the Rhone. Not surpris-
ingly, these bishops were often drawn from circles connected with Lérins.58 He
rushed from city to city. He summoned councils. He deposed bishops at will.59
Challenged in 444 by Pope Leo, he crossed the Alps in winter, striding on foot
all the way to Rome.60 When the two men met, there was an explosion of words
between them. Hilary, said Leo, uttered “things such as no layman should speak
and no bishop ever have to hear.”61
    Viewed from Rome, Hilary’s charismatic dominance in southern Gaul repre-
sented all that governmental circles in Italy had come to distrust in Gallic ver-
sions of local Romanness. It was a Bacauda within the church—­a balkanization

                                       424
                      marseilles, arles, and lérins


of ecclesiastical politics within the very territories of the Respublica. As the em-
peror Valentinian III declared (at Leo’s behest) in 445: Hilary “had violated the
majesty of imperial government . . . with the lone recklessness of a usurper.”62 The
hero of the saints of Lérins, Hilary was not necessarily the hero of everybody else.


      “A new brotherhood of . . . outsiders”: Monks and the Churches
                           of Southern Gaul

Hilary died in 449. His memorable clash with Leo, in the last years of his life,
should not be treated in isolation. It was the climax of long-­term resentments that
had grown up in Gaul itself. The style of ecclesiastical government represented
by monk-­bishops of Lérins such as Hilary threatened notions of church order
that were well established in Italy and Africa and that had been taken for granted
in much of Gaul and Spain as well. What was at stake was nothing less than the
sociology of the local Christian communities. Would the churches continue to
be churches of the mediocres? Or would a new model of ecclesiastical leadership,
imposed from on top by vivid leaders of monastic background such as Hilary,
establish itself as the norm? This development threatened to brush aside the com-
bination of plebs and clergy that had accounted for the low-­profile tenacity of the
Christian churches in most provinces of the West.
    A sense of alarm at the appearance of the high-­handed style of leadership
represented by Hilary and the monastic clique of Lérins had ensured that the
bishop of Rome was fed with anti-­monastic petitions from the clergy of many
Gallic cities. Letters from Rome responded to these petitions. They accepted the
grievances of a local clergy who felt pushed to one side by the forceful “saints” of
Lérins.
    The bishops of Rome based their case on a strong sense of the clergy as a Third
Estate. As we have seen, this sense had developed in Rome since the days of
Damasus. But the Roman model was not linked to Rome alone. It was a model
that could also be applied to provincial churches. It suited the social profile of
the urban communities from which the clergy were still recruited, both in Italy
and in many other provinces.
    In most Gallic cities, the clergy and their bishops had remained relatively lit-
tle men, drawn from the town councillors and the rich plebeians. Aware of their
precarious position in the social pyramid, the clergy were held together by a fierce
sense of privilege. They modeled themselves on their social equals—­on members
of the lower ranks of the imperial bureaucracy. A clerical career was supposed
to resemble that of a civil servant working his way to the top in a governmental
office. Promotion within the clergy was to be by seniority. Ideally, a bishop should
rise from the ranks of the clergy of his hometown.63 It was expected that the

                                        425
                                  chapter 25


bishop would be chosen by a broad constituency of the “people” of that city, act-
ing in collaboration with their clergy. These were relatively free elections. They
were by no means always dominated by other bishops or by local magnates.64
   Hence the vigor with which the clergy of many cities in southern Gaul re-
acted to the rising prestige of monks. In 428 Pope Celestine echoed their griev-
ances in a long letter to the bishops of Provence. Celestine condemned this “new
brotherhood of wanderers and outsiders . . . who did not grow up in the church,
but came from another religious setting.”65 The resentment of the small-­town
clergy did not focus on the average monk. It was the super-­monk who appeared
to have come out of a privileged background such as Lérins that concerned them.
Celestine insisted that such monks should not be chosen as bishops over the
heads of the clergy. The orderly ranks of clergymen, dressed in ceremonious,
Roman style, were not to be pushed aside by men who positively wished to look
like Elijah the Tishbite—­hairy men, dressed in strange monastic robes.


      “Diversity and separation in one church”: Prosper of Aquitaine
                          at Marseilles, 428–­33

The rise of the monk-­bishops also met with a theological challenge raised in the
name of Augustine by a lay intellectual: Prosper of Aquitaine.66 Prosper was a
married man with strong theological opinions. He was like Sulpicius Severus in
his sharp pen and like Paulinus of Nola in his poetic verve. A product of the lei-
sured culture of previous decades, Prosper was an example of the easy symbiosis
of lay and clerical circles that characterized the Christianity of Provence. He had
little sense that, as a layman, he was debarred from issues debated by the clergy
and by experts in the monastic life. He needed heroes, and he found one in Au-
gustine. He also needed enemies. He moved from Aquitaine to Marseilles in the
420s. Once there, he went out of his way to pick a quarrel with the local sancti. In
428, when Augustine was still alive, Prosper attempted to get the bishop of Hippo
involved in discussions on grace and free will which, so he said, were taking place
at Marseilles. He told Augustine that he represented a circle of “intrepid lovers
of the full doctrine of grace.”67
    In 432 Prosper went further. He picked on Cassian. He wrote a tract called
Contra Collatorem (Against the Sermonizer) to answer what he claimed to be a
veiled attack by Cassian in the thirteenth book of his Conferences on Augustine’s
notions of grace and free will. He even went so far as to accuse Cassian of har-
boring “remnants” of Pelagian ideas. By choosing a pseudonym for Cassian, he
avoided singling him out as the object of a personal attack. But, in so doing, he
also relieved himself from any obligation to understand Cassian’s highly nu-
anced views on grace and the human will on their own terms. As “the Sermon-

                                        426
                       marseilles, arles, and lérins


izer,” Cassian was no more than a straw man for Prosper. He was made to stand
for currents of opinion Prosper considered dangerous because different from the
views of Augustine.68
    Not surprisingly, the “saints” of Marseilles remembered Prosper somewhat
coolly. He was feisty—­nervosus, a man of “muscular assertiveness.” His attack on
Cassian was ill conceived.69 Modern scholars tend to agree. They speak of the
attack on Cassian as “Prosper’s red herring.” It was “a singularly ill-­considered and
regrettably influential interpretation of Cassian’s writings.”70
    Yet on one issue Prosper touched a raw nerve. He wrote when monks of
Lérins had begun to take over the governmental capital of Arles as bishops. Pros-
per sensed that it was time to look at the qualifications of these persons from a
strictly theological point of view. They plainly brought to the cities advantages
of culture, class, and ascetic training, both from Lérins and from their secular
background. But did they think that their activity had sprung from the grace of
God alone? Or had part of their success sprung from their background—­from
“merits” accumulated by their own unaided will, independent of the grace of
God?71
    In this, Prosper did not claim to write only as a theologian of grace and free
will. He claimed to be concerned with the structure of the Christian commu-
nity. He caricatured Cassian’s guarded language. To Prosper (if not to Cassian’s
more sympathetic modern exponents), Cassian seemed to hold back a residue of
free will in the human person. Devout persons brought this precious residue of
free will to the service of God. They placed it entirely in the hands of God, to use
as He wished. Yet even this humble attitude rang alarm bells for Prosper. In his
opinion, to speak of such a residue of free will was the thin end of a wedge.
    This was because Prosper perceived that free will was not a purely abstract,
sociologically neutral notion. It could act as a shorthand for the possession of
social and cultural advantages. Once believers claimed that part of their actions
had derived from their free will alone, independent of the grace of God, this will
itself—­the good will, that is, which led to good religious actions—­could be in-
vested with sociological overtones. Those who came to God of their own free will
might be tempted to think of themselves (and, more important, to be thought of
by others) as having brought with them an entire spectrum of social and cultural
advantages that had been achieved by their own free will. Culture, class, and as-
cetic know-­how might be among them. The church might come to be ruled by
an elite of self-­made saints, who could be thought to have owed as much to their
social background and ascetic grooming as to the grace of God.
    For this reason, Prosper claimed that Cassian’s views would bring about a
fateful “diversity and separation in one church.”72 The very wrongheadedness of
the accusation, when applied to Cassian, showed how much weight Prosper
attached to the issue.73 He accused Cassian of having implied that some persons

                                         427
                                  chapter 25


could be thought to have brought considerably more of their own free will to the
service of God than had others. God would be disposed to “protect and em-
brace” them precisely because of these qualities. They had “anticipated God’s call
with fervor and alacrity.”74 They already showed, in effect, that they deserved to
lead the Christian community: “[They] abound in glory . . . who devoutly and in
their own strength have offered to God what they had not received [from Him,
but from their own past].”75
   The leaders of the Lerinian movement were not immune to this criticism.
Faced by the raw secular world of Arles, they strove to establish for themselves
“visible moral status in the here and now.”76 Humble though they might be in
themselves, their admirers were quite prepared to acclaim them as men of spiri-
tual power, won through ascetic labors on the isle of Lérins and discreetly bol-
stered by their noble background.
   Against this view, Prosper upheld the utter leveling of all wills before God. To
be “called” by God was to be entirely remade by Him. It was to enter a space of
magical transformation, invisible to human eyes and incapable of being measured
by human criteria.77 Social status and culture were irrelevant to this transfor­
mation. If that was so, they might also be irrelevant to the church’s choice of its
leaders. The strong institutional sense of the clergy, preserved in the Roman model,
fostered a social and cultural leveling where only the grace of God (and no visible
social advantages) counted. Only the invisible grace of God could confer distinc-
tion on persons rendered equally faceless by their offices in the church. As far as
Prosper was concerned, lower-­class bishops could emerge in due order from the
drab ranks of the clergy. Such a bishop was as certain of the blessing of God
(provided that he was among the elect) as was any vivid holy man of aristocratic
background who might be brought in from Lérins.


                Servitutis officum: “The due return of service”

           Freedom, Service, and the Gallic Consensus

Prosper’s attack on Cassian was his last contribution to the argumentative world
of the sancti of Marseilles. We should be careful not to give it undue prominence
in the overall religious landscape of the Provence of his time.78 What Susan Wes-
sel has called “the ongoing conversation” about Augustine and the Pelagian Con-
troversy continued in Gaul.79 But it did not continue on Prosper’s terms. What
has been called a “Gallic consensus” emerged.80 This consensus did not reject
Augustine. Rather, when writing of grace and freedom, authors from Lérins and
Marseille chose their words carefully. They agreed with much of what Augustine
had said, but they did so on their own terms. Above all, they placed a screen of

                                        428
                      marseilles, arles, and lérins


language between themselves and the bishop of Hippo. When they spoke of
grace and free will, they avoided speaking in the way that Augustine and his
enthusiastic admirers, such as Prosper, were prepared to speak. We should linger
on this phenomenon, if only for a moment, as it reveals something of the social
world these authors took for granted.
    What the Gallic writers had in common with Augustine was the need to ex-
press the extent of human dependence on God. They shared with him a “spiritu-
ality of dependence.”81 Prosper’s caricature of Cassian tends to make us forget
that, for both parties, Pelagius was the odd man out. He was “a crazy.”82 His talk
of the natural nobility of the soul and of the total autonomy of the will came
from another world than their own. We see this clearly when, at the very end of
the fifth century (in 473–­74), bishop Faustus of Riez summed up the issues that
had been discussed for generations in Provence. He wrote a treatise titled On
Grace. In it, Pelagius’s view of the human person was presented as that of a free
laborer who expected—­indeed demanded—­to gain his reward “by work alone,
without the patronage extended by grace.” Faustus rejected Pelagius’s views out
of hand. Human beings needed a lord to serve heart and soul. Pelagius offered
them not a lord but only a distant paymaster from whom they could claim fair
wages.83
    But how was this acute sense of dependence on God to be expressed? Here
the two sides diverged significantly. Augustine had tended to speak of the rela-
tion between God and human beings in terms of a swamping of the person by
the grace of God. He and his followers used a language of dependence that al-
ways went deeper than the human will. Dependence on God was expressed in
terms of inspiration, of illumination, of a mystical union between God and the
soul. It is perhaps no coincidence that many vocal Augustinians (such as Pros-
per) were also poets. Used to the idea of the poet “possessed” by the Muses, they
saw nothing theologically dangerous in a notion of grace that flooded the entire
person, to create from scratch something totally new because totally inspired. In
the words of a minor poet who celebrated his conversion at this time:
   O Father, if it seems good to grant, put Your whole self within me,
   Into my deepest depths, into the marrow of my soul.
   All that I can do is yours; even to will is barely left to me.84
   In clear contrast to this language of mystical absorption, authors such as Faus-
tus and his predecessors in Provence chose to speak of grace and free will in terms
of a root metaphor derived from the world of social relations. It was a metaphor
taken from the high-­pitched world of the relations between patrons and clients.
Impoverished by Adam’s fall, the human being approached God as a down-­and-­
out client might approach a patron. Human freedom had been “stripped of re-
sources” by sin.85 But, nonetheless, the approach of a sinner was that of a client,

                                       429
                                   chapter 25


not a slave. It was the choice of a free person. Though they might be utterly de-
pendent on their patron, such clients still brought to his service an officium, the
return of a free man anxious to add what little he could to further the cause of his
lord: “So that God may retain the full rights of a lord and the believer may give
in return the freely offered service of subjection.”86 It is a metaphor that bore the
stamp of the age. The landowners of Gaul had struggled at this time to establish
ever tighter vertical relations with their peasants. What they wished from their
dependents was not servitude (which had become harder to enforce in a world
dislocated by intermittent violence) but, rather, the dependable service of cli-
ents. This was exactly what the authors of Provence proposed when speaking of
the services rendered by human beings to God.


     Your lightnings have gone forth over the whole earth (Psalm 76:19):
                      Prosper and the Roman Empire

It was in this way that Provençal authors spoke of the same issues as did Augustine
and his admirers. They often did it to the same purpose—­to stress the absolute
dependence of human beings on God. But they did it their way. They also held
distinctive views on the fate of their own society and of the Roman empire. These
differed significantly from those proposed by an Augustinian such as Prosper.
    It is worthwhile looking at Prosper’s view of the prospects of the Roman em-
pire. It merits greater attention than does his squib against Cassian. In Prosper’s
opinion, the Roman empire already appears as a mere sideshow. Put bluntly:
his Augustinianism convinced him that nothing in the past contributed to what
happened in the present, just as nothing—­no social advantage, no cultural gift,
no ascetic labor—­could precede the workings of grace in the individual heart.
Everything was a new creation. Every event was touched by a sense of vertigo—­it
marked a new departure where the hidden hand of God alone had moved. Ecce
faciam nova (Isa. 43:19): “Behold, I shall do new things”—­the words of God to
the prophet Isaiah summed up Prosper’s challenge.87 The Roman empire in itself
contributed nothing to the daily miracle of the newborn will. Impressive, infi-
nitely ingenious, and strictly necessary if a human race guided by their evil hearts
was not to destroy itself entirely, the old Roman order stood to one side of the
world of grace.88 The two worlds touched in no way.
    At a stroke, Prosper rendered the history of the church majestically indepen-
dent of the history of the beleaguered Respublica. It did not greatly matter to
Prosper if the Roman empire declined. For, to use a modern phrase, Rome was
no longer “where the action was.” The world of God’s grace was a world without
a clear human center. Grace could happen at any time and in any region. The


                                        430
                      marseilles, arles, and lérins


future held any number of surprises. Not all of these were necessarily nasty sur-
prises; many, indeed, might be glorious. But they had nothing to do with the
march of human history, not even with the march of Rome—­far from it. These
novel glories happened and would continue to happen because of the mighty
pulse of God’s all-­powerful grace within the Catholic Church alone: “Your light­
nings have gone forth over the whole earth (Psalm 76:19).”89
   Prosper left Marseille for Rome in 433 to put his pen at the service of the
pope. It is significant that, once in Rome, he chose to sum up his own worldview
in a Chronicle and not in a theological tract.90 In Prosper’s Chronicle the Res­
publica was ousted from center stage. For Prosper, the history of the fifth century
was not the history of barbarian invasions at the expense of the empire. His his-
tory was a Gesta Dei per ecclesiam—­the history of the great acts of God that
continued to happen through his church. These acts of God provided plenty of
good news. Thus, the entry for 431 assured the reader that even the terrible Irish
had come to believe in Christ. They had done so through bishops alone. At one
stroke, because of the God-­given energy of bishops, Britain had ceased to be Pe-
lagian and utter pagans on the edge of the world had become Christian.91 The
Respublica had nothing to do with that triumph along the former frontiers of
Rome. The message was clear. Even if the empire vanished, such events would
continue to occur: “for the glory of the saints is this, that the whole world should
come to be subjected to God and to His laws.”92
   Altogether, in his Chronicle, Prosper viewed the world around him with “an
almost surprising serenity.”93 This was because he had rendered the workings of
God’s grace in the church in the West as independent of the Roman empire as he
had rendered active service of God, in those touched by God’s grace, indepen-
dent of any claims to previous qualifications derived from lay status or from as-
cetic prowess.
   Such serenity was by no means to be found among the sancti of Marseilles.
We have already met the unknown author of the Chronicle of 452 in the previ-
ous chapter. He was no lover of Augustine or of those who loved Augustine. In
an early entry, he spoke of the spread, in Gaul, of the “heresy” of “those who
believe that they are among the predestinate, which is said to have originated
with Augustine.”94 In the Chronicle of 452, the Respublica—­the Roman empire—­
remained the center of attention. The chronicler recorded, with glum brevity,
the years in which whole provinces, or groups of provinces, fell off the edge of
his world—­made subject to barbarians or separated from Rome by Bacaudic re-
volts.95 In 451 he concluded that “in this time, the state of the empire—­of the
Respublica—­appeared to be pitiable in the extreme.”96 Rather than the high Au-
gustinian optimism of Prosper, which looked past the Respublica to the con-
tinuous, grace-­filled triumphs of the Catholic Church, these were chill views. In


                                       431
                                 chapter 25


southern Gaul, serious persons had begun to allow themselves, for the first time,
to think the unthinkable: “Why is it that the condition of the barbarians is so
much better than our own?”97 In the early 440s, a memorable and far from reas-
suring answer to this question came from another sanctus of Marseilles—­an ad-
mirer and, perhaps, a former monk of Lérins, now working as a priest in the city:
Salvian of Marseilles.




                                      432
                           Chapter 26
                           •••••
 Romana respublica vel iam mortua: With the empire
               now dead and gone
                Salvian and His Gaul, 420–­450




    A Report on the State of the Nation: Salvian’s De gubernatione Dei
                         in Modern Scholarship

The most vivid and by far the best known commentary on the state of the Roman
empire in the 430s and 440s was provided by yet another refugee to Provence—­
Salvian. It is to one work of Salvian in particular, his De gubernatione Dei—­On
the Government (that is: [On the providential rule] of God)—­that all historians
of the social history of the later empire turn so as to learn about the social ills of
the Roman empire in the fifth century.1 Writing in 1899, Samuel Dill could say
of Salvian:
   He feels a burning indignation against the selfishness of the wealthy and
   official class, and an equally passionate pity for the poor and oppressed,
   which, had he lived in the nineteenth century, would certainly have made
   him a Socialist of the extremest type.2
   In the words of his English translator, Salvian’s De gubernatione Dei “might
well be entitled A Report on the State of the Nation.”3 It was a damning report.
Throughout the last century, the De gubernatione Dei has been quarried for evi-
dence for the abuses that are held to have caused the fall of the Roman empire in
the West. Salvian has been treated as our principal source for the imperial tax
system, which sapped the resources of the cities and which drove even well-­to-­do
Romans to seek freedom among the barbarians and the Bacaudae.4 He is re-
garded as a prime witness for the oppression of the peasantry by the great land-
owners, which has seemed to many scholars to announce the coming of the
Middle Ages: “Salvian described a primitive feudal system, an obvious precursor
to the political structure of medieval France.”5 Last but not least, Salvian’s insis-
tence on making invidious comparisons between the vices of the Romans of his

                                        433
                                   chapter 26


day and the virtues of their barbarian conquerors has led him to be alternately
denounced as a defeatist, even as a “collaborator,” by Frenchmen and to be ac-
claimed by Germans for having foreseen the future of early medieval Europe. To
use the words of Salvian’s translator: “Salvian looks to the future and realizes that
the destiny of Europe belongs to the Teutonic tribes.”6
    Yet we do Salvian a disservice by quarrying his work in this way for pieces of
raw evidence for causes of the decline of the empire. We treat him as no more
than the writer of “A Report on the State of the Nation.” We look less at Salvian
himself than at what he tells us about the symptoms of the terminal illness of
west Roman society. We argue about whether Salvian’s diagnosis was correct. We
do not ask why he wrote as he did or why he emphasized certain symptoms rather
than others. Salvian has become for us a source. He is not often considered as a
person.
    In fact, Salvian was a vivid person with his own, idiosyncratic take on the
problems of his day. In his writings we catch the hopes and fears associated with
a particular juncture in the crisis of the empire—­of the Respublica—­in a particu-
lar region. He wrote in the late 430s and early 440s, probably in Marseilles and
certainly for the sancti of southern Gaul.7
    Let us look for a moment at the world that Salvian and his readers looked out
on from the relative security of Provence. In the 430s and 440s it had become
plain that what had once been a universal empire had begun to unravel. The ter-
ritories around Marseilles and Arles had become a self-­conscious imperial enclave.
They were lands of the Respublica. But Salvian now looked out at a world where
the Respublica was only one state among others. The “central Romanness” associ-
ated with the Respublica (to use the well-­chosen term of Peter Heather) had
come to be challenged by powerful alternatives in both Gaul and Spain. Provence
and the southern valley of the Rhine were ringed by barbarian kingdoms in the
making and by ominous, stateless zones associated with the Bacaudae. Far to the
south across the Mediterranean, Africa had recently fallen to the Vandals. Sal-
vian wrote no longer for the citizens of a world empire but for the inhabitants of
an enclave in which the grandeur of an ancien régime still lingered. He wrote to
warn them that the Roman order of which they remained so proud hung on by a
thread. The Respublica was almost dead and gone: “Now dead or at least drawing
its last breath in that part of the world where it appears to be still alive.”8
    We have to understand why Salvian was prepared to say this. It was not simply
because of the social abuses he described so vividly—­these were mere signs for
him of the progress of a more deep-­seated malady. This was the implacable work-
ing out of the judgment of God against an entire society that claimed to be Chris-
tian. The Christians of the empire had abandoned God. In the last analysis, for
Salvian the church and not the empire was the Sick Man of Europe. The empire


                                        434
                            salvian and his gaul


might fall because the church had already fallen. How had Salvian come to this
startling conclusion?


        “A teacher of bishops”: Salvian at Marseilles, ca. 420–­ca. 480

We know very little about Salvian, but what we do know is revealing. In the first
place, Salvian was no Paulinus of Pella. He had not declined quietly into genteel
poverty. Nor was he a man of the south, like Prosper of Aquitaine. He had come
from the far north. He had been present as the Roman order that had seemed so
secure in the days of Ausonius collapsed along the frontier of the Rhine. Trier,
the former northern capital of the Roman world, was sacked four times within a
decade. Salvian claimed that he had seen rows of decomposing corpses outside
its walls.9 We learn from one of his letters that a female relative had been left
stranded in Cologne. Utterly impoverished, she was too poor to flee. She had
become dependent on the good graces of barbarian ladies from the new Frankish
governing class that had taken over the city. Salvian had sent this letter so as to
raise funds from fellow saints to support her son, a boy “of not insignificant
family.”10
    Salvian came to the deep south as a refugee from a region where the imperial
order appeared to have fallen to settle in territories where this imperial order had
survived. He did so as a conversus—­a convert to an ascetic form of Christianity.
His wife had joined him in this conversiuncula—­this “little conversion of ours.”
We know this from an awkward letter he wrote to his parents-­in-­law, who had
been pagans. But even when they became Christians, they remained deeply hos-
tile to the asceticism of their daughter and son-­in-­law. The letter shows that, for
Salvian, to be a sanctus was always to be on the outs with ordinary Christians.11
    In the mid-­420s, Salvian appeared at Lérins. He joined persons who were as
resolutely alienated from the world as he was. He may have lost his wife at that
time. He wrote in heady terms about the abbot of Lérins, Honoratus. He called
him “our very own sun in Christ.” The slightest absence of the abbot caused a
chill to fall upon his monks, as if a cloud had covered the sun.12 But it was not
as an admirer of Lérins but as a preacher in the church of Marseilles that Salvian
established himself. He became a priest. He lived to a ripe old age; he was still
alive in 480. He had outlived the Respublica whose imminent demise he had de-
clared around 440.
    Unlike the abrasive Prosper, Salvian was remembered fondly in the Catalogue
of Illustrious Authors written by Gennadius of Marseilles. Gennadius wrote of him
with evident admiration as a “teacher of bishops.” He was well-­known for his many
works, “written in a rhetorical and forthright style.”13 Despite the challenging


                                        435
                                  chapter 26


idiosyncracy of the writings of his middle age, Salvian was not necessarily an
isolated figure. He expressed and may have molded the views of an entire body
of opinion—­of monks, clergymen, and impoverished members of the local aris-
tocracies. The anger of this group at the rulers of their own society lingers in
Salvian’s pages.
    Salvian always wrote for saints about the preoccupations of their fellow saints.
His works circulated among the monk-­bishops drawn from the monastic circle
of Lérins. In the 420s he had been the tutor of Salonius, the son of Eucherius.
Eucherius was one of the best known of the admirers of Lérins. When Eucherius
became bishop of Lyons in 435, Salonius was placed by his father as bishop of
Geneva at some time before 440. Geneva was a crucial city. It was a watching
point into the valleys of Switzerland; it stood on the edge of a region wide open
to the barbarian world. In 443 Burgundian militias were settled there, in order to
offer much needed defense. It is, perhaps, significant that Salvian chose to write
for a bishop whose city lay on the frontier of the receding empire.


    Illa egregia . . . dudum primitivae plebis beatitudo: That outstanding
    blessedness which the first community [of Christians] once enjoyed

              Salvian and the Wealth of the Church

Bishops such as Salonius worried not only about the barbarians but about the
solvency of their own churches. They needed donations from the laity. But their
attention was not directed only to the laity. As members of the circle of Lérins,
they had more intensely inward-­looking preoccupations. Like John Cassian, they
had to face the issue of the renunciation of wealth. Was renunciation obligatory
for all monks and clergymen? Could they expect those “devoted to religion”—­as
lay penitents, as ascetics, and as members of the clergy—­to surrender all their
wealth to Christ? More important yet, would they renounce their wealth by giv-
ing it to the church?
    The first known work of Salvian, written sometime between 435 and 439,
addressed this theme. It was called Ad Ecclesiam—­an Open Letter to the Church—­
and came to be known as On Avarice. Characteristically, for a member of a Pro-
vençal in-­group, Salvian adopted a pen name. He was Timothy—­the Timothy to
whom Saint Paul had written so much advice on the management of the church.
He went out of his way to justify both the pen-­name and the book itself in a long
letter to Salonius.14
    The Ad Ecclesiam was typical of the mood that was current among the sancti
of Provence. A streak of radicalism ran through all their writings. They wrote so
as to challenge a chosen few to adopt ever more consequential and more drastic

                                        436
                            salvian and his gaul


attitudes toward the world around them. What Salvian attacked with particular
ferocity in the Ad Ecclesiam were not the weaknesses of the average lay Chris-
tians. Those who claimed to be true Christians—­as monks and clergymen—­and
who nonetheless refused to give their wealth to the church were the principal
target of his contempt.
    The tension between real ascetics and sham ascetics gave vigor to Salvian’s pen
as he wrote the Ad Ecclesiam. We see this most clearly in his idealization of the
life of the first Christians. In this idealization of the Jerusalem Community (as
this had been described in chapters 2 and 4 of the Acts of the Apsotles), his view
of the church had been influenced by debates in Marseilles, stirred up by the
monasticism of Lérins and by the writings of John Cassian. He proposed a fun-
damentally monastic vision of the original purity of the Primitive Church. For
Salvian, the early Christians had lived in a “time of exceptional blessedness.”
Judged against this vibrant utopia, the contemporary church seemed deeply
fallen.15
    Salvian’s ideas converged with those of John Cassian. Both men were strang-
ers to Provence. Cassian was a Latin-­speaking east Roman from the Danubian
frontier; Salvian was a refugee from the Rhineland. Both thought of the Chris-
tian church in their own days as overshadowed by the imagined perfection of the
ecclesia primitiva, the church in its first days. But Cassian was the more optimis-
tic of the two. For Cassian, a precious remnant of the first solidarity of Christians
appeared to have survived, despite a massive cooling off of zeal among the major-
ity of believers. It could still be found in the monasteries of Egypt and might be
renewed in properly founded monasteries in Gaul.16 Salvian, by contrast, made
plain in the opening pages of his Ad Ecclesiam that this perfection had all but
totally vanished:
   That exceptional and outstanding blessedness which once the first
   community—­the primitiva plebs—­had enjoyed has passed away. . . . How
   different the Christian people are now from what they had been! . . . In a
   new and hitherto unheard of manner . . . the Church wanes as it reaches its
   fullness, slipping back as it advances.17
For Salvian, the vibrant image of the Primitive Church hovered above his age as
a permanent rebuke—­a historical superego.
    The Primitive Church of Salvian was very much an image of his own making.
It was more like fifth-­century Lérins than first-­century Jerusalem. He thought
of it as a community of the wealthy who had renounced their properties in favor
of the church. In a mighty upsurge of zeal, the rich Christians of Jerusalem had
followed the words of Christ: If you would be perfect, go, sell what you possess and
give to the poor, and you will have treasure in Heaven (Matt. 19:16). Salvian placed
far less emphasis than had Augustine—­or even Cassian—­on the sharing of goods

                                        437
                                  chapter 26


and hearts associated with the Jerusalem Community. Rather, he presented the
Jerusalem Community as a gathering where the rich had made a massive pur-
chase of paradise by surrendering their wealth to the church in return for treasure
in heaven.18 When speaking of the early Christians, Salvian used the same lan-
guage as that with which the monk-­bishop Hilary of Arles was praised, a decade
later, on the inscription placed on his sarcophagus. Here was a man who had
“purchased heaven by earthly gifts rendered, now, perpetual.”19
    Aimed at heaven, this was a sharply upward-­tilted use of wealth. The poor are
all but absent from Salvian’s view of the Primitive Church. Those “in need” who
benefited from the pooled goods of the first community were not the real poor.
They were the “holy poor,” the “poor among the saints” of Salvian’s times. They
were poor monks and clergymen who expected to be supported by rich mem-
bers of the laity, much as Jerome had expected them to be supported thirty years
previously when he wrote against Vigilantius.20


        On Avarice: Family Strategies and Donations to the Church

Not surprisingly, the Ad Ecclesiam was described somewhat unkindly by a Ger-
man scholar of the nineteenth century as “a manual of the clerical art of extor-
tion, a guide to legacy hunters.”21 The tract was known to contemporaries as On
Avarice. But the avarice attacked in it had nothing to do with the denunciations
of the rich that we have seen in the preaching of Ambrose and in the Pelagian
treatise On Riches. The themes of luxury and self-­aggrandizement are absent.
What mattered for Salvian was not how the rich had gained their wealth nor
even how they used it. It was where they would eventually place it. The avarice
Salvian attacked was the retentiveness of potential wealthy donors to the church.
These were persons who would rather bequeath their property to anyone but
clergymen.
    The Ad Ecclesiam reminds us that in fifth-­century Gaul, we have silently en-
tered a new age. This is not the fund-­raising of Augustine’s sermons, addressed
still to socially diverse congregations. With Salvian we are dealing with heavier
matters—­with transfers of wealth from rich families through testamentary be-
quests to the church. Because of this, the Ad Ecclesiam takes us back to a very
ancient, very Roman world. Captatio—­legacy hunting—­had been one of the prin-
cipal “social pressure points” of Roman upper-­class society.22 This was because an
element of sheer willfulness, even whim, had always been associated with the dis-
tribution of legacies. The testator was encouraged to include his friends among
the beneficiaries of his will. As a result, members of the dying man’s family lived
in perpetual fear that overgenerous legacies to friends might rob them of a large


                                       438
                           salvian and his gaul


share of the inheritance. In the words of Edward Champlin: “Captation ignites
the tensions at a major social frontier between family and friendship.”23
    In the straitened conditions of fifth-­century southern Gaul, the ancient ten-
sion between family and friendship flared up with unusual intensity around the
issue of gifts to the church.24 This was because, in many cases, the laity had be-
come as dependent on the church as the church was on the laity. Well-­to-­do
families had come to use the church so as to husband their own threatened re-
sources. It struck them that Christian renunciation was not such a bad idea if it
reduced the number of competitors for the family inheritance. Girls were forced
to become nuns so as to save on dowries. The emperor Majorian was called upon
to rule on this issue in 458. He ruled that young girls should not be forced to
take the veil. He plainly did so in answer to petitions by rich senators, some of
whose colleagues had taken advantage of this new form of estate planning.25
These strategies affected boys as well as girls. Young men of good family were
placed in the clergy or they were allowed to become monks—­but only on the
condition that they lost their share of the inheritance to their married brothers
and sisters. In this way, would-­be monks and clergymen found themselves disin-
herited by their own families. They were denied the financial means to express
devotion to the church—­through donations, through the foundation of monas-
teries, and through almsgiving to the poor.26
    Salvian’s sharpness on this issue is a reminder that many local churches may
not have looked only to the wealthy laity for financial support. When it came to
substantial endowments, they expected to receive more from persons who were
already members of the church’s hierarchy. As we saw in the case of Pinianus at
Hippo in Africa, real wealth was expected to come to the church from rich per-
sons who had joined the priesthood. Priests, bishops, wealthy monks, and lay-
persons who lived the religious life as penitents (of which there were a number
in Gaul) formed a small but dependable constituency of potential donors. What
appalled Salvian more than did the selfishness of the normal rich was the fact
that many religious persons, even clergymen, preferred to pass on their wealth to
their kinsfolk or to rich patrons rather than give it to the church.27


     “One tiny flicker of hope”: Deathbed Gifts and the Other World

In much of the Ad Ecclesiam, Salvian repeated the preaching of former bishops.
Bishops had long encouraged their parishioners to remember the church in their
legacies. Augustine in Africa and Valerianus of Cimiez in Provence both urged
their hearers to think of Christ as if He were an extra son—­thereby ensuring that
the church received a share of each family’s inheritance.28


                                       439
                                   chapter 26


    But Salvian did it his way. He only mentioned that particular option in pass-
ing. Instead, he went out of his way to make clear to the laity that he was not
making the same absolute demands on them that he made on his fellow saints.
He stressed the fact that he did not expect all Christians equally and without
exception to give all their wealth to the church, as the first Christians had done
at the time of the Jerusalem Community.29
    Salvian conceded with ponderous condescension that the majority of his
readers were far too weak to follow such advice. They would never be persuaded
to renounce their wealth in their own lifetime. Rather, he insisted that, for such
weaklings, God had offered an “extremely soft” option. Gifts could be made on
their deathbed, for the world to come. Deathbed donations to the church gave
average believers “one tiny flicker of hope” as their souls left the body at the hour
of death.30 Such gifts enabled the soul to cross the awesome threshold of death.
One gave to the church so as to avoid a Hell that loomed just beyond the mo-
ment of death.
    We have become so used to the medieval practice of gifts for the soul that it is
easy to forget that Salvian’s vivid focus on death and the other world struck a new,
sharp note. Previously, donors had given for less clearly focused reasons. They had
given so as to increase the glory of their local church. They had spoken vaguely of
donations for “the salvation of their souls.” But they had not given much thought
to the exact mechanisms by which this salvation might be achieved in the other
world through gifts and memorial services. Indeed, they had not been encouraged
by their clergy to give much thought to such obscure matters.31 Even Augustine’s
notion of alms for the expiation of sins was mainly concerned with regular alms-
giving in this world. His preaching and writing is notably free of other-­world
scenarios.
    But if there was anything the monks of Lérins brought to the Christianity of
their time, it was a novel, overwhelming sense of judgment in the other world.
Hilary of Arles came to be known for his preaching of hellfire.
   Who could have shown more vividly the terrible ordeal of the Last Judge-
   ment? Who could inspire such terror by conjuring up the dark fire of Hell?
   Who could express the agonies of the searing river of fire, as it swept the
   sinners away?32
    Hilary had used these images to inspire penance. Salvian did so to inspire
gifts. Faced on their deathbed by the serried ranks of their own family—­“a yoke
made heavy by the solid flesh of kinship”—­donors should think of the serried
ranks of angels and of demons who awaited them in the next life: “Behold, the
staff of the Sacred Tribunal awaits you as you leave this life. The torturing angels
and the ministers of undying punishments stand at the ready.”33 It is as if we were
suddenly transported, across half a millennium, to the scenes of bliss and terror

                                        440
                            salvian and his gaul


that decorate the portals of the Romanesque churches of France. Altogether,
with Salvian a new, chill wind blew through the churches of southern Gaul. In
this world, as well as in the next, the judgment of God had come dramatically
close: In every place, the eyes of the Lord look out upon the good and the wicked
(Prov. 15:3).34


             De praesenti iudicio: Judgment in the Here and Now

Salvian’s next work was dedicated directly to Salonius. It was his famous tract De
gubernatione Dei. Written at some time after 439 and not completed, it was all
too aptly known to contemporaries as De praesenti iudicio: “Judgment in the
Here and Now.”35 It is important to realize the extent to which an overpowering
awareness of the imminent presence of God as the judge of human sins—­and
not a modern historian’s sense of the abuses of Roman society—­drove Salvian to
produce his tract for the times.
    Salvian’s insistence on the judgment of God made him a writer who was as
powerful as he was idiosyncratic. There were many options he did not take when
wrestling with the fate of his society. These other options had been canvassed
in Provence. For Eucherius of Lyons, for instance, the ills of the present merely
proved that Christians lived in the “old age” of the world. It was better for them
to think of their own old age and approaching death than to focus in too con-
crete a manner on the ills of contemporary society. Like everything else, it would
soon pass away.36 Indeed, seen from a monastery, the world seemed a somewhat
diaphanous place. It was as pallid as a moon in the morning sky.37 Not so for
Salvian. He held his focus with fierce determination on the real ills of a real em-
pire. He did so to persuade his readers that they were in the presence of a God
who judged human sins in the here and now with terrifying particularity.
    In writing in this way, Salvian showed that he was part of the general “Gallic
consensus” in theology. This consensus included a strong sense of the unrelent-
ing rigor of the Law of God. Salvian’s emphasis on the Law of God resembled the
insistence on total obedience to the commandments of God that had been put
forward in Pelagian writings that were still read in Marseilles. Human beings were
free—­but they were free only to serve God. They did this by observing His Law
to the full. The Law of God had been given to every Christian. To fail to observe
it was not an excusable sign of human weakness but amounted to a direct act of
rebellion against God. What God wished from the Christian people was total
transparency to His Law: “The life of a Christian should be as pure—­as crystal
clear—­as the clear, bright fluid in the pupil of the eye.”38 God’s Law was clear for
all to obey. God’s judgment for breaches of this Law was also clear for all to see.
A terrible sense of the transparency of the justice of God in punishing the empire

                                        441
                                   chapter 26


for Christian breaches of His Law made the De gubernatione Dei quite unlike
any other contemporary writing.39
    Why was this remorseless logic of crime and punishment so important to Sal­
vian? It was because, at the back of Salvian’s mind, there lay a lingering convic-
tion that, in some way or other, the Roman empire was the Israel of modern times.
Like the ancient Israel, it was a state subject to the peculiar care of God. This fact
conferred a sense of privilege on the inhabitants of the surviving territories of the
empire. But it also laid a heavy responsibility upon them.40
    As David Lambert has made plain in a thoughtful study, Salvian wrote about
the Christian Roman empire of the fifth century as if it was an avatar of the king-
dom of Israel: “It had become a politico-­religious entity of the same kind as Israel
under Moses.”41 The empire was an Israel writ large. The former intimacy of the
link between Israel and the Law of God haunted Salvian when he thought about
the present. There had once been a time on Sinai when “men and angels had
joined in a single school” to learn the Law of God.42 Israel was a privileged soci-
ety because it had once been brought near to the Law of God. The Christian
Roman empire could have done the same. Instead (again like Israel), it neglected
God and His Law.
    Thus, Salvian fastened on the widespread tendency of his contemporaries to
identify the Christian empire with ancient Israel. But he drew a different conclu-
sion from this identification. His message was so terrible because he claimed that
the Christian Roman empire was, indeed, an Israel but a failed one. Its inhabi­
tants had rejected the opportunity to be an Israel obedient to the Law. For this
reason, Roman Christians lived in an Israel in its last days, an Israel deserted by
God. And this was the fault of the Christians. For they had rebelled against the
Law of God. The moral backsliding of the Christian congregations had drained
the churches of the supernatural virtue that had once been attached to the very
name of Christian.43 A church whose prayers should have acted to “placate” God
had come to “exacerbate” Him.44
    Vos non estis populus meus: “You are not my people” (Hosea 1:9). These words
of Hosea to an abandoned Israel summed up, for Salvian, the extent of the peril
the surviving Respublica now faced.45 It had been betrayed from within by its own
Christians as certainly as Israel had been betrayed by its own inhabitants when
they had rebelled against the Law of God. Like the ancient kingdom of Israel in
its last days, the Romans of the late 430s and early 440s were paying the price for
their abandonment of God. For this reason, God’s judgment upon them could
not have been more just or more chillingly clear:

   The Romans were once the strongest of all, now they are powerless. . . . Bar-
   barian peoples used to pay tribute to them. Now we are tributary to the bar-
   barians. They rent to us the very sunshine. Our entire safety is up for sale.46

                                         442
                            salvian and his gaul


    Deus noster propitius esto Reipublicae Romanae: Our God, may You
                     be propitious to the Roman state

                Salvian and Contemporary Opinion

In order to write as he did, Salvian deliberately brushed aside alternative, more
comforting ways of seeing his world. He notably passed over the high Augustin-
ian optimism of Prosper of Aquitaine. For Prosper, as we have seen, the workings
of God’s mighty grace in the church effectively cut the history of Christianity
loose from the history of the empire. Prosper’s world of pure grace was a world
with no center. The hand of God was as likely to show itself on the shores of
Ireland as in Arles. And the workings of God’s providence were beyond human
scrutiny. A velvet opacity screened the relation between sin and judgment.
    Nothing could be more different from Prosper’s serene mystification of the
workings of grace and of God’s providence than the remorseless clarity of Salvi-
an’s sense of a direct relation between God’s Law and God’s judgment in the here
and now. Nor did the centerless world proposed by Prosper mean anything to
Salvian. His view of the Respublica as an avatar of the kingdom of Israel kept his
attention focused on the existing territories of the empire. For it was there that
the Law of God should have been observed in its fullness; and so it was there
that the blows of God’s judgment had fallen with inexorable force and in a man-
ner that was clear for all to see.
    In adopting this view, Salvian pointedly dissociated himself from the incipi-
ent Christian patriotism of his contemporaries in the territories of the Respublica.
We who read Salvian’s On the Government of God with the advantage of hind-
sight tend to treat the Roman empire of the late 430s as a doomed institution.
But this was not how it appeared to many contemporaries. The 430s and early
440s were seen by many as a time of consolidation after the terrible events of the
early decades of the fifth century. Having experienced widespread violence, the
Christian communities of southern Gaul began to dig in. As we have seen, a siege
mentality bought townsfolk together around their local churches. For the first
time in their history, the cities of Gaul gained major cathedrals. In Clermont, a
new Christian basilica (built by the bishop, a rich senator) occupied a large pro-
portion of the newly fortified citadel.47 In Geneva itself, Salonius (the recipient
of the De gubernatione Dei) found himself in a complex of new Christian build-
ings that occupied a sixth of the area of the newly walled city.48
    This defiant mood was most prevalent in cities that stood on the frontiers of
the Respublica. Narbonne lay within striking distance of the Visigoths of Tou-
louse and had been besieged by them. It needed divine protection. In 445 bishop
Rusticus of Narbonne rebuilt the city’s basilica. He did this not only as a bishop
but as a public figure. An inscription placed on the lintel in clear monumental

                                        443
                                    chapter 26


script made plain that the Praetorian Prefect of Gaul himself had urged Rusticus
to undertake the building. The prefect also contributed part of the state’s in-
come, along with building materials and workmen, to the amount of 2,100 solidi.
Set up “through the mercy of Christ,” the cathedral of Narbonne was a sign that
Christianity had become the state cult of the Roman Empire.49 The prayers
of the Church were believed to have maintained the protection of God for the
Respublica. It was the same elsewhere. Now buried in the long grass beside the
Christian basilica of Salona (Solin, on the Dalmatian coast of Croatia, a little
north of Split), a similar lintel declared in large capitals: Deus noster propitius esto
Reipublicae Romanae—­“Our God, may You be propitious to the Roman State.”50
    Salvian’s answer was a firm “no.” God would not be propitious to the Res­
publica. For all its rhetorical style, the On the Government of God was not a purely
literary confection. It was an icy blast directed against the mood of recovery and
consolidation that had comforted Salvian’s compatriots. What did Salvian offer
them instead?


              The Footsteps of God: Salvian and the Barbarians

Salvian proposed, for the very first time, a novel map of Gaul. This was a strictly
moral map. What he traced upon it were the differing shades of knowledge of
the Law of God in differing regions and among differing groups. Some groups
could claim diminished responsibility—­they had not known that Law. Others,
such as the Romans, could make no such claim—­they had known the Law. They
were entirely responsible for their sins. They must face the full rigor of God’s
judgment.
   In an unusually illuminating article, Michael Maas has pointed out the “imag-
inative leap” involved in propounding such a view of the world. For Salvian’s map
was not like the usual Roman map. It did not divide the world in cultural terms.
No chasm stood between the uncivilized barbarian and the civilized Roman.
Compared with knowledge of the Law of God, such distinctions were trivial.51
Let us see what this shift of perspective involved.
   Salvian’s insistence on knowledge of the Law of God as the only criterion
according to which God judged any human society had the effect of rearrang-
ing the barbarian groups of Gaul as if they lay around the Respublica in a series
of concentric circles. Gaul was ringed by an outer fringe of unconverted, pagan
barbarians—­Saxons, Huns, Franks, Gepids, and Alamans. They were a supremely
nasty lot. Salvian (who had seen them at work along the Rhine) had little use for
non-­Christian barbarians. But, unlike the Romans, they could at least claim ig-
norance of God’s Law. For that reason, they would suffer less harsh punishment
than would the Romans.52

                                         444
                            salvian and his gaul


    Next came an anomalous gray zone. Goths and Vandals were not pagans.
They were Christians. But they were misinformed Christians. They were Arian
heretics. Proud to be old-­fashioned (and proud of their links to the eastern em-
pire), the Goths had remained loyal to what had been the imperial religion in
the days when the mighty pro-­Arian emperors Constantius II and Valens had
been their patrons along the frontier of the Danube.53 In Salvian’s opinion, the
Goths could not have known the Law in its entirety because they were Arians.
They had received only a partial version of this Law from their Roman Arian
teachers. For that reason, they could not be judged as harshly for their errors as
Roman Christians would be judged. They erred in good faith. Only the Catho-
lic, Roman Christians of Salvian’s own time had no excuse. They could expect no
mercy.54
    For this reason, Salvian singled out the Christian Visigoths and Vandals as
the privileged agents of the judgment of God. This was not difficult. These two
groups had been the barbarians whose successes needed most to be explained.
They had done most to humiliate the Respublica. Salvian ended his work with
a description of the Vandal conquest of Carthage in 439. More than any other
barbarian victory, this had inflicted a body blow that left the empire stunned. If
this catastrophe was not “judgment in the here and now” then nothing was.
    Altogether, Salvian saw the barbarians (and especially the Visigoths and Van-
dals) as the traveling assizes of God. They seemed to him to move from province
to province in a manner that was grimly intelligible. Each province in turn had
deserved its fate. As a result, Salvian made the tentative advance of barbarian war
bands from region to region, as they followed the fortunes of Roman civil war
like flitting wolf packs, seem inevitable and overwhelming. The confident lines
and arrows that show the “barbarian invasions” in conventional modern text-
books owe more than we think to Salvian’s merciless vision. For Salvian, this series
of unexpected conquests seemed to hang together in a single, dramatic pattern.
They were the footsteps of God as He strode in judgment across the West in the
here and now.55


                     Dicam quomodo: Let me tell you how

                      Salvian and Roman Society

In Salvian’s view of the world, barbarians appear largely as executors of the judg-
ment of God against the Romans who had known and abandoned His Law. As
we have seen, this view has stimulated vehement debate among European schol-
ars. But we must remember that Salvian’s daring shift of perspective toward the
barbarian world was not as important to him (or, one suspects, to his readers) as

                                        445
                                   chapter 26


was his treatment of the sins of the Romans themselves. Here Salvian was quite
unusual. Far from indulging in ill-­focused jeremiads, he was prepared to spell out
in detail what sins in particular had earned the wrath of God. He wrote not only
to tell “why” but to tell both “what” and “how”—­what had gone wrong in
Roman society and by what mechanisms this wrong had come to happen. Dicam
quomodo: “Let me tell you how” was Salvian’s refrain.56 Though he is often dis-
missed as a purveyor of rhetorical exaggerations, the very tenacity with which
Salvian held his focus on the ills of his time make him quite unusual.
    In the first place, Salvian confronted his contemporaries with a shocking
anomaly. Romans had begun to flee to the barbarians where formerly they had
fled from the barbarians in horror, as Salvian himself had done when fleeing from
the Rhineland.57 Now they fled toward the territories of their former enemies.
They had been forced to do this because of Roman oppression: the authorities of
the Respublica had come to treat Roman citizens as little better than barbarians.
For Salvian, the Bacaudae were a glaring example of this dire process. Branded
with the opprobrious name of “Bacaudae,” freeborn Romans found themselves
the target of vicious campaigns of repression by Roman armies. They were treated
as if they were public enemies of the Roman state.58
   They are forced to be barbarians. . . . It is the unjust rule of Romans ­(Romana
   iniquitas) which makes them cease to be Romans.59
    Salvian did nothing to soften the impact on his readers of this ultimate anom-
aly. He did not share the interest of modern historians in the emergence of new
styles of local Romanness around barbarian courts or in the no-­man’s-­land of the
territories controlled by the Bacaudae. He had no sense whatsoever that a new,
barbarian-­Roman world was emerging. Rather, he still looked at Gaul and Spain
with the hard eyes of a man who wrote from within the territories of the Res­
publica. He was well aware of the ideology of those who governed his region.
Any province under barbarian rule was, technically, a province taken “captive”
by the enemies of Rome. In such a captive province, there simply should not have
been Romans who were happy to be illic—­“over there”—­in barbarian territory.
Yet such Romans now prayed that they would never again become subjects of
the empire.60
    For Salvian himself there was little that was romantic about barbarians. God
might judge them and excuse them according to his Law. But that was a God’s-­
eye view. For Salvian and his readers, barbarians—­even Christian barbarians—­
were different. They even smelled different. Stench clung to their bodies and to
their clothes.61 Yet well-­born Romans of high culture preferred to live among
them: “they prefer to live as free men in a captive land than to live as captives
under the name of Roman freedom.”62


                                         446
                            salvian and his gaul


    Other authors had written about Romans who found it easier to live with
barbarians than to pay taxes to the empire.63 That, in itself, was not new. What
was new was the manner in which Salvian drew attention to this flight as a shock-
ing inversion of the normal order of things. The Respublica should be the place
of liberty. Augustine had said so, in no uncertain terms, only a decade previously,
when he drafted his petition to halt the slave trade in Africa. Roman armies were
there to fight for “Roman liberty” lest Roman citizens become the captives of
barbarians.64 Now the most sinister transformation of all had taken place. It was
within the Respublica itself that Salvian perceived the ultimate anomaly—­a new
birth of captivity.


         “Strangled, as if by thugs, with the bonds of taxes”: Salvian
                                 and Taxation

We must be clear as to what Salvian regarded as the root cause of this sinister
development. He focused on an all-­too-­well-­known object—­the fiscal apparatus
of the Roman state. Inherited in all its abrasive vigor from the fourth century, the
imperial tax machine still struggled in the face of massive dislocation and losses
of territory to pay the armies and to maintain a governmental class whose wealth
still derived in large part from their control of taxes.
    Thus, in his emphasis on taxation, Salvian did not simply repeat the perpetual
and general grievances of all subjects of the later empire against the weight of
taxes. His comments reflected a precise moment in the crisis of the Roman state.
From the military point of view, what remained of the Respublica had rallied
with unexpected vigor in the 430s and early 440s. Covering with mobile forces a
vast area between the Rhineland and the Danube, Count Aetius had rendered the
empire a power still to be reckoned with. In the words of Guy Halsall, Aetius’s
campaigns amounted to a form of “government through punitive expedition.”65
Quite apart from the brutality of such campaigns, they had been extremely
costly. The cavalry units used by Aetius were crushingly expensive to maintain. A
policy based as much on diplomacy as on the use of force drained money in the
form of subsidies.66
    In both Gaul and Italy, taxes had to be collected even more stringently than
before. Traditional exemptions were curtailed or overridden. The reaction of the
rich—­especially the high-­ups in government circles—­had been to protect them-
selves against high taxes by shifting the burden onto lesser taxpayers. This abuse
now became more than usually flagrant and unpopular. A rhetoric of the public
good had long been deployed by subjects of the empire in their petitions for tax
relief. The same rhetoric was echoed back to taxpayers in imperial edicts. In 441


                                        447
                                   chapter 26


the chancery of Valentinian III in Italy denounced tax evaders in the same lan-
guage as did Salvian:
   Since they serve only their domestic profits and deprive the common
   good, in which is contained their true and substantial welfare. . . . The bur-
   den which the rich man refuses . . . only the weaker man bears.67
The language used in the imperial edicts shows that Salvian was no innovator.
He partook in the widespread culture of criticism to which we referred when
speaking of Ambrose. But what was different was the implacable finality of his
judgment: “the Romana respublica is now dead . . . strangled, as if by thugs, with
the bonds of taxes.”68
   Salvian’s relentless precision on matters of taxation betrays the clear but nar-
row focus of his own field of vision and of those who read him. An impoverished
local notable himself, he spoke with rare anger on behalf of the minor nobility of
the provinces. Such persons felt increasingly alienated from the narrow govern-
ment circles who controlled imperial policy. It was this class of minor notables
that felt particularly threatened by ruthless taxation. When Salvian spoke of the
pauperculi—­the “poor little guys”—­who were devastated by high officials, he did
not mean the lower classes in the modern sense.69 His “poor” were rarely peas-
ants. They were never the down-­and-­out poor of the cities. They were people like
himself. In the 430s it was they who risked sliding down the steep slope into
impoverishment as refugees and as fiscal debtors.70 And they did so because they
were victimized by their own more fortunate and more ruthless peers. The im-
mediate villains of Salvian’s tract were local ones. They were the leading town
councillors—­the principales—­of the cities. As in the fourth century so in the
430s and 440s: the duty of the leading councillors was to extract all that they
could from their weaker colleagues as well as from the peasantry. Ever since the
fourth century, they had grown rich through manipulating the tax machine of
the Roman state at the expense of their peers.
   What place is there where the principales do not devour the very guts of
   the widows and orphans, and even of the sancti [the clergy, whose duty it
   was to protect them]?71
   Salvian seldom lifted his eyes from the brightly lit scene of local, city-­based
extortion. Yet he singled out the high-­ups of government as the real culprits. For
it was they who had set the imperial tax machine in motion: “Praefectura . . .
praeda: a Prefecture confers a license to pillage. . . . The whole world is destroyed
so that a few should bear the title of Vir Illustris.”72 These were bitter words.
Salvian knew that the title of vir illustris conferred by high office gave access
to the upper ranks of the nobility. Former holders of high offices entered the
charmed circle of ex-­prefects and sons of prefects to which Sidonius Apollinaris

                                        448
                            salvian and his gaul


belonged and to which he clung so tenaciously in the generation after Salvian. In
Salvian’s account we can hear distinctly the angry voice of men less privileged
than Sidonius and his friends. This was the voice of members of the lesser aris-
tocracies linked to their region and to its provincial cities. In writing as he did,
Salvian expressed the anger of an entire group, directed against what was fast be-
coming an isolated ancien régime—­an upper aristocracy closed against newcom-
ers and tarnished by association with the systematic violence of the Roman state.
If this was “central Romanness,” then, Salvian implied, it got what it deserved.


    Labores manuum nostrarum manducamus: We are eating the bread
                         of our own making

                 Outer Captivity, Inner Oppression

High taxation meant impoverishment. And impoverishment meant a quicken-
ing of the most sinister process of all—­the enslavement of Romans by Romans
within the territories of the Respublica itself. Salvian went out of his way to ex-
plain exactly how this happened. Faced by the weight of taxes, poor farmers
found that they did not have the means to emigrate to the barbarians. Instead,
they did what little they could do: they handed themselves over to the rich
as clients in return for protection. The rich took over title to their lands under
the pretext of saving the farmers from the land tax. The patron registered the
farmer’s land on the tax rolls under his (the patron’s) own name. Within a few
years, the poor farmers found themselves without land, although they were still
hounded for personal taxes. Such patronage by the great, so Salvian claimed,
turned free men into slaves as surely as the magic of Circe had turned humans
into pigs.73
    This was an unpardonable transformation. Salvian had no objection to pa-
tronage in itself. He wrote that it showed “greatness of soul” in a powerful man
to offer to help the weak.74 But to turn a free client into a slave in this way went
against the whole grain of his view of society. As we have seen, the Gallic consen-
sus on theology had assumed a view of society that accepted sharp asymmetries
as long as the partners remained free agents. The relation of patron and client
provided the root metaphor for the relations between God and human beings.
Salvian shared this view. Dependence on God—­or on the great—­was not the
same thing as slavery. Free men in distress might approach the great as abject
clients. But they should not be made into slaves. As far as Salvian was concerned,
Gallic society could remain steeply hierarchical. But (in the words of Cam Grey)
this hierarchy was to be based on “reciprocal vertical relationships” between pa-
trons and clients, not on the unilateral enslavement of the clients.75

                                        449
                                  chapter 26


   It is important that we should not be misled by Salvian’s dramatic picture of
the oppression of clients by their patrons in the Gaul of the 430s. It is far from
certain that enslavement through patronage happened on an unprecedented
scale at this time. Still less is it certain that such patronage represented a new
development—­a harbinger of feudal links of dependence that bound the peas-
antry as serfs to their lords. There is much to be said for the less dramatic view
proposed by Jens Uwe Krause: such patronage did not mark a new departure.
Salvian was not describing the sudden emergence of a new, “proto-­feudal” order
throughout the countryside of Gaul. He was only describing the normal ups and
downs of farmers forced to sell part or all of their land to richer neighbors so as
to cover their tax debts.76
   But what this deflation of the phenomenon of rural patronage in Gaul does
not explain is the intensity with which Salvian himself fastened on it as a privi-
leged symptom of the miseries of the Romans. He did so for a reason that was
deeply rooted in his thought on the justice of God. The justice of God was always
apposite. By a relentless lex talionis, the Romans suffered at the hands of the
barbarians precisely what they were inflicting on their fellows: nothing more,
nothing less: “Are we surprised that the barbarians capture us, when we make
captives of our own brothers?”77
   If Salvian has misled social historians of the fifth-­century West by exaggerat-
ing the power exercised by rural patrons over their dependents, it was because
he wished his readers to know that any captivity Romans inflicted on each other
was bound to be as brutal as that which any barbarian had inflicted on Romans.
For the justice of God to stand, the one captivity—­that imposed by patrons on
their clients—­had to be presented as just as oppressive, as widespread, and as
inexorable as was the other—­the captivity inflicted on Romans by barbarians.
For the one to be a punishment for the other, both had to be presented as equally
disastrous and equally irrevocable.
   Here Salvian’s rhetoric struck a contemporary note. “Captivity,” “subjuga-
tion,” and “unconditional surrender” were the ugly words with which contempo-
rary chroniclers spoke of the rise of the barbarians at the expense of the Roman
empire. The Chronicle of 452, for instance, recorded the dates when province
after province fell under the “captivity,” the ditio—­the “power”—­of barbarian
groups.78 Faced by this rhetoric of subjugation used by contemporary upholders
of the Roman order when talking of the world outside the territories of the
Respublica, Salvian invited his readers to look inward. Everything that they, as
Romans, complained about in the outside world was happening within Roman
society itself. It was because of the sinister growth of “captivity” in their own
society that they suffered “captivity” at the hands of barbarians. Labores ma­
nuum nostrarum manducamus (Psalm 127:2): “We are eating the bread of our
own making.”79

                                       450
                           salvian and his gaul


                    Sonus populi: The sound of the people

As a convert to the ascetic life and a clergyman, Salvian expected to be a lonely
figure. In the words of Robert Markus:
   Salvian has sharply divided the world: the utterly corrupt Roman world
   on the one side, the few who have renounced it on the other. The division
   of the world into the few—­or the very few, as he likes to add—­reverberates
   like a scarcely muffled drumbeat through Salvian’s pages.80
    But his sense of belonging to a beleaguered group did not mean that Salvian
was isolated from reality. He saw the world through narrow slits. But these slits
were no more narrow than those through which Sidonius Apollinaris viewed (with
calculated euphoria) the traditional Respublica in its last days. What Salvian saw
he saw clearly. This was a robustly profane society. The upper reaches of this so-
ciety might revere the “saints”—­as they had revered the striking monk-­bishops
of Arles, Honoratus, and Hilary. But this honor had been based on an ancient
compact. The world of the holy (represented by ascetic bishops) was not supposed
to mingle with the world of the profane and still less to modify it. The “saints”
could do nothing to remove the stain of deep profanity from the empire itself.
    The unredeemed profanity of the public life of the later empire was essential
to Salvian’s view of the world. He piled up a unique denunciation of the social
sins of the Romans—­the merciless collection of taxes and the imposition of new
slavery on dependent farmers. But, as far as he was concerned, even if the Roman
empire of his time had been strong and just, it had remained a proud institution
deaf to God’s Law.81 As Hervé Inglebert has seen clearly, the surviving Respublica
represented for Salvian the “absolute triumph of the earthly city.” It had remained
an empire oblivious to God.82
    For Salvian, the Christian façade of the empire amounted to no more than a
set of “emperor’s clothes.” In reality, the Roman state was stark naked. The em-
pire had not opened itself to the values of the Christian church it claimed to
patronize. The church itself had lost its power to pray for the safety of the em-
pire.83 The clergy were snubbed by tax collectors and by high officials.84 Those
who adopted the monastic life were mocked by their fellow nobles and were
deprived of their inheritances by their families.85 Salvian himself remembered
how he had once been sent packing by a praepotens, a high official to whom he had
appealed on behalf of a man whose livelihood was threatened. With “blazing
eyes,” the high-­up told Salvian that he had sworn to Jesus Christ to ruin the poor
fellow. He would not go back on his oath.86
    This was not simply a personal failure on Salvian’s part. In his works, we can
catch the same sense of frustration that the correspondence of Augustine and
Alypius had conveyed a decade previously in Africa. When taxation and the

                                       451
                                  chapter 26


necessities of state were involved, the empire, though ruled by Christian princes,
presented to the bishops a cliff face of secular power largely untouched by the
appeals of churchmen. This was not a state that was in any mood to surrender its
prerogatives to bishops and clergymen.
    One aspect of the empire showed this clearly. The high ceremonies of state
remained heavy with profane elements. There was little or no sign of Christian-
ity in the ivory diptychs with which the consuls of the fifth century continued to
celebrate their elevation, as Symmachus had done in the fourth.87 The splendid
scenes in Arles, which Sidonius Apollinaris remembered as a youth from the late
440s, would also have been soundproof to Christianity. Salvian even claims that
the auspices were still taken on these occasions.88 Roman generals on campaign
at the head of still largely pagan armies made up of barbarian mercenaries were
happy to use non-­Christian forms of divination on the eve of battles.89 Many
bishops viewed the ideology of empire itself as still bathed in sinister grandilo-
quence. Bishop Quodvultdeus, who had been driven from Carthage by the Van-
dals in 439, was by no means impressed by the empire to which he had fled. He
was convinced that one of the signs of the approach of Antichrist and the end of
the world was the ease with which petitions to the emperor still spoke of “your
Godhead, your Altars, your Perennial Being.”90
    This robust profanity was also to be seen in all aspects of the life of secular
persons. The numinous link between abundance and the turning of the seasons
(on which we touched when discussing the world of Ausonius) continued to
haunt the imagination of the rich. In the court city of Ravenna, the Feast of the
Kalends was still celebrated with ancient gusto. Dressed as the mighty gods who
ruled the planets, actors danced from house to house through the streets of the
city.91 An exquisite mosaic has recently been discovered beneath the Via d’Azeglio
in Ravenna. It shows children dressed as the seasons participating in a round
dance. It may date from this time.92
    But what shocked Salvian most of all was the fact that in the cities of Africa
and Gaul, the sense of solidarity on which the morale of the citizens depended
owed little to the Christian churches and still less to the preaching of bishops.
It continued to be generated by the roar of the circus. This was what still drew
townsmen together in times of crisis. For the games had never been occasions for
mere amusement. They had linked the cities to the destiny of the empire. Salvian
had seen this happen in his native Rhineland. In 421 the notables of Trier sought
from the newly created emperor Constantius III funds to celebrate his accession
through circus games. They would have solemnly gathered in the amphitheater
on the Petrisberg above a city already blackened by the fires of war. The wild ex-
plosion of worldly joy associated with such games (and by no means the prayers
of the saints) were held to be the most effective remedy for the upheavals of the
past decades.93

                                       452
                            salvian and his gaul


    Altogether, to go to the circus in a time of crisis was not to succumb to luxury
but to show a robust, civic patriotism. To love one’s city was to love the games.
Salvian reports that as the Vandal armies closed in around the governmental capi-
tals of Africa—­first Cirta (Constantine, Algeria) in Numidia and then Carthage—­
they were met by “the sound of the people as it roared acclamations in the
circus.”94
    Salvian wished to treat these heavy symbols of collective loyalty as if they
were dispensable. They were frivolous luxuries. To support the games in times of
“calamity for the imperial treasury” was to throw good money down the drain.
He claimed that financial restraints had already led to the widespread abandon-
ment of games in most of the cities of Gaul.95 Historians have tended to take
Salvian at his word. They readily link the end of circus celebrations in the West
to the economic recession of the fifth century.96
    Yet there is only limited truth in this assertion. As we have seen, games had
already come to be less numerous in the fourth century. Even in a prosperous
province such as Africa, they tended to be concentrated in certain “flagship” cit-
ies. But in such cities they survived; their ideological weight had not been dimin-
ished. Major government centers in the West maintained their circuses through-
out the fifth century and even longer. In Saragossa, for instance, at the extreme
western edge of the surviving territories of the Respublica in Spain, a spectacle
was laid on in the circus in honor of the new consul in the 490s.97 As late as 577,
the first reaction of a Frankish king to a challenge to his rule was to build circuses
in Soissons and Paris, “for he was keen to offer spectacles to the citizens.”98
    Salvian would have taken little comfort from this sign of continuity. His view
was that, like a patient high on drugs (Sardinian herbs that were used to bring
on uncontrolled laughter), the Roman people “laughed as it died.”99 He wrote
to declare that the time for laughing was over. The profane world associated with
empire was all but dead. Yet it had refused to die. It is possible to read Salvian’s
“Report on the State of the Nation” against the grain of its author’s intentions.
Careful reading of On the Government of God and of a wide array of contempo-
rary sources shows that in the 430s and 440s, Salvian still faced an imperial soci-
ety that had remained deeply profane. The exercise of power in the Respublica
had retained an ancient, pre-­Christian tone. Only when that ancient core finally
gave way, in the course of the sixth century, could it be said that the West had
definitively entered a “post-­Roman” age. Only then—­but not before, and cer-
tainly not in the time of Salvian—­did the Christian church finally come into its
own. For it was only then—­in the later fifth century—­that the church emerged
as the owner of great wealth that made it for the first time the equal of the landed
aristocracy. This was a decisive change. Let us end, then, in these last three chap-
ters, by turning first to Italy and then back to Gaul, Spain, and Africa to see how
this—­the last stage of our story—­came about.

                                        453
                           Chapter 27
                           •••••
                Ob Italiae securitatem: For the security of Italy


                Rome and Italy, ca. 430–­ca. 530




                               Fifth-­Century Italy

In 439 Count Aetius returned to Rome after a series of wide-­ranging campaigns
in Gaul. The Roman Senate celebrated his return by erecting a golden statue to
him in the Atrium Libertatis—­a building near the Senate house at the top of the
Forum. The base of the statue has survived. It is a modest block covered with el-
egant, small letters that now stands beside the entrance of the Senate house
unnoticed by passing tourists. In this inscription, the Senate praised Aetius for
victories that had “returned Gaul to the Roman empire.” But they thanked him
above all “for the security of Italy” obtained by his distant wars.1
    It was a resolutely local view. It reminds us that after the first fateful spasm
of violence that began in 406 and culminated in 439 with the Vandal conquest
of Carthage, the unity of the western empire had shattered. Many regions had
abandoned (or would soon abandon) the sense of belonging to the Respublica, to
the empire. As in the days of Symmachus (now half a century in the past), the
Roman Senate that erected the statue to Aetius still saw itself as the symbolic
core of the Roman world. But this world had changed. The members of the Sen-
ate (most of them from families based in Rome) now looked out across the Alps
to a Gaul and a Spain that had become war zones. It seemed as if Italy alone, as
it stretched in a succession of rich and diverse landscapes from the Alps to the
Ionian sea, was a land of rare security.2 In Italy the Respublica that Salvian, writ-
ing about Gaul, had declared in just these years to be “almost dead and gone”
appeared still to be very much alive.
    A strong sense of the unbroken survival of the Roman ancien régime pre-
vailed in Rome and in central and southern Italy. By contrast, northern Italy,
between the Alps and the Apennines, was a different world. A corridor between


                                        454
                                rome and italy


Gaul and the Balkans, it was frequently dislocated by warfare. Furthermore,
northern Italy was used to the presence of barbarians. For centuries the Roman
civilian popu­lation had been flanked by a large military establishment of pre-
ponderantly barbarian origin. Ever since the days of Ambrose, the Romans of the
north had derived much of their wealth from supplying the armies gathered
around the court in government centers such as Milan and Ravenna. It was
not surprising, therefore, that the establishment of barbarian rule in Italy fi-
nally came from the inside and not as a result of invasion. It was a result of the
final winning out of a non-­Roman military faction in northern Italy. After 476
the emperor simply withdrew, leaving power in the hands of a series of strong-
men who emerged from barbarian contingents that had long been stationed in
northern Italy and the Balkans—­first Odoacer (476–­93) and then Theodoric
(493–526).3
   Compared with the “political hothouse” of northern Italy,4 Rome, central Italy,
and the Mezzogiorno moved to a slower rhythm. For the upper classes of the
region, the “security of Italy” meant two things: the preservation of the stupen-
dous stage set of Rome itself and, alongside this, the development of an agrarian
economy capable of supporting them in new, less affluent times. How did the
Christian church, especially in Rome, fit into this situation?


                   Complexity: A New Narrative for Rome

In order to answer this question, it is important that we should abandon two
narrative modules that are deeply embedded in modern scholarship on the his-
tory of fifth-­century Rome. The one asserts that after the Gothic sack of 410, the
emperors abandoned Rome forever, leaving a vacuum of responsibility that was
rapidly filled by the popes. It is believed that in the course of the fifth century, a
Rome without the emperors rapidly became “the Rome of the popes.” The other
belief is a corollary of this narrative. It is said that the Senate of Rome rallied
briskly around the bishop of Rome. It is often assumed that the wealth of Chris-
tian senators fueled the rise of an opulent church from the early fifth century
onward and that the result of this alliance was the emergence of a Christianity
deeply tinged with aristocratic Roman values. This has been presented as an alto-
gether happy evolution. It is said to have preserved the continuity of the tradi-
tions of classical Rome in Christian form. In a darkening age, marked by so much
violence and destruction in other regions of the West, what values—­we tend to
think—­could have been more worthwhile preserving than Roman values? It has
always proved heartening, both to scholars and to general readers, to imagine a
fifth-­century Rome where little had changed. For the leaders of the Christian


                                         455
                                  chapter 27


church itself had become more Roman than the Romans. Rome, it is said, be-
came the preserve of
   a papacy sure of itself and penetrated by the old educated classes, Christian
   by now yet conscious of the obligation to carry on the traditions of the
   classical past.5
      [For] the pope and his clergy, allied to the great Roman families, em-
   bodied the Church in Rome.6
    These are the warm words of Richard Krautheimer, the master exponent of
the Christian architecture of fifth-­century Rome. Yet we have come to learn (if
only in the last decade) that the story is not so simple. In the words of Federico
Marazzi, who has summed up the new view in a luminous essay: “The key to
understanding the city of Rome . . . is complexity.”7
    Marazzi rightly insists that the fifth century was not characterized by an ef-
fortless mutation of pagan Rome into the Rome of the popes. Rather, we are
dealing with a more tension-­laden situation that continued the abrasive dynam-
ics of the Rome of the fourth century. As we have seen, in fourth-­century Rome
many groups had been content to go their own way. No one group achieved out-
right dominance over all the others in the city. This situation continued through-
out much of the fifth century. In a world characterized by compartmentalized
endeavors, the final emergence of the bishops and clergy of Rome as dominant
players in the urban scene came late. It happened only in the late fifth and early
sixth centuries—­in the pontificates of Simplicius (468–­83), Gelasius (492–­96),
and Symmachus (498–­514).
    These bishops did not emerge as leading figures in Rome as a result of an alli-
ance with the Senate. They emerged, in many ways, in defiance of the Senate.
They did so as the upholders of a high view of ecclesiastical autonomy. By the
year 500 ad, this sense of autonomy was given weight by the possession of solid
landed wealth, carefully administered by the bishop and his agents all over
southern Italy. In asserting their autonomy, the bishops and clergy looked past
the Senate. They were the heirs of the development we have traced since the days
of Pope Damasus. Damasus and his successors had pushed the clergy to the fore
with the support of the minor nobility. The conditions of the fifth century
­favored the further emergence of the clergy as a Third Estate in Rome. We must
 look now at how the eventual victory of the clerical element in the city came
 about.
    In order to do this, we must abandon the notion that the emperors were ab-
 sent from fifth-­century Rome. In fact, the emperors resided in Rome far more
 frequently than they had ever done in the previous two centuries. Rome quite as
 much as Ravenna was their capital. It provided the ruler of a diminished empire
 with what was still a spectacular backdrop for himself and his court. When they

                                       456
                               rome and italy


resided in Rome, the court and its resident officials could be kept in supplies by
an ingeniously revamped annona system.
   The court made its presence felt in the churches. For the entire first half of
the fifth century, the great basilicas of Rome owed as much to the emperors and
to their courtiers as they did to local donors. In the succinct words of Andrew
Gillett:
   Sixtus [432–­40] and Leo [440–­61] transformed the urban landscape of
   Rome . . . but their works, often seen as an expression of the pope’s new-­
   found local authority within the city . . . occurred in the presence, not the
   absence of the western emperors.8
    For instance, Sixtus III completed the great basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore
at the top of the Esquiline Hill. It dwarfed the titular churches around it. It made
the pope present in an area previously dotted with senatorial houses.9 The great
mosaic that can still be seen on the arch before the apse spelled out, in the visual
language of Roman triumphal art, the claims of the bishop of Rome to be the
head of a Christian religion that was as worldwide as the empire itself. The church
was dedicated by Sixtus to the plebs Dei, to the Roman congregation as a privi-
leged and holy People of God.10
    But the building of Santa Maria Maggiore owed less to the unaided initiative
of Sixtus than we once thought. Probably built on imperial property, it had been
aided at every step by the emperor.11 It is notable that Sixtus donated to Santa
Maria Maggiore “a twelve pound wine jug of the finest gold.” Gold was the fin-
gerprint of empire; its use betrayed the active participation of the imperial court.
At Santa Maria Maggiore and elsewhere, golden liturgical plate made its first ap-
pearance in Rome since the days of Constantine.12 The age of Sixtus III has often
been described as the first great age of papal Rome. For the emperor and for the
governing circles resident in Rome, the foundation and endowment of basilicas
such as Santa Maria Maggiore represented, rather, a momentary return, fostered
by the court, to the golden age of Constantine.13
    It is also far from certain that, in the fifth century, the great Roman families
were any more committed to the economic support of the church of Rome than
they had been in the fourth century. Some families did contribute; many others
did not. Compared with the resident aristocracy of Constantinople, who poured
money into new shrines and monasteries, the great families of Rome were a
minor presence. Courtiers, officials, and, later, military men were the figures
who left their marks on the churches of Rome. It was they, and not the nobles,
who made repairs, provided mosaics, and offered ex-­votos. Indeed, when it came
to giving land to the church, the upper nobility was more than usually ungener-
ous. They kept the best land to themselves. In the suburbium—­the intensely cul-
tivated area outside the city that was a zone of prime real estate dominated by the

                                        457
                                 chapter 27


nobility—­the church held only 5 percent of the land in around 500 ad. In the
fifth century there had been no avalanche of noble wealth in the direction of
the church.14
    For many leading nobles in the fifth century—­as in the fourth—­Rome was
first and foremost a stupendous ancient city. It was notable for traditions that
were thought to reach back a thousand years. It had by no means become a city
dominated by Christian shrines. Resident Roman senators blended easily into
the ancient, pre-­Christian backdrop of the city. Many remained crypto-­pagans
for longer than we might expect. We have already met Volusianus, the uncle of
Melania the Younger, whose criticisms of Christianity immediately after the sack
of Rome provoked Augustine to write his City of God. As late as 437 Volusianus
was still a pagan, though nominally enrolled as a catechumen of the Christian
church. He was only baptized on his deathbed.15 There were many like Volusia-
nus both in Rome and in Constantinople. Their existence in high society was
screened by an “ideology of silence.” They were there; one simply did not talk
about them. For their very existence mocked the public ideology, which claimed
that Christianity had become the sole religion of the Roman world and that pa-
ganism no longer existed.16 As Arnobius, an African writer in mid-­fifth-­century
Rome, put it, there were still many members of the rich for whom the Christian
Psalms and the teaching of Christ on almsgiving were frigidae naeniae, “unin-
spiring ditties.”17
    These attitudes were surprisingly long-­lasting. As late as 494, Pope Gelasius
claimed to be outraged that members of the Senate still supported the festival of
the Lupercalia, which dated from the days of Romulus. Every February 14 naked
youths dashed through the city whipping ladies suspected of immorality and sing-
ing obscene ditties—­which, on this occasion (so as to keep up with the times)
may have included songs about the adulteries of a member of Gelasius’s clergy.18
    Even good Christians of the noble class spent more time and money main-
taining the joy of their city and the glory of their families in the Colosseum and
the Circus Maximus than they did in the churches. In 494 Flavius Turcius Rufius
Apronianus Asterius was consul. His very name represented a confluence of great
families, like the quarterings of a late medieval heraldic shield. We know from
the subscription of two surviving manuscripts that Asterius had edited both the
Eclogues of Vergil and the works of Sedulius, a recent Christian poet. But he had
spent his money on Rome. As consul, he had “thrown away his revenue as a mat-
ter of pride” for his beloved city.19 But what was this city like?




                                       458
                                 rome and italy


       Apparet quantus in Romana civitate fuerit populus: It is evident
          how great the population of the city of Rome has been

         Population and Supply in Fifth-­C entury Rome

Those who study Rome in the fifth and early sixth centuries have to resign them-
selves as best they can to a peculiar lacuna in their evidence. The one factor that
is crucial to any convincing narrative of the social and economic history of Rome
in this period remains unknown: the population of the city. Legislation on the
organization of the Roman annona in the fourth and early fifth centuries pro-
vides us with a series of spectacular figures. There may have been as many as
300,000 recipients of cheap pork in 367. There were still 120,000 after the
Gothic sack. As late as 452, 3.5 million pounds of pork were provided for some
141,120 citizens. Despite the sharp drop after 410, Rome seemed (on paper at
least) to have remained one of the largest and best provisioned cities of the
Mediterranean.20
    Yet, for many scholars, these figures seem too good to be true. They argue that
this level of population could not have been maintained throughout the fifth
century. They assume that the loss of massive levies of grain and oil from Africa
due to the Vandal conquest of Carthage must have had drastic consequences.21
Furthermore, field archaeology in the suburbium of Rome and in southern Etru-
ria appears to point to a “sudden and unforeseen” emptying of land that had once
been given over to intensive agriculture for the Roman market.22 The sudden
death, after 450, of entire tracts of countryside around Rome may be a warning
sign that we are looking at the traces at one remove of an otherwise silent and
gigantic catastrophe—­the emptying out of a city which, in 400, had been the
largest human settlement on the face of the planet.
    Yet, even if we subscribe to a dramatic view of the recession of Rome during
this period, we still know little about the pace of this collapse. Somehow, Rome
does not seem to have collapsed as rapidly or as drastically as the model to which
historians appeal to explain this collapse would lead us to expect.23 Thus, when,
in 533–­35, the bureaucrat Cassiodorus wrote of the Rome of his times, he toyed
with the contrast between the present and the glorious past of the city:
   It is evident how great was the population of the city of Rome, seeing that
   it was fed by supplies even from far off regions. . . . For the vast extent of the
   walls bears witness to the throngs of citizens, as do the swollen capacity of
   the places of entertainment and the wonderful size of the baths.24
   But Cassiodorus’s edict showed that he did not think that he was living among
ruins. He was still busily organizing pigs for Rome. In the form of livestock, at
least, the annona for Rome had continued to be gathered throughout southern

                                         459
                                  chapter 27


Italy, if not in such prodigious amounts. When King Theodoric visited Rome in
500, he confronted a populus Romanus that could be thought to be as large as
120,000. Theodoric also provided 8,500 modii of grain for the poor gathered
around the shrine of Saint Peter. This was the equivalent of a year’s supply for
300 persons.25 In the words of Sam Barnish, Rome in the early sixth century still
gave “the impression of a great city.”26
    Behind this impression there lies a largely hidden history of the redeploy-
ment of Italian agriculture in the south to make good the losses of supplies from
Africa.27 This redeployment did not reach the same levels as in the age of the an­
nona at its height in the fourth century. But it did ensure the one thing that mat-
tered. The People of Rome continued to be honored by receiving civic rations in
one form or another. On occasions, these may have been no more than token
distributions of honey and rare wine. Pork continued to be provided from the
ever-­available herds of pigs in the toe of Italy.28 Through these somewhat make-
shift devices, Rome retained an outstanding ancient tradition. It remained a city
of the annona, which meant that it also remained a city of the populus Romanus.


     Ad maiorem gratiam voluptatemque populi Romani: To the greater
                charm and delight of the Roman people

Rather than lock ourselves into false certainties, either way, as to the size of
Rome at this time, it is better to attempt to envision the changes in the texture
of its urban life and the relations between different groups at this time. Fifth-­
century Rome was not a ghost city. But it had become somewhat of a parody of
its former self. The houses of the senatorial aristocracy came to dominate the city
more than ever. In the hills of Rome, houses with splendid marble pavements
held the high ground up to the end of the sixth century.29 But they now stood in
the midst of deserted gardens and the emptied, charred ruins of former, even
greater palaces.
    It was a world in which the urban framework had fallen apart. Vivid islands
of continued habitation stood out more clearly in the midst of a degraded urban
landscape.30 This applied also to the Christian churches and shrines of Rome.
Some were gentrified. They were made into oases of civilized living, like the
noble palaces of the same period. In 461–­68, for instance, Pope Hilarus set up
a fountain and a porch in brightly colored marbles in front of Santa Croce in
Gerusalemme (near the Lateran). He also endowed the great suburban shrine of
Saint Lawrence (San Lorenzo fuori le mura) with a little palace hall (a praeto­
rium), an indoor and an outdoor bath, and two libraries.31
    The great families who still lived in these palaces treated the city as their
own. The dislocation of the old annona system and its replacement by less mas-

                                       460
                               rome and italy


sive supplies made the inhabitants of Rome if anything more dependent on food
supplies drawn from the estates of the nobility. We do not know, but we can
reasonably imagine, that a large proportion of the plebs of Rome depended on
the great families as clients, for employment, and even for food. The nobiles were
tempted to behave as if they owned the populus Romanus. When, in 509, the
supporters of a pantomime began to heckle their own patrons (the family of
the Decii) in the Circus Maximus, the Decii simply sent armed slaves into the
amphitheater to beat up their rebellious clients.32 A century earlier, such high-­
handed treatment of the People of Rome would have cost Symmachus his palace,
if not his life.
    But, though perhaps more dominant, the nobles were poorer than they had
been before. Traditional forms of self-­advertisement came to a virtual end as the
century progressed. Except on rare occasions, the upper nobility no longer re-
ceived statues from their peers and admirers.33 In the same manner, lesser figures
did without the marble sarcophagi that had been the glory of the Christian cata-
combs of the fourth century.34
    Yet Rome remained a splendid stage set for its resident nobility. Throughout
the fifth century, members of the Senate worked hard to create within the city
a series of “museum islands” devoted to their own version of the past of Rome.
The buildings around the Senate House (where Aetius’s statue was placed) were
carefully restored. Deserted buildings full of rubble were hidden behind re-
paired façades. The paving of the Forum was maintained.35 This was not merely
an exercise in museum-­like conservation. It was about the collective memory
of an entire class. The continuity of the Senate with its own past was stressed.
Leading pagans of the late fourth century (such as Nicomachus Flavianus) were
brought back into public view by statues to which long inscriptions were at-
tached. Christian senators placed their inscriptions beside those of their pagan
ancestors, as if to emphasize an unbroken continuity of civic pride to which reli-
gion was irrelevant.36
    This determination to continue the civic past of Rome was particularly visible
in the mighty Colosseum. The seats around the arena of the Colosseum were
regularly repaired up to the 530s.37 Even today, we can sit where the last senators
of Rome once sat in massed family groups. They presided over games that had
the same ingredients (if not lavished on the same scale) as those once celebrated
by Symmachus and his son. Only the gladiators who had given a savage thrill to
the praetorian games of little Memmius were absent.38 Occasionally a cross, now
carved so as to mark the divisions between the seats of different families, gave a
hint of Christian times.39 But what happened in that great building was sound-
proof to Christianity. The only noise in it was that of the People of Rome. In 438
the Prefect of the City (Flavius Paulus) restored the Colosseum after an earth-
quake. He did so ad maiorem gratiam voluptatemque [populi romani], “for the

                                       461
                                  chapter 27


greater charm and delight of the Roman People.”40 At the same time, however,
Paulus and his family were careful to make their vows to Saint Paul by contribut-
ing to the marble sheathing of the great basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls.41


   Great Works and Little Works: Annona, Almsgiving, and the People
                              of Rome

What we find, in the Rome of the mid-­fifth century and in subsequent decades,
is an uneasy balance between two very different efforts. The lay elites of the city
strove to maintain the civic life of Rome as they had had inherited it from their
grandparents of the fourth century. At the same time, the bishop of Rome and
his clergy attempted to reach out to the population of the city as a whole in the
name of the care of the poor. What was at stake was a redefinition of who exactly
were the “People of Rome.” It was only when this redefinition occurred (at the
very end of our period—­indeed, at the very end of the sixth century) that the
“People of Rome” came to overlap, in the social imagination of contemporaries,
with the “poor of the Church” who had always been subject to the care of the
bishop of Rome. The Roman church, and not the emperor and the nobility, be-
came the protector and the nourisher of the People of Rome. This was the cru-
cial change. Then, and only then, could Rome be truly called “the Rome of the
popes.”
    This was not an evolution we can take for granted. At first sight, the two
forms of care were utterly disproportionate. The amounts spent on maintaining
the annona and the games dwarfed the sums spent on poor relief.42 For example,
in the early sixth century, the bishop of Ravenna was the head of one of the rich-
est churches in Italy. He was expected to spend 3,000 solidi a year on the poor.43
But, in 452, the cost of pigs alone for the annona of Rome amounted to 14,700
solidi a year.44 A century before, the sons of senatorial aristocrats had spent
86,400 solidi in a few weeks on their praetorian games at a time when the yearly
revenue of the church of Rome may have been a mere 26,000 solidi.45 Between
the two forms of giving, and the wealth mobilized to meet the demands of each,
there was no contest.
    In this respect, one is reminded of the debates of Chinese mandarins at the
court of the T’ang emperor in the eighth century. As Buddhism spread in west-
ern China, conservative Confucian scholars (the nearest equivalent that we might
find in all of Eurasia to men such as Symmachus and Cassiodorus) contrasted
scornfully the “little works” carried out by Buddhist monasteries in times of
hardship—­in the form of almsgiving, orphanages, and soup kitchens for the
poor—­with the “great works” undertaken by the emperor and his bureaucracy.
Only supplies of food from the great imperial warehouses (and not the “little

                                        462
                                 rome and italy


works” of the Buddhist monks) could relieve the famine of whole provinces.46 In
the fourth, fifth, and early sixth centuries, many conscientious administrators of
the annona of Rome (such as Cassiodorus) would have thought the same way.
Christians might give alms to feed the poor at a time of famine. Some did this
in a memorable fashion. For instance, in the 470s, Gallo-­Roman aristocrats in
Cler­mont and the Rhone valley united to transport food to the cities and to take
care of famine victims at their villas.47 But ultimately, as in China, it was the state
that controlled the greatest warehouses and so could do the greatest good. As
Cassiodorus told King Theodoric, for a ruler in Roman style, “The best troops . . .
are his well-­stored granaries.”48 The cargoes of grain released from state granaries
in times of crisis or diverted to feed the people of Rome (as Theodoric had done
when he visited the city in 500 ad) were still considered to be stunning proofs
of the generosity of the emperor. The “small works” associated with the Christian
care of the poor took second place.
    But things were not as simple as they seemed to a bureaucrat such as Cassio-
dorus. “Conspicuous overprovision” had always been part of the ideology of the
annona.49 Even in the fourth century, one wonders whether all those pigs, all
that grain, and all that oil solemnly earmarked for the Roman people ever arrived
at Rome each year in the quantities laid down in the laws. In scale alone, the hia-
tus between the annona and Christian almsgiving to the poor may have nar-
rowed in the course of the fifth century. The amounts provided by the annona
diminished while the church emerged, slowly but surely, as the safety net of the
Roman people as a whole. But this, of course, depended on the ability of the
clergy to elicit donations. In order to do this, they had to provide the rich fami-
lies of Rome with a rationale for the pious use of wealth. Let us see how they set
about doing this.


       Sub quadam procuratione: Under contract as an estate manager

            Demetrias, Prosper, and the Use of Wealth

The process of gathering wealth for the church was well under way by the time
that Leo the Great became pope (440–­61). Already, a decade earlier, in around
433, an intellectual very different from the disabused Salvian arrived in Rome
from Marseilles. Prosper, the pugnacious defender of Augustine (whom we met
in chapter 25), came to Rome to act as secretary and advisor to the popes. He
also held strong opinions on how the Christian rich should view their wealth.
One of his first works may have been a letter on this subject to Anicia Demetrias,
entitled De vera humilitate—­On True Humility.50 If Prosper is the author of this
tract, it would have constituted his visiting card to a remarkable lady.

                                         463
                                  chapter 27


    In the 430s, Demetrias was a living reminder of the belle époque of fourth-­
century Rome. She was the granddaughter of none other than Petronius Probus.
We last met her receiving letters of spiritual advice both from Jerome and from
Pelagius on the occasion of her consecration as a nun at Carthage in 413. Now
she lived three miles out of Rome on an estate near the Via Latina. Some time
before her death, she built a large shrine to Saint Stephen within the center
courtyard of her villa. Though completed at the urging of Pope Leo and with the
help of a Roman priest, the shrine was, nonetheless, very much her shrine. It was
possibly built to be her mausoleum, placed at the heart of her villa.51
    Whether it was Prosper or someone else who wrote the De vera humilitate,
the author did so very much as Demetrias’s client. He was made to show his
paces. He was to demonstrate to Demetrias and to those around her how a holder
of high Augustinian views such as Prosper made sense of the legendary wealth
associated with her family. The treatise on humility turned out to be, in fact, a
treatise on wealth.
    The treatise advanced an unusually trenchant justification of wealth provided
that it was used on behalf of the church. The author was austerely Augustinian.
Unlike Pelagius, twenty years previously, he denied to Demetrias any sense of
“natural” nobility. Like everyone else, she was a fallen creature. Her virtues were
given to her by God alone. They did not grow upward naturally from her pedi-
gree, as Pelagius had seemed to imply.52 But the same mighty hand of God that
had placed His grace in her heart had also placed Demetrias in the midst of huge
wealth. This wealth need not taint her. It did not have to be thrown away (as
Melania and Pinianus had done in the hectic days of Demetrias’s youth). Once
her heart was detached from wealth through the grace of God, she was able to
approach her fortune with a dispassionate and firmly focused sense of purpose,
as if from an Archimedean leverage point outside it. She was not its owner; she
was its manager.53
    On this point, the author was unusually explicit. He did not simply exhort
Demetrias to restrain herself or to learn to be more generous, as the ancient plati-
tudes on wealth had long insisted. Rather, he presented the use of wealth as a
form of relationship to God. Wealth was a gift of God that asked to be managed.
Demetrias was to think of herself not as the owner of vast lands but as an estate
manager, a procurator placed in charge of the properties of God. Carefully ad-
ministered by the wealthy, the revenues of their estates were to be paid into the
church on a regular basis in the name of the poor:
   They should treat their properties in no other way than if they were in
   charge of goods for the poor and for the useful purposes of the church. It
   is as if they were serving under contract as an estate-­manager—­sub quadam
   procuratione.54


                                       464
                                rome and italy


   Furthermore, Demetrias was not only urged to give to the poor. She was also
encouraged to use her wealth to support an entire hierarchical society, held to-
gether on every level by deference.
   The first application of humility is to the good relations associated with
   our life in common, by which divine mercy is elicited and human society
   is woven together. For it does much to strengthen love when in honor pre­
   ferring one another (Rom. 12:10) . . . those beneath love to serve and those
   above them are not swollen with pride; where the poor do not hesitate to
   acknowledge the precedence of the rich and the rich take pleasure in treat-
   ing the poor as equals. So that those at the top take no pride in the brilliance
   of their pedigrees, but nor do the poor rise up in the name of a shared
   human nature.55


        Voluntaria et sancta collectio: A voluntary and holy collection

   The Sermons of Pope Leo (440–­6 1) and the Redefinition
                   of the Poor in Rome

The same language was adopted by Pope Leo (440–­61). Indeed, Leo’s language
overlapped so completely with that of the writer of De vera humilitate that many
have thought that he, and not Prosper, was its author. Leo opted heavily for the
Augustinian view of wealth. In his sermons, he always treated wealth as a provi-
dential fact of life. It had to be accepted on a “No questions asked” basis. How
wealth had been obtained was no longer an issue for him. What mattered was
how it would be used: “For although we can do nothing to create the world of
nature, we can, however, put to full use the material goods that we have received
through the grace of God.”56 What is revealing is the extent to which Leo used
this view of wealth to foster forms of Christian practice that reached out, dis-
creetly but unmistakably, beyond the immediate needs of the poor so as to steady
the city of Rome as a whole.
    In the mid-­440s Leo instituted a special collection—­a collecta—­for the poor.
It occurred in the summer months, which, for the average inhabitant of Rome,
were hard months. They were months of heat, fever, and scarce food before the
arrival of the harvest. But the church collections were also timed to coincide
with the Ludi Apollinares in the Circus Maximus, which took place in early July.
These were weeks of heavy giving. The page in the Calendar of 354 that illustrates
the month of July showed a great sack full of gold coins that symbolized the huge
sums spent on the games at this season.57 As we saw in the case of Symmachus,
part of these ludi were provided by senatorial families on behalf of their sons, as


                                         465
                                  chapter 27


praetors. On that occasion, Symmachus had spent on little Memmius in one
week a sum that was equivalent to over three times the yearly revenue of the
church of Rome. Leo made explicit that one purpose of the collection was to
counter the dazzle of such shows. He even claimed that the practice of the col­
lecta dated back to the “days of idolatry,” when the charity to each other of a small
and heroic band of Christians stood out in a pagan city.58
    The collection was a feast of unity. Leo expected that all Christians would
converge on their neighborhood churches to bring their free-­will offerings as
alms for the poor.59 Given the fragile relations between the bishop of Rome and
the clergy established in the various tituli—­the neighborhood churches, whose
near independence of the bishop had been shown on many occasions—­Leo’s
collection represented an unparalleled flexing of papal muscle. With this collec-
tion, he intended to draw all Christian Rome together around a single holy ven-
ture. More than that, it was a feast of solidarity. The gifts were offered by an un-
divided people of God. The poor were urged to think of their contributions as
being just as important as those of the rich.60 Charity was not a matter of osten-
tatious giving, by which the rich distinguished themselves from everybody else.
Leo was careful to leave room for the mediocres, even for the poor. It was the
“resources of the multitude” that enabled this voluntaria et sancta collectio.61
    But who felt the weight of this giving? Here we may be dealing with two dif-
ferent definitions of the poor. Alms doubtless continued to be distributed on the
spot to the destitute in the different regiones of Rome. Indeed, in a dramatic and
still mysterious incident, a Roman deacon, Titus, had been assassinated in 426
by men of the commander in chief, Felix, when distributing alms to the poor in
the city. Felix was also said to have engineered the assassination of Patroclus, the
bishop of Arles in the same year.62 (A few years later, Felix and his wife, Padusia—­
plainly undisturbed by these events—­added new mosaics to the papal cathedral
at the Lateran!)63 In the tense conditions of the 420s, bishops in key cities and
almsgiving in key neighborhoods in Rome had both come to carry a political
charge that they had not carried previously.
    But Leo and his successors went further than their predecessors in taking con-
trol of the care of the destitute. They ensured that almsgiving was sacralized and
centralized by being linked to the cult of the saints. As we saw from Paulinus of
Nola’s description of the memorial feast of Pammachius for his wife, the atrium
of Saint Peter’s had already become a place where alms were distributed and the
poor were fed. Leo told the rich that by distributing alms in the courtyard of
Saint Peter’s, their granaries (those dark symbols of wealth retained) might be
redeemed—­and, indeed, filled with yet more grain in the coming year.64 Major
churches became points on which the poor converged. In 472 Anthemius, one of
the very last emperors of Rome, hoped to escape with his life after having been
deposed. In order to escape detection, he “mingled with the beggars and joined

                                        466
                                rome and italy


the supplicants” who had gathered around the church of Saint Chrysogonus in
Trastevere.65
    Yet Leo’s “poor” were strangely faceless. His sermons gave no sense of a city
filled with large crowds of the destitute. It is a significant silence. Preaching at
Ravenna, Leo’s contemporary Peter Chrysologus (Peter of the Golden Words)
lingered with pathos on the destitute. He wished to shock. He spoke of Lazarus
lying at the door of Dives, with every sore on his body an open mouth crying out
to touch the heart of the rich.66 Peter may well have had to face a higher inci-
dence of conjunctural poverty than did Leo. He preached in a region that had
been exposed to frequent dislocations, such as Attila’s terrible raid into northern
Italy in 452.
    There are no such brutal juxtapositions in the sermons of Leo. Rather, a new
form of poverty had begun to preoccupy him. This was the poverty of what later
ages called the “shame-­faced” poor. Such persons were impoverished noblemen
and citizens, not beggars. Leo insisted that the “shame-­faced” poor also should
be covered by the church’s care of the poor.67 With this, Leo spread a wider net
in Rome, both financially and imaginatively, than ever previously. His concern
for the shame-­faced poor was the thin end of the wedge. It meant that Christian
discourse on the poor had changed from obsessive concentration on the afflicted
“poor” as standing for the nadir of the human condition to a less dramatic but
more general concern for the impoverished members of an entire city. The imagi-
native pendulum that had swung dramatically throughout the fourth century
between seeing the poor as “others” and seeing them as “brothers” (which we
sketched out in chapter 4) now came to rest in favor of the poor as “brothers”—­as
fellow citizens entitled to care in times of stress.
    In preaching in this way, Leo followed Ambrose. His language when speaking
of the poor stressed the cohesion of the urban community as a whole. It was
language consonant with the lifeboat mentality we also observed in the cities of
Gaul. But, with Leo, the sense of an afflicted community achieved a yet deeper
resonance. Like Ambrose, he spoke of the Christian congregation in terms bor-
rowed from the history of ancient Israel. Leo implied that the Christian congre-
gation was a new Israel. It was notionally coextensive with the entire urban com-
munity. He also spoke of the poor no longer as creatures confined to the margins
of society.68 Rather, he spoke of them as like the poor of Israel—­as self-­respecting
citizens down on their luck who needed justice and protection quite as much as
they needed food.69 His strong notion of compassion was not only directed to-
ward generating pathos for the poor. It was attuned to embrace all Rome, great
and small alike, in the wider community of a suffering human race.70
    Thus, a double development took place in the last half of the fifth century. The
church of Rome grew richer. The senatorial aristocracy grew poorer, mainly as a
result of the loss of their overseas estates in Africa and the Balkans. These losses

                                         467
                                  chapter 27


could not be compensated for by the development of Italian agriculture alone.
As the nobility got poorer and the church grew richer, the incomes of the two
groups (which had previously admitted no comparison) began to level up. At the
same time, an imaginative leveling up occurred. Through the preaching of Leo,
the Christian congregations were actively encouraged to view the poor as fellow
members of the same urban community. Entitlement to protection and to sup-
plies of food that had once been associated exclusively with the civic rights of the
Roman People to their share in the annona came to be offered to all distressed
Romans by the pope and his clergy.
   By the time of Gregory the Great (590–­604) the “great works” of the annona
and the “small works” of Christian charity had merged. There are no grounds for
the view that the popes of Rome consciously took over what remained of the
annona system.71 Instead, they offered their own support on their own terms. But
what they offered converged on what the People of Rome had been accustomed
to expect. The difference was that it was now the poor who were said to be privi-
leged and not the plebs. But the level of care remained the same. In the time of
Gregory I, three thousand refugee nuns in Rome received, as an annual payment,
almost exactly the same amount as Roman citizens had once received, each year,
from the annona.72 Gregory also ensured that the true heirs to the citizens of
Rome were not only the beggars of Rome but also the “shame-­faced” poor—­
impoverished members of the nobility and other inhabitants of the city. The
names of these poor were duly registered in account books kept in the Lateran
palace. Their standard of living was guaranteed as honorary members of the
“poor of the church.”73
   Even in the care of the poor, Rome remained distinctive: its citizens were
privileged. One of the most valued privileges of the People of Rome had been to
be supported by the products and labor of others. Gregory continued this tradi-
tion. He went out of his way to obtain barbarian prisoners of war as slaves. He
explained to local governors and to generals who were responsible for this slave
trade that he did so because the labor of barbarian slaves on the estates of the
church enabled him to care for “the poor of the church” in Rome.74 That slaves
should serve the poor in a gulag situated in the suburbium of Rome (where slaves
had always been prominent) strikes a modern reader as a wry paradox. But Greg-
ory was too much a Roman to see anything strange about this arrangement. In
Gregory’s Rome, the poor of the church were recognizable avatars, if somewhat
the worse for wear, of the once triumphant populus Romanus—­a privileged citi-
zen body destined still to be served by the nations of the barbarian world.




                                       468
                               rome and italy


     Massae . . . iuris nostri . . . a me ipso Dei favore et iuvamine fundatae:
      [The church] of an estate . . . owned by me . . . founded by myself
                          with the favor and help of God

                  The Wealthy and Their Churches

But this is to anticipate a time when the church of Rome had finally become the
greatest landowner of Italy. The terrible wars brought upon Italy by the invasion
of the emperor Justinian, after 535, well and truly leveled the playing field be-
tween the wealth of the church and that of the Roman aristocracy. After those
wars the church became the only great landowner left standing in Italy. At the
end of the sixth century, Gregory I inherited a very different Italy from that of a
century before.
    Around the year 500, however, such a drastic evolution could not have been
predicted. Instead we find a situation of “vibrant complexity” (to hark back to
the well-­chosen words of Federico Marazzi).75 Lay landowners were still very
much a presence in the city and in Italy as a whole. But they found themselves
caught up in a series of conflicting relationships with the wealth of the church.
Let us see how this situation had come about.
    The rich of Rome and Italy had not contributed as much to the wealth of the
church as conventional narratives have suggested. This wealth had grown up be-
side them, not because of them. Emperors, courtiers, and relatively modest per-
sons had been the principal donors in fifth-­century Rome. But once the wealth
of the church was there, senatorial landowners became involved with it. They did
so very much for their own reasons—­as founders of churches on their own es-
tates in the provinces and as the guardians of public order in Rome itself.
    We can see this clearly in the case of one major donor from the end of the fifth
century. Flavius Valila qui et [also known as] Theodobius could hardly claim to
have been a scion of the Roman aristocracy. He was a military man of Gothic ori-
gin closely attached to the court. He represented the military muscle of the Re­
spublica and of its successor, the barbarian kingdom of Italy under Odoacer. Yet
this man of war had his seat among the senators at the Colosseum.76 Flavius
Valila/Theodobius is the best-­known lay donor to the Christian church in the
entire course of the fifth century.
    In Rome itself, Valila left to Pope Simplicius (468–­83) the splendid palace on
the Esquiline of Junius Bassus, the consul of 331. This was a magnificently pro-
fane building, whose inlaid panels of multicolored marble showed Bassus in his
chariot presiding over the consular games with a triumphant sweep of the arm.77
Simplicius consecrated the palace as a church. The pope’s inscription made plain
that by the act of consecration, Valila’s donation of the palace to the church—­
made “with devout mind”—­now worked for the good of his soul. “Adapted to

                                        469
                                   chapter 27


celestial matters” by becoming a church, the donation was Valila’s very own trea-
sure in heaven. The worshipers were to learn from the donation of the pious Goth
how “through this series of exchanges [commercia] kingdoms on high can be
sought out through earthly wealth.”78
   It was the language of Paulinus of Nola. But Valila may have had other, more
earthly reasons to make the donation. He may have received the palace and its
adjacent properties as confiscated land, passed on to him as a reward by the em-
peror or by Odoacer. To place a church in the middle of these properties was
a way to secure them for his family and to gain the protection of the Roman
church for himself in a time of violent regime change.79
   In any case, Valila had already been a Paulinus of Nola in his own way. In
471 he placed a church on his estate, the massa Cornutiana (now Santa Maria
in Cornuta), within sight of Hadrian’s villa at Tivoli. In the words of his foun­
dation document (copied in a medieval collection of charters), this church was
built on an estate that was “ours by right,” a me ipso Dei favore et iuvamine
fundatae—­“ built and founded by myself, with the favor and help of God.” The
church was placed beside the farmhouse of the estate, with a carefully fenced row
of buildings and allotment gardens for its priests. The sheer splendor of its ac-
coutrements made it a little Cimitile. Silver plate, chalices, and incense burners
for the Eucharist lay on the altar. Silver crowns and great candelabra hung over
the altar and along the nave—­“fifty four pounds and seven ounces of silver by
the measure of the City.” Worth around 650 golden solidi, it was as much silver
as Pope Damasus had given to his own family church in Rome. But Valila also
included seventy-­seven different textiles, with careful instructions as to where
each precious curtain should hang.
   Last but not least: Valila made clear that the moment that any future bishop
or priest attempted to detract in any way from this little oasis of splendor,
through alienation of its precious objects or through transferring them to an-
other church, the donation would be null and void. The entire foundation would
revert to Valila or to his heirs.80 This was the sort of rich man who, all over Italy,
in the course of the fifth century had come to think of churches as part of the
footprint of their own wealth and power on the land.


       Pro sua devotione . . . in possessionibus suis: For his [or her] loyal
                     devotion . . . on his [or her] estates

               Christianity and Agriculture in Italy

In order to understand the complex relation between the rich and the Christian
churches we must look far beyond Rome, and most especially we must look south,

                                         470
                               rome and italy


to the Mezzogiorno. Here we meet churchmen and landowners alike adjusting
to changes in the agrarian economy of Italy that had begun to take effect after the
loss of Africa to the Vandals. It has long been possible to follow this development
through papal correspondence concerning the estates of the church, that be-
comes increasingly abundant at the end of the fifth century and in the sixth cen-
tury. But this evidence has now been placed in a concrete and vivid context by a
series of archaeological discoveries that (in the words of Domenico Vera) amount
to “a rediscovery of Late Antiquity in southern Italy.”81
    Apart from raids from Vandals (in the 440s and 450s), one punitive expedi-
tion by the east Roman fleet (in 508), and a violent eruption of Vesuvius (which,
among other disasters, almost buried Paulinus’s shrine at Cimitile sometime dur-
ing 507–­10), the Mezzogiorno did not experience the sinister climate of violence
that had ground down the structures of the old order in Gaul and Spain. Fur-
thermore, in Italy, unlike Gaul, two large court cities remained to be fed—­Rome
on the west coast and Ravenna on the Adriatic. Sicily and Apulia adjusted to pro-
vide for both cities. The grain fields of both regions expanded at this time to
make good (if on a smaller scale) the loss of the African annona. Above all, the
“burning” fields of Apulia, which stretched in a monotonous plain from the
mountains of Samnium to the Adriatic, became the new Numidia of Italy—­a
breadbasket set in place by unrelenting toil and supervision.82
    In the last decade, the remarkable work of Giuliano Volpe and his colleagues
has shown what this new southern Italy looked like to those who owned the
land. Great villas linked in varying ways to estate production and to export have
been discovered in Apulia, Bruttium, and Lucania in the heel and the toe of Italy.
The villas themselves varied greatly. The recently discovered villa at Faragola (As-
coli Satriano, south of Foggia) was close to the main road system. It rested against
the hillside of the valley of the Carapelle, beside a road that joined the Appian
Way to the Via Traiana. A dining hall laid with panels of opus sectile in glass and
marble was dominated by a perfect stibadium (a half-­moon dining couch) made
of inlaid marbles and decorated with bas-­relief panels that show a scene from a
mystery cult. On hot days, the entire mosaic floor in front of the dining area
could be covered with a delicious film of shimmering water ingeniously led from
the neighboring river. A harbor stood beside the river to transport the products
of the estate. All this was built in the later fifth century, at a time when tradi-
tional villas lay deserted all over Gaul and Spain.83
    It was the owners of such villas who decided to plant churches on their estates.
In this, Apulia did not resemble fourth-­century Numidia. In Apulia the owners of
the land acted first. Unlike Augustine’s Africa, there seems to have been less up-
ward pressure from the villagers themselves to have their own churches and clergy.
The churches were founded by local landowners. But few if any of these founders
were senatorial landowners. Rather, they were men on the spot. Many were thriv-

                                        471
                                  chapter 27


ing conductores—­managers who had become rich by renting the estates of the
emperor and of other absentee landlords. As with the parvenu courtiers of the Vi-
sigoths in Aquitaine (such as count Victorius), to found a church in the fifth cen-
tury was a relatively inexpensive way of leaving one’s mark on the countryside.
    The letters of Pope Gelasius (492–­96) cast a vivid light on this situation.
Faced by newly established churches, Gelasius had clear views as to what the do-
nors should do. The lay donor who wished to found a church pro sua devotione . . .
in possessionibus suis—­“out of loyal devotion . . . on his [or her] estates”—­must
first approach the local bishop with a petition that included a deed of donation
(such as that which Flavius Valila had provided for his church outside Tivoli). It
was for the bishop to consecrate the church and to provide the priest (though
the bishop usually chose a candidate suggested by the owner). The free-­will offer-
ings of the faithful were to go to the priest. The founder himself or herself was
left with only the right of processio “such as any Christian can have.” This meant
little more than the right to take the Eucharist in the building that he or she had
provided.84
    Yet the word processio itself had always implied more than that. It derived
from the solemn procession of the faithful to bring gifts to the altar. It was a
ceremony associated with an act of public giving by a benefactor. Such gifts were
expected to receive some return in forms of recognition and of rights granted to
the benefactor by a grateful people. Yet Gelasius insisted that, in church, giving
made the giver in no way different from any other member of the congregation.
    We can guess why Gelasius took such an austere stance toward the lay found-
ers of churches. He was attempting to curb a vigorous conglomerate of assump-
tions as to the use and status of privately founded churches. Lay founders did not
share the pope’s views. For centuries, owners had been in the habit of maintain-
ing a greater stake in their foundations than Gelasius allowed. Some pocketed
the offerings made at the newly founded church.85 Others expected a family
foundation to serve the region as a whole. Magetia, a spectabilis femina—­a “high-­
ranking” woman—­near Sora (Frosinone), had wished to have a burial church in
which to lay the dead of her family. Plainly she expected that this family mauso-
leum would function as a church for the estate as a whole. It was to be open to
the entire population as a center for public Mass. Gelasius cut Magetia down to
size. Only private masses for the souls of the departed could be celebrated at the
tombs of her kin. In effect, as a laywoman, Magetia was denied any religious role
other than the care of her own dead.86
    Other founders had assumed, like Magetia, that their family mausoleum could
also serve as a church for the neighborhood, even if this mausoleum contained
the graves of non-­Christian ancestors. Prayers might even be offered in the names
of the departed. For these were ancient and venerable names, associated with the


                                       472
                                rome and italy


family who owned the land. Gelasius professed to be shocked. This could not
happen “if any sense of Christianity is clear or deeply-­rooted in these regions.”87
    Plainly Gelasius’s “sense of Christianity” was not that of every landowner. His
letters represent, on paper at least, a ringing defeat for ancient, Roman notions
of religion as a matter for “friends and family.” This notion of religion had been
normal on the estates of the great. From time immemorial, countrymen and
owners alike had been joined together by sharing an ancient cultic landscape
that the owners helped orchestrate by founding shrines.88 By contrast, Gela­
sius’s ­letters were characterized by so fierce a determination to limit the rights of
lay founders that we already seem to hear in them the voice of Hildebrand (Pope
Gregory VII) and his fellow reformers at the time of the eleventh-­century Inves-
titure Contest.
    In fact, it is the other way around. We hear Gelasius because the partisans of
Hildebrand listened to him. They read him and made extracts of his letters. Most
of Gelasius’s letters on the state of the churches in Italy take the form of frag-
ments. They consist of passages copied from his letters to be used as proof-­texts
by late eleventh-­century canon lawyers whose principal concern was to defend
the rights of the church against encroachment by laypersons.89 Yet if we look
more closely at those extracts, we will see that, on the ground, the interests of
laypersons and the pope converged as often as they were in conflict. Let us see
how this was so.


                         Publica disciplina: Public order

       Clerical Privilege and Unfreedom on the Estates

The foundation of churches on estates posed, immediately, the problem of who
would act as priests in them. To be a clergyman—­whether a priest or a deacon—­
was to “put on the belt of the clerical order.”90 The term echoed the old words
cingulum militiae, the military belt that had distinguished members of the impe-
rial bureaucracy. In using this term of the clergy, the popes’ letters showed that
the spread of Christianity had imported yet another layer of privileged persons
into the countryside. Enterprising locals were only too happy to become mem-
bers of this new privileged class through joining the clergy. By doing so, they
threatened to undermine the grip of the landowners over their lives. Gelasius
was told that many who became priests and deacons had been slaves. Many more
had been obnoxii—­farmers permanently tied to the estate on which they were
registered as taxpayers. Clerical status freed them from these bonds. This hap-
pened at a time when the landowners of southern Italy depended on their ability


                                         473
                                   chapter 27


to control a large pool of tied labor in order to bring in the yearly harvest on
which their wealth depended.91
   Harsh though he might be in limiting the rights of lay founders, Gelasius sup-
ported the landowners wholeheartedly when it came to controlling their own
peasants. Ordination to the clergy was not to become an escape hatch for slaves
and tied peasants. In 494 he told the bishops of the Mezzogiorno that
   almost everybody is complaining about the way in which here and there
   slaves and hereditary tied farmers are fleeing from legal dependence and
   from estates under the cover of taking up a religious life.
This must stop,
   lest a practice associated with the name of Christianity should seem to cause
   a breach in the rights of others and to subvert the publica disciplina—­the
   order of society as laid down by law. . . . Nor should the dignity of the cleri-
   cal ministry be tarnished by persons subject to such obligations.92
    On this matter, the pope saw eye to eye with the wealthy laity. Disrupting the
social order by allowing tied persons to join the clergy amounted to a pollution—
­a blot on the scutcheon of the Christian church. Gelasius meant what he said.
The antithesis between bound and free and between those subject to hereditary
obligation and those who were unencumbered free farmers had deep roots in his
thought on the human condition. Like Leo, Gelasius was an Augustinian. When
he learned that a bishop was propagating Pelagian ideas in Picenum, Gelasius
was duly shocked. The bishop (appropriately named Seneca) had claimed that
 babies were free of sin. Seneca had argued that they did not need to be baptized
at an early age. God had formed every human being in the womb. Seneca went
on to claim that, because of this, no human being carried the taint of an original
sin, inherited from Adam. All human beings had been born free. They were in-
nocent of an inherited taint such as could only be expiated by baptism.
    How wrong could bishop Seneca be! For Gelasius, obligation from the dawn
of time, not freedom, was the stuff of the human condition. With rock-­like
certainty, the social metaphor of the great estate slid into place in Gelasius’s
condemnation of the views of bishop Seneca. Gelasius asserted that no human
being could claim to be born free. All were born into an unfreedom inherited
from Adam. All were subject to sin, as if they they were peasants bound to the
land: “tied to their registered place of origin, because born into a state of servile
dependence.”93
    As we saw, the Gallic writers of Provence at this time went out of their way to
 avoid such language. They admitted a steep degree of dependence of human be-
 ings on God. But, for writers such as Salvian and Faustus of Riez, the metaphor
 that made sense of this dependence had always been that of a patron approached

                                         474
                                 rome and italy


by a destitute client. For all his misery, the client remained a free man. By con-
trast, Gelasius’s instinctive resort to the language of slavery and hereditary obli-
gation as the master metaphor of the human condition may give us a glimpse of
the strain of social effort on which the “security of Italy” rested on the great es-
tates of the fifth-­century Mezzogiorno.


       Ut quae vel pro salute vel requie animarum suarum unusquisque
          venerabili ecclesiae pauperum causa contulerit: Whatever
     somebody for the sake of his salvation and the repose of his soul will
       have donated . . . to the venerable church on behalf of the poor

                 Lay Bequests and Clerical Control

Though they were reassured by Gelasius and other popes on a central issue of the
social order, lay landowners continued to view the clergy with unrelenting suspi-
cion. They had no wish to surrender their wealth to an institution that failed to
respect their wishes. The donation of Flavius Valila made plain the fears of every
founder. They worried once their church fell into the hands of the bishop’s ad-
ministration, they would lose all say in what happened to it. A treasure house of
family piety, as solid and as splendidly appointed as any villa, would be neglected.
Its holy vessels might be appropriated by the bishop, passed on to other churches,
or sold outright to raise funds.
    The greatest worry concerned the misuse of land donated to the church. No-
where was this anxiety more acute than in Rome itself. Upper-­class Romans
feared that land that had been given by their predecessors might be sold off by
ambitious popes to finance ecclesiastical schemes for charities and for building
operations. Candidates for the papacy might do worse: they might bribe sup-
porters with promises of church lands. As a result, individual clergymen might
emerge greatly enriched at the expense of their lay superiors—­the senatorial do-
nors. This was a serious matter. For the first time, it raised the issue of the balance
of wealth in the city between the clergy and the nobiles. Until then, the pope and
clergy had not counted as competitors. But this had ceased to be the case in the
last decades of the fifth century.
    These anxieties coincided with a regime change in northern Italy. In 476 the
last Roman emperor, Romulus Augustulus, resigned. He was replaced by a bar-
barian strongman, Odoacer (476–­93), who ruled as king of Italy. Odoacer stayed
in Ravenna; Rome ceased to be an imperial residence. For this reason alone,
Odoacer needed the approval of the Senate even more than had previous em-
perors. For the Senate was the shop window of his regime. It was only through
the Senate that Odoacer could make his power felt in the ancient center of the

                                         475
                                  chapter 27


empire. Recognition by the Senate gave his ad hoc regime a reassuringly old-­
fashioned look.
    Furthermore, both Odoacer and his successor, Theodoric (493–­526), were
not Catholics. They were Arians. Religious issues among Catholics could not be
resolved in their palace. As a result, the kings turned to the Senate. Here was a lay
organism. Even though most of them were staunchly Catholic, senators were
still dependent on the patronage of the court of Ravenna as members of the
clergy were not. In effect, Odoacer and Theodoric placed the Senate between
themselves and the popes. They treated the Senate as if it was the traditional
caretaker of Rome. As caretaker, the Senate, and not the pope and his clergy, was
given a mandate to patrol the clergy’s use of wealth.94
    The Senate soon had the opportunity to show its powers. In 483 Pope Sim-
plicius had died without naming a successor. A contested election seemed im-
minent. Acting as Praetorian Prefect and as the representative of the absent king,
Flavius Caecina Decius Maximus Basilius—­as his name implied, a grandee of
the grandees—­summoned the clergy to a meeting in the mausoleum of the em-
perors beside Saint Peter’s.95 He and his family knew about wealth and how it
should be spent at Rome. In 484 his brother Decius Marius Venantius Basilius
would complete a reconstruction of the arena of the Colosseum proprio sumptu—­
out of his own pocket—­as a gift to the city of Rome.96 As a representative of the
Senate, Maximus Basilius intended to teach the clergy how to use their wealth
properly for the good of the city. He presented them with an ultimatum in the
form of a document—­a scriptura. No future election of a pope was to happen
without prior consultation with the king and the Senate. Above all, no church
lands or ornaments were to be alienated under any pretext:
   For it is unjust and equal to a sacrilege that, whatever somebody for the
   sake of his salvation and the peace of his soul will have donated or securely
   bequeathed to the venerable church on behalf of the poor should be trans-
   ferred to somebody else.97
   The language invoked in this ultimatum was old. Gifts to the church had long
been defined as gifts to the poor made for the sake of the souls of the donors. But
the situation in 483 was new. This was the first time that a major public debate
took place on the wealth of the church. Basilius’s document betrayed a new ur-
gency. The church had become rich, but nobody, least of all the clergy, knew ex-
actly how this wealth should be administered. No one could say for certain who
actually owned the properties of the church. When we speak, often somewhat
glibly, of the “wealth of the church” in the fifth century, we must realize that we
are referring to what had remained a conceptual and managerial morass.98
   Nobody had yet defined to what extent a bishop could dispose of the wealth
of the church on his own initiative. Nobody agreed on how much he had to at-

                                        476
                                rome and italy


tend to the views of his colleagues and his own clergy when handling church
property. Last but not least, individual donors had been given no guarantee that
their wishes would continue to be respected or that family properties would not
be broken up or alienated to serve the general purposes of the church.
   Hence the Senate’s support for the document prepared by Basilius. Not sur-
prisingly, Basilius’s proposal rankled in clerical circles. Almost twenty years later,
in 502, Pope Symmachus presided over a large synod at Rome. Symmachus and
his episcopal colleagues haughtily rejected the document that had been drawn up
by Basilius. But they did this by taking the wind out of his sails. They incorpo-
rated Basilius’s principal complaint, agreeing that the wealth of the church should
be inalienable. But it was the pope—­not the Senate—­who would ensure that its
integrity was preserved in perpetuity. The decree of their synod was to last “for as
long as the doctrine of salvation of the Catholic Church, under the plan of God,
will remain in place.”99
   It is the language of eternity applied to a mighty institution. Four hundred
years previously, in 95 ad, a Roman citizen in distant Phrygia (west-­central Tur-
key) had declared that his will (which provided, among other things, for an an-
nual gift of roses to his tomb) should stand “for as long an age as the rule of the
Romans shall be maintained.” Four hundred years later, in 871–­99, a Saxon no-
bleman made his gift to the church of Canterbury in Britain. The gift was to
stand “as long as baptism should last and money can be raised from the land.”100
   Pope Symmachus’s proud words mark the beginning of a new age. In the
course of the fifth century, the wealth of the church had piled up more slowly
than we might think and in the course of many contests between clergy and
donors in Rome and all over Italy. But it had come to stay. In our next-­to-­last
chapter, let us look a little more closely at how the wealth of the churches had
been accumulated and mobilized throughout the Latin West. This will help us
understand by what devices, both theological and practical, the wealth of the
church came, by the middle to the end of the sixth century, to stand out sharply
as different from the wealth of laypersons because it was wrapped in the magic
of eternity.




                                         477
                           Chapter 28
                           •••••
     Patrimonia pauperum: Patrimonies of the poor
           Wealth and Conflict in the Churches
                  of the Sixth Century




       Istam omnem rerum ecclesiasticarum procurationem: The whole
               management of the properties of the church

                            From Hippo to Arles

In the course of the fifth century, the face of western Europe changed irrevocably.
This time, the revival of an imperial order, such as had followed the dislocations
of the third century, did not take place. The Latin West became a post-­imperial
world. Regional power blocs replaced the former western empire. The wealthy
suffered as the ambitious engine of enrichment driven by the needs of an impe-
rial state was brutally dismembered. Parts of this engine survived, but it worked
now on a more local level and at a lower scale of intensity. On all levels of society
(and not only among the rich) a general impoverishment set in. The fourth-­
century age of gold became a memory. Furthermore, if we are to believe some
scholars, western Europe began to feel the long-­term effects of a “climatic
anomaly”—­the edging southward as far as the Mediterranean of a colder and
more rainy climate. Meteorological changes that had taken place over Greenland
(two thousand miles to the north of the territories of Rome) may have added
their silent weight to the slow unraveling of the Roman agrarian landscape in the
very heartlands of post-­imperial Europe.1
    Yet, despite rapid changes on many levels, strong links with the past remained.
The grandchildren of persons who had been alive in the old age of Augustine,
Jerome, Pelagius, and John Cassian would have lived through the final establish-
ment of Frankish rule throughout Gaul, in around 500–­520, and might even have
lived to witness the ominous arrival of the east Roman war fleets of the emperor
Justinian along the coasts of Africa, Sicily, and southern Italy in 533–­35.


                                        481
                                   chapter 28


    In the Christian churches of the West, some problems remained. Indeed, one
of the most remarkable features of the period we will now consider (essentially
the sixth century) was the dogged continuation within the Latin churches of
debates inherited from a more prosperous age.
    We are dealing with a phenomenon that is peculiar to the period Hervé In­
glebert has aptly named une antiquité tardive post-­romaine—­“a post-­Roman late
antiquity.”2 Despite the disappearance of the Roman state, the cultural resources
piled up in the Christian churches of the fourth and early fifth centuries contin-
ued to be deployed. The crisis of the age did not lead to discontinuity in this
field. Rather, the thoughts of the golden age of the Fathers of the Latin Church
(the age of Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine with which we began this book)
were brought to bear to meet new circumstances. Hence the paradoxical min-
gling of high thoughts and down-­to-­earth reality that characterizes much of the
sixth century. This is not merely an accident of the sources. It is part of the char-
acter of an age. In a world where so much had changed, Christian writings de-
voted to major problems of faith and organization maintained an unbroken arc
that spanned the seemingly vertiginous gap between the late 300s and the late
500s—­joining the world of Augustine and Jerome to that of Gregory of Tours.
    Not the least of these problems was a continuing uncertainty as to the exact
nature of the wealth of the church. How would bishops, monks, and clergymen
relate to the wealth that had come to pile up around them in the course of the
fourth and fifth centuries?
    To understand the nature of this situation we must return for a moment to
the Hippo of the old age of Augustine. A few incidents that seemed to be of
minor, quotidian importance at the time reveal the dilemmas a Christian bishop
had to face.
    In the spring of 411, as we have seen, the congregation of Hippo made an at-
tempt to grab the wealth of the pious senator Pinianus by ordaining him a priest
at Hippo, thereby tying him and his fortune to their city. Augustine was accused
of colluding with this attempt. It was said that he wanted to increase the wealth
of his church.
    Augustine reacted with transparent embarrassment to this insinuation. He
complained that bishops such as himself were treated as if they were like any
other landowner. It was assumed that they had total control of the wealth of their
church, tamquam possessores et domini—­“as if they were landowners and lords.”3
To counter this accusation, Augustine went out of his way to explain that he
merely acted as a manager of the wealth of the church of Hippo. As bishop,
he was in charge of “the whole management (the procuratio) of the properties of
the church.”4 But he did not own these properties.
    Furthermore, Augustine insisted in a later letter that he undertook this
“management” only on behalf of the poor: “For if we possess anything, it is not

                                        482
                wealth and conflict in the churches


ours, but goods of the poor over which we exercise, in some way or other—­
quodammodo—­a kind of manager’s control.”5 This statement, too, had been
prompted by an embarrassing situation. Augustine had to explain (to none other
than Boniface, the ill-­fated Count of Africa, whom we met in chapter 23) why
the Catholic Church had grown appreciably richer through taking over the con-
fiscated estates of its Donatist rival.
    In both cases, laypersons were presented with a paradoxical notion of wealth.
Their local Christian church could be wealthy. But the wealth of the bishop was
not supposed to be like the wealth of any other landowner. It was wealth that was
not owned but “managed.” And it was managed in the name of those who could
never own anything—­the poor. Put bluntly: a non-­owner presided over the
wealth of non-­persons. Ideally, the bishop was a managerial figure. He was not a
landowner but a Good Steward. His position was like that of the managers of the
great imperial estates (many of whom had been slaves). He did not own any of
the wealth that had been entrusted to him. Altogether, the wealth of the church
was a strange form of wealth. It was wealth held at a distance, by an inner hiatus
that distinguished sharply between ownership and administration.6
    Augustine had placed the weight of a lifetime behind this option. As we saw, his
monastery had been founded so as to realize the ideal of a community shorn of the
divisive particularity associated with private property. He had also gathered around
himself an inner group of clergymen who had vowed to live as monks. These
monk-­clergymen were supposed to have renounced all personal ties to property.
    At the very end of his life, in late 425, it became clear that this renunciation
had not been understood by everyone in the radical manner that Augustine had
understood it. One of Augustine’s monk-­clergymen, the priest Januarius, had
recently died. It was revealed that he had stashed away a sum of money. He be-
queathed all this money to the church of Hippo, having pointedly cut both his
daughter and his son out of his will.7
    This incident has usually been seen as a tragic moment for the old Augustine.
It was “tinged with the twilight tones of the end of a long reign.”8 But this may
not be the case. The incident sprang from an elementary misunderstanding as
to what the wealth of the church was supposed to be. Januarius was no secretive
curmudgeon. Nor did he necessarily think that he had broken Augustine’s rule
of poverty. What mattered for Januarius was not that he owned wealth but that
he did not own “lay” wealth. He had kept his wealth strictly within the church.
He had not given any of it to laypersons. Both of his children were already sup-
ported by the church: his daughter was a nun, his son was a monk. The precious
sum of silver went to the church of Hippo. The money of a man of the church
had passed to the church. Many of Augustine’s congregation thought that noth-
ing particularly untoward had happened and that Augustine should accept Janu-
arius’s legacy.9

                                       483
                                   chapter 28


    Augustine acted to rebut this claim with remarkable fierceness. His great ser-
mons on the affair of Januarius (Sermons 355 and 356) became classics. Monks
referred to them, treating them as a charter for the total autonomy of monaster-
ies. They drew the conclusion that a monastery was a self-­supporting body. Its
monks lived from the revenues of the properties they had handed over to the
common fund and from those properties alone. For this reason, they claimed
that they did not depend on the wealth of the local church. In 525 a group of
monks in Byzacena, south of Carthage, used Augustine’s sermons in this way to
show that their monastery was independent of the bishop because it was finan-
cially independent of the local church.10
    But Augustine was not concerned with monks pure and simple. What he had
insisted on was monastic renunciation for the clergymen in his service. Com-
pared with the ideal monks imagined by John Cassian, these clerical monks lived
in a more ambiguous situation. They were not cut off from the world. They had
not entered a community protected by the glacis of a real or imagined desert.
Instead, they were surrounded by a dense penumbra of wealth. What would be
the relation of such persons, deprived of personal wealth, to the corporate wealth
of the church they served?
    In his final sermon on the affair (Sermon 356), Augustine made plain what
this situation could mean. He publicized the arrangements made by one priest
in particular—­Leporius. For Augustine, Leporius was the model monk-­priest.
He was a living example of a man who had never strayed far from wealth but who
had never owned a penny of what he had handled.
    Leporius had come to Hippo from war-­torn northern Gaul.11 He was a ­Salvian
—­a refugee who had ended up not at Marseilles but in Africa on the far, south-
ern shore of the Mediterranean. He had renounced his own private wealth be-
fore Augustine came to know him. He came to Hippo technically “poor”—­that
is, without anything that he could call his own. There he settled down as an enter-
prising dealer in real estate. Untainted by private wealth, he proved to be a gifted
fund-­raiser. With funds raised in this way, he built a monastery, a poorhouse,
and a chapel of the martyrs at Augustine’s command. He had even bought a
house that was rented out to provide yet further income for the church. But
none of this was his.
    Having itemized the many ways in which Leporius had spent the money that
he had raised, Augustine then turned to the congregation to make clear that they
should not even entertain the thought that anything apparently owned by Lepo-
rius was other than property owned by the church as a whole:

   Let nobody any longer say, “At the priest’s house,” “In front of the priest’s
   house.” . . . Here’s where the priest’s house is. It is here [in the monastery of


                                         484
               wealth and conflict in the churches


   the clergy], where my house is. He has no other house, except for God,
   who dwells everywhere.12
    Seldom in late antiquity had the fingerprints of personal wealth been wiped
off more thoroughly from the properties of the church than in this final settling
of accounts between Augustine and the monk-­clergy of Hippo.
    Later generations continued to ponder Augustine’s words. In around 500–­
510, Julianus Pomerius, himself a refugee from Africa and a loyal disciple of Au-
gustine, wrote his book On the Contemplative Life at Arles. Under its bishop,
Caesarius (502–­42), Arles was one of the richest and most active sees in Gaul.
Pomerius wrote to persuade admirers of the monks that it was still possible to be
both a monk and an active bishop such as Caesarius.13
    In the Gaul of the early sixth century, to reassure monks that they could be
bishops meant persuading them that the wealth of the church had come to stay.
It was there. The only issue was how to deal with it. Pomerius went out of his
way to prove that involvement with the wealth of the church need not pollute
them or detract from their spiritual life. It was possible to be both a contempla-
tive and an administrator. The tantalizing disjuncture between the wealth of
the church and the studied wealthlessness of its nominal owner, the bishop, was
central to Pomerius’s argument. Pomerius insisted that the wealth of the church
could be administered—­indeed, even increased—­by persons inspired by the aus-
tere distinction between wealth and its mere “managers” delineated by the old
Augustine.
    Pomerius looked back on the bishops of the previous century. He praised Hil-
ary of Arles for having greatly increased the wealth of his see.14 He also praised
Paulinus of Nola. Indeed, in the pages of Pomerius, we do not meet Paulinus the
great renouncer and the flamboyant builder of the shrine of Saint Felix. We meet
a very different Paulinus—­a Paulinus for the sixth century: Paulinus, the canny
bishop of Nola, who “did not despise the wealth of his church, but administered
it with the utmost conscientiousness.”15
    Central to the argument of Pomerius was the notion that the wealth of the
church was not like any other wealth. It was not personal wealth, which caused
the coarse adrenalin of lordship to surge within those who owned it. It was
wealth directed as if from a higher sphere by aloof “managers.” Above all, it was
wealth bathed in a mystical aura all its own. It was wealth piled up through in-
numerable transactions with the supernatural, to which all sexes and to all classes
had contributed. Above all, it was wealth that was collected and administered on
behalf of the poor:
   For they [the bishops and clergy] should know that the goods of the
   church are nothing other than the fruit of vows made by the faithful, the


                                       485
                                  chapter 28


   various prices which they offer for their sins, they are the patrimonia
   pauperum—­the patrimonies of the poor.16


                  “Ill defined according to the ancient laws”

    Gifts to the Church: Christian Piety and Roman Law

We modern persons, who have come to take for granted the notion of the imper-
sonal administration of wealth in corporate bodies—­in churches, universities,
and large companies—­need to make a leap of the imagination to recapture the
extent to which Pomerius’s high doctrine of wealth without a dominus flouted
the common sense of centuries. Roman law had recognized the existence of
corporate bodies—­of town councils, trade associations, and similar collegia. But
Roman lawyers did little to define exactly how these bodies should act in relation
to their wealth. The lawyers offered no guidelines as to who were entitled to take
decisions and who could represent the corporation.17
    The Christian churches of the fourth and fifth centuries inherited this lacuna
in Roman legal thought. In 321 Constantine ruled that “every person shall have
liberty to leave at his death any property that he wishes to the most holy and
venerable council of the Catholic Church.”18 It was a characteristically expansive
edict. It appeared, at first sight, to open the sluice gates for wealth to pour into
the churches. But this did not happen. The law was plainly issued because lega-
cies to the church had been challenged and continued to be challenged. Made
close to death, legacies to the church threatened to exclude rightful heirs. As we
saw in chapter 26, when we discussed the writings of Salvian of Marseille on giv-
ing to the church, the conflict between a prospective donor to the church and his
own family was an ancient Roman issue that had flared up with peculiar inten-
sity in the course of the fifth century.
    But there was more to it than this. Such wills were not only unpopular. They
were vulnerable by the standards of strict Roman law. In naming a “holy and
venerable council” as the recipient of gifts, Christian donors named a vague en-
tity whose legal status had not been fully established. The bishops had not done
their homework. In the laws of Constantine and his successors, “the idea of a
church’s civil personality [was] taken for granted rather than worked out.”19
    In the centuries that followed, Roman lawyers continued to look with a cold
eye on the lack of definition inherent in Constantine’s ruling. They moved slowly.
There was a significant time lag between the language of Christian piety and the
norms of Roman law. Christians had long been encouraged to give “to the
poor” and “to Christ.” As we have seen, for a writer such as Pomerius, the proper-
ties of the church were all (in some way or other) gifts to the poor. But in Roman

                                        486
                wealth and conflict in the churches


law “Christ” and the “poor” were vague terms. They were personae incertae—­
“individuals of whom a testator could form no specific concept.”20 They were to
be avoided as a potential cause of litigation.
    In the 430s Salvian had urged Christians to name Christ in their will.21 But as
late as 530, the east Roman lawyers of the emperor Justinian were still at work,
attempting to make sense of Christian bequests “of which we have found many
that seem ill-­defined according to the ancient laws.” A law of Justinian referred
to an unnamed donor, “a person of illustrious background, well-­educated in law
and rhetoric,” who had brought on complicated litigation through having named
only “Our Lord Christ” as the beneficiary of his will. Justinian’s lawyers attempted
to steer such dangerously open-­ended bequests toward a clear recipient—­
preferably the bishop of the city in which the testator had lived.22
    Faced by the problems raised by ambiguously worded legacies, Roman lawyers
instinctively chose this solution. They favored the bishop. He was singled out as
the one clear representative of an otherwise ill-­defined association. It was expected
that gifts to the church (in whichever form they came—­shares of an inheritance,
an entire inheritance, legacies, or simple offerings) would be made “to So-­and-­So,
bishop of the church of such and such a place” or “to the church of such-­and-­
such a place, whose bishop is so-­and-­so.”23 As a result, bishops were not what
Augustine said that they should be—­mere “managers” of the wealth of others.
The common sense of an entire society still bathed in Roman law made them
domini whether they liked it or not.24 And, as we will see, many liked it greatly.


        “Nowadays . . . avarice has grown in the Church as it has done
            in the Roman empire”: Bishops and Their Critics

Needless to say, not every bishop was an Augustine. But this was not simply
because other bishops were less conscientious or less other-­worldly. They were
caught in an unresolved dilemma. Roman law made them lords while Christian
sentiment wished to think of them as mere managers. Left to himself, a bishop
was a lord of the wealth of the church in his own city. The only restraints placed
on his initiative in using this wealth were a sense of decorum, spasmodically
reinforced by the pressure of colleagues, by provincial councils, and by the invo-
cation of previous rulings of the ancient church (in the form of the “canons” of
councils, whether real or invented). These often proved to be flimsy mechanisms
of control. Usually we hear of a bishop’s actions when these restraints had failed.
And in the late fifth and sixth centuries, we come to hear a lot. There is a good
reason why this should be so.
   It has been said of the constitution of the Roman empire that it was an autoc-
racy tempered by assassination. The position of the Christian bishop in his own

                                        487
                                  chapter 28


church was much the same. It was an autocracy frankly tempered by character
assassination. The only way to check a bishop’s autocratic rule over the wealth of
his church was to denounce him for his misuse of that wealth.
     Historians of the social and economic role of the church in late Roman so­
ciety have every reason to be grateful for this situation. There is hardly any evi-
dence for the nature of the wealth of the church and for the mechanisms of its
distribution that does not come to us from denunciations of individual bishops
for some abuse or other in the administration of the goods of the church.
     Such denunciations occurred frequently. We’ll look at just a few examples
from the Latin West in this period. In 475 Pope Simplicius issued a famous
­ruling on the fourfold “Roman” division of the revenues of the church. He
 ruled that such revenues were to be divided in equal shares among the bishop,
 the clergy, an allotment for the upkeep of the churches, and the poor. It is a cen-
 tral piece of evidence for the finances of the churches of Italy at this time. Yet
 it is known to us only because the bishop of Aufinum (Ofena: L’Aquila) had
 been denounced by his clergy for keeping the last three years of revenue all for
 himself.25
     We also know that the revenues of the see of Ravenna in the early sixth cen-
 tury amounted to 12,000 solidi a year. It is one of the very few figures that we
 have for the income of any church in the late antique period. But how do we
 know this? The precious statistic has only come down to us as a result of conflicts
 within the church of Ravenna that led to the descent of a delegation of sixty
 angry clergymen on Pope Felix III (526–­30) in Rome. They came to claim their
 rights to a full “Roman” fourth of the revenues their bishop had refused to dis-
 burse. The clergy settled for that: 3,000 solidi (which, multiplied by four, has
 given historians the sum of 12,000 solidi per annum as the revenue of a major
 Italian see).26
     These and innumerable other incidents make plain that the most vociferous
and most unforgiving watchdogs of the bishops were not the laity but their own
clergy. And what they watched most intently was the bishops’ use of the wealth
of the church. In the words of an anonymous treatise probably written in the
fifth century by a fierce supporter of the rights of the clergy over against their
bishop:
   Nowadays because avarice has grown in the Church as it has done in the
   Roman empire, individuals who take advantage of the power and influ-
   ence associated with the name of bishop . . . reduce the entire order of
   deacons to their own use . . . while the unhappy clergyman goes begging
   in the streets.
The wicked bishop, apparently, had imposed a pay freeze on his priests!27


                                        488
                wealth and conflict in the churches


           Recognoscite dominum vestrum: Recognize your master

        Bishops, Clergy, and the Wealth of the Church

Though the forms it took varied from region to region, the conflict between the
bishop and his clergy was a Europe-­wide phenomenon. It had roots in the deep
past. Ever since the third century, the role of the bishop as the undisputed leader
of the Christian community in every city had never been entirely secure. What
historians of the Early Church call “mono-­episcopacy” was established consider-
ably more slowly than we might think. Many urban churches of the fourth and
fifth centuries remained “polyfocal” in practice. Priests and deacons were often
more present to their congregations than was the distant bishop (especially if
that bishop, as a public figure, was constantly absent attending councils or lob-
bying at the imperial court). A strong whiff of proprietary rights still lingered
in many churches. In Rome congregations attended churches that were known
to have been endowed by lay donors from families that may have continued to
be dominant in the neighborhood. Priests and deacons might enjoy the patron-
age of rich and cultivated persons in a way that rendered them virtually inde-
pendent of their bishop.28 We are looking at a formula for factionalism. As far as
the three-­cornered conflict between the bishop, his own clergy, and their lay
supporters was concerned, little had changed between the fourth and the sixth
centuries.
    This was particularly the case in Rome. In the time of Pope Symmachus
(498–­514)—­whom we met at the end of the last chapter—­the schism caused
by the simultaneous election of Symmachus and the priest Laurentius revealed
how powerful these centrifugal forces had remained. It was a memorable schism.
In the words of Henry Chadwick, the conflict between Symmachus and Lauren-
tius led to “a dreadful four years of gang warfare.”29 Leading clergymen were
killed as rival factions clashed in the streets of the city.
    The backdrop to this schism was a Rome that had broken up into a loose
confederation of neighborhoods. It was dotted with islands where groups of fine
buildings (both ecclesiastical and aristocratic) stood out in the midst of a sprawl-
ing and degraded urban landscape. These dispersed islands of well-­maintained
residences were the power bases of rival clergymen and their lay allies. The tenac-
ity of the opposition to Pope Symmachus mounted by the clergy who supported
Laurentius shows that a bishop’s control of his own clergy could never be taken
for granted.
    In these situations, wealth was the key to episcopal power. Symmachus rode
out the storm because he could flex the financial muscle of the wealth of the
church. Loyal clergymen were said to have received threefold pay raises. The poor


                                        489
                                   chapter 28


were looked after as seldom before. As lord of his church’s wealth, Symmachus
reestablished himself as lord of the churches of Rome.30
    Rome was exceptional both for its size and for its traditions of clerical inde-
pendence linked to lay patronage. Elsewhere in Italy, as in Gaul and Spain, the
conflict between the bishop and his own clergy took place on a more narrow
stage. It is best seen as the last playing out of a very ancient Roman style of urban
politics.
    As we have seen, the secret of the Roman social order in the West had been
the ability of small groups to hang together at the top of local society. The
curiae—­the town councils—­had played that role for centuries. But they only did
so for as long as they held together. The town councils declined in the fourth and
fifth centuries, not because their members sank into undifferentiated poverty
but because they had fractured. An inner group of principales (such as those de-
nounced by Salvian) became separate from the run-­of-­the-­mill town councillors.
The town councillors who had gathered for centuries in the “temple” of the town
hall lost their sense of cohesion. Excluded and victimized by a new oligarchy of
principales and imperial servants, town councillors had sought their fortunes
elsewhere (often by entering government service), or they had turned to the pro-
tection of powerful patrons outside the city.31
    This story is well-­known and has been told often. But by the sixth century,
the conflict between the town council and its leaders had come to be replicated
within the Christian church. All over the West, the clergy lost out to their bishop.
The bishop and his personal staff emerged as the new principales. The clergy took
on the role of lesser town councillors. They saw themselves as the digruntled los-
ers in a battle with a high-­handed oligarchy now centered on the bishop’s palace.
Bishops refused to treat their clergy as equals in much the same way as the oligar-
chic inner core of principales had browbeaten their weaker colleagues in the town
councils.
    The battle between the bishop and his clergy was fought in very much the
same manner as the battle between different sections of the town council had
been fought in previous centuries. In the late fourth century, average town coun-
cillors were accused of “hiding in the shadow of the powerful” so as to avoid their
duties in the city.32 Now, in many church councils of sixth-­century Gaul, priests
were denounced by their bishops for doing much the same. They lingered by
preference in the “oratories and villas of the powerful” so as to keep the bishop’s
officials at bay and to avoid turning up to attend the bishop’s ceremonies in the
city.33
    The conflict between the bishop and his own clergy did not simply replicate
the infighting of the town councillors. It was exacerbated by the mechanisms of
episcopal elections. Ideally, bishops were supposed to be drawn from the local
clergy. But the result of this practice was that a bishop would have to live for the

                                        490
                wealth and conflict in the churches


rest of his life with resentful colleagues whom he had defeated. Outsiders were
frequently chosen so as to avoid this situation. In the fifth century, this solution
goes some way toward explaining the demand in the cities of Provence for monk-­
bishops trained in Lérins. In sixth-­century Gaul, it was more usual to choose
outside candidates from distinguished “senatorial” families or from among the
growing cadre of royal servants. Only prestige-­full outsiders could bridle the ri-
valries within the local clergy that had been unleashed by the election of their
bishop.34
    To make matters worse, disputed elections were a financial bloodbath for the
local church. They were often as expensive to the rival parties (in terms of the
wealth that they had to mobilize in proportion to their other outlays) as the dis-
plays of “civic love” had been for those who had competed for eminence by lav-
ishing shows on their city in earlier centuries.35 Much of the money spent on
these occasions went into bribes. It has been calculated that the Frankish kings
gained 10,000 solidi a year in gifts from rival parties in contested elections.36 This
is some indication of the intensity with which the clergy of the cities pursued
their feuds. In such a situation—­whether he was a winner from inside or had
been introduced from outside as a tiebreaker—­no bishop could feel secure.
    Bishops could only feel secure if they had the wealth of their church behind
them. Bishops who did not act quickly to establish control of the wealth of their
church frequently found themselves helpless. They had to face senior clergymen
who were already firmly ensconced at the head of the administration of the
properties of the church. Nothing shows this more clearly than the way in which
Gregory, bishop of Tours (573–­94), wrote about Sidonius Apollinaris in his
Book of Histories. As we saw, Sidonius had become bishop of Clermont in 468 in
unusual circumstances. He was ill prepared for the job. Remembered a century
later, he appeared to Gregory to be a poignant figure. Gregory wrote that Sido-
nius had been a former prefect, “from the very first ranks of the senators of Gaul.”
He was the relative by marriage of a Roman emperor. For Gregory, Sidonius was
the “real thing.”37 Yet as a bishop Gregory remembered him as a pathetic figure.
Two priests “took away from him all power over the estates of the church and
reduced him to a pittance, with great ignominy.”38 That was how a former gran-
dee appeared to an observer of the conflict-­ridden churches of late sixth-­century
Gaul.
    Only a bishop who made full use of his power as the dominus of the wealth of
his church could hope to control his clergy. In 580 Riculf, a priest of Tours, made
a bid to replace Gregory as bishop of Tours at a time when Gregory was absent
and out of favor at the Frankish court. Riculf knew exactly how to conduct a cleri-
cal putsch. He immediately took over the bishop’s palace and made an inventory
of the money he found there. Then he took over the estates of the church. He
repaid his supporters with gifts and with advantageous tenancies of choice fields

                                        491
                                   chapter 28


and vineyards. The minor clergy—­usually young boys already enrolled at an early
age in the service of the church—­he simply flogged. Recognoscite dominum ves­
trum: “Recognize your master” was Riculf ’s boast.39 Gregory portrayed Riculf as
an upstart and a barbarian. But he was no such thing. He was a well-­established
priest and administrator of church property. He had contacts at court. He was
simply doing, if high-­handedly and in a hurry, what any other bishop (Gregory
included) would have done to secure himself as head of his own church.


       “Made rich by the devout or stripped by the faithless”: Wealth
                 and the Churches in the Sixth Century

These vivid anecdotes of small-­town politics Latin Christian style do not only
litter the vivid works of Gregory of Tours. They can be found in almost every
other source for the sixth century. They point to a more decisive but more silent
development. At some time during the late fifth and early sixth centuries, the
Christian churches of the West realized that many among them had become,
indeed, very rich. The weight of this development can be sensed in the nature of
the sources. It is not entirely an accident that we know considerably more about
the finances of the churches after the late fifth century than we know from any
earlier period.
    Let us take the example of the Liber Pontificalis (Book of the Pontiffs) of Rome.
It was written in around 510 by a priest possibly connected with the papal ad-
ministration in the Lateran at the time of Pope Symmachus. A series of biogra-
phies of the popes from Saint Peter to the early sixth century, the Book of the
Pontiffs could have taken many forms. For this reason, the form that it did take is
all the more surprising. It turned out to be a book about wealth. It is a treasure
trove for historians of the late Roman economy. It contains twenty of the thirty
inventories of church plate available for the entire Roman world in the period
between 300 and 600.40 It preserves some of the only evidence that we have for
the revenues and distribution of church estates and for the financing of church
foundations. Yet we seldom stop to think why we are treated to such unique evi-
dence. It is because this was the work of a man who wrote at a time when issues
of church wealth had played a crucial role in the conflict between the supporters
of Pope Symmachus and those of the priest Laurentius.41
    It is the same with Gregory, who became bishop of Tours in 573. Gregory
finished his Histories in 591. The relation of Gallic society as a whole to the
wealth of the church was a central theme of his narrative. He made it clear that
he intended to write about the ways in which “the churches have either been
made rich by the devout or stripped by the faithless.”42 Altogether, in the Latin
churches of the sixth century wealth was in the air.

                                        492
                wealth and conflict in the churches


    The awakening of the churches to great wealth was a new development. It
could not have been foreseen in the fourth and early fifth centuries. Yet we often
fail to realize the novelty of this situation. Certain deeply entrenched historical
stereotypes stand in our way. At the risk of being brusque, it is important to re-
move these.
    First, we must begin by making clear what we mean by speaking of “the wealth
of the Church.” As far as wealth was concerned, there was no such thing as “the
Church” with a capital C. There was only the wealth of individual churches.
Each bishop was the little lord of the wealth of his own church and of his own
church only. Hence the distribution of wealth among the churches was highly
stratified. It followed the contours of a steeply pitched hierarchy of cities that
had been set in place in the later empire. Imperial capitals, metropolitan cities, and
government centers had come to draw wealth and talent to themselves, leaving
the minor cities to their fate. Most small cities shrunk; some collapsed entirely.
    The wealth of the churches was distributed in the same uneven manner as was
the wealth of individual cities. We find glaring contrasts between the wealth of
individual churches in the Latin West.43 Rich cities had rich churches. In Italy
the churches of Rome and Ravenna had revenues of 26,000 and 12,000 solidi,
respectively. They towered above their neighbors. By contrast, in central Italy in
the shadow of Rome, the churches of the little towns were dirt poor. In Ferentis
(Ferento, Viterbo) the bishop had only one vineyard with which to support
himself and pay the expenses of his church. In Aquinum (Aquino, Frosinone)
the dying bishop foretold the future of his see in around 540. It was not a rosy
future. The next bishop would be a former provider of donkeys at the local road-
house. His successor would be a fuller. After that, there would be no more bish-
ops. The see would vanish, ground down (as so many of the little cities of Italy
were ground down in the 540s and 550s) by plague and war.44
    The second stereotype that must be avoided is the assumption that the rise
to wealth of the Christian churches was fore-­ordained. Many accounts of this
period assume that the wealth of the Church (very much with a capital C) was an
inevitable consequence of the conversion of Constantine. In reality, as we have
seen, Constantine did little to place the leaders of the Christian churches on the
high ground of Roman society. He assumed that this high ground would remain
occupied by others. For many churches the road to wealth was hesitant and sur-
prisingly spasmodic. In the fourth and fifth centuries, different regions drew on
very different constituencies of donors. As a whole, bishops tended to rely less on
wide acres and more on the legal and fiscal privileges granted to them by Chris-
tian emperors. They did not feel that they could compete on their own turf with
great landowners and successful courtiers. Up to the end of the empire, even the
most prosperous churches of the West still lay in the shadow of massive com-
plexes of lay wealth. It was only the unexpected collapse of the great lay fortunes

                                         493
                                  chapter 28


in the course of the fifth century that left the Christian bishops standing, for the
first time, as major landowners in every locality.45
    The third stereotype has led us to suppose that the wealth of many churches
grew because they inherited the wealth of the secular aristocracy.46 It is asserted
that large numbers of senators became bishops and clergymen. They brought
their wealth with them. The “aristocratization” of the church is held to be the
one truly major development of Latin Christianity as a whole from the fifth cen-
tury onward. This view rests on a misunderstanding. It extends to all regions of
the West conditions that were peculiar to certain enclaves of senatorial power in
Gaul. Patient work on the personnel of the Christian churches in other regions
has shown that an aristocratization of the church did not happen in Italy and in
many other parts of Gaul, Spain, and Africa.47
    Even in Gaul, aristocratic dominance in the churches was less widespread and
less deeply rooted than many scholars assert. Martin Heinzelmann has claimed
that aristocratic dominance had “distant roots in the state of Constantine and
had been firmly established in Gaul since the second half of the fifth century.”48
But this may not be the case. The work of Heinzelmann has been of inesti­
mable value in pointing to the elements of continuity between the ruling elites
of Gaul in Roman and post-­Roman times. But it is less certain that the continu-
ity of Roman aristocratic values and of aristocratic styles of dominance to which
Heinzelmann drew our attention led the bishops inexorably to a position of un-
challenged wealth and power in Gallic society. Still less did it lead to the forma-
tion of what Heinzelmann has called a Bischofsherrschaft—­a “bishop’s lordship”
over the cities of southern Gaul and elsewhere.49 The tendency to exaggerate the
density of the senatorial presence in the churches has caused us to imagine a situ-
ation where bishops of Roman noble background came to rule virtually autono-
mous city-­states. We even assume that Gregory of Tours wrote his Histories and
his Books of Miracles in order to provide an ideology for this supposed bishop’s
lordship.50
    But this is not the case. In reality, the bishop’s position in the cities of Gaul
was considerably more fragile than the image of a solid bishop’s lordship sug-
gests. By the last decades of the sixth century (that is, when Gregory was writ-
ing), what dominance the senatorial families had once enjoyed in the churches
of Gaul was fast becoming out-­of-­date. A new aristocracy (partly Roman and
partly barbarian) had formed around the courts of the Frankish kings. Its repre-
sentatives were quite prepared to push aside honored relics of an earlier age.51
Senatorial families lost their influence. They became poorer. This meant that
there was little or no old money left for the churches of Gaul to fall back on as a
source of endowments.
    Last but not least, we cannot assume that the Christian clergy possessed fail-­
safe mechanisms for the accumulation of wealth. We must reject the romantic

                                        494
                wealth and conflict in the churches


stereotype that has presented the Catholic Church as rising ever higher on a
flood of pious donations.52 Nor can we adopt the mirror image of this devout
imagining—­the image of a church that cynically set out in quest of legacies.
There is, for instance, no support for the view that Christianity altered patterns
of marriage (by increasing prohibitions on marriage between cousins) in such a
way as to produce a surplus of unmarried or unmarriageable persons whose in-
heritances would go to the church.53
    In fact, as the sermons of Augustine and the tracts of Salvian make plain, late
Roman Christians were not necessarily great givers to the church. And even when
they gave, their gifts were frequently challenged—­by kinsfolk, by fiscal agents,
and by other interested parties. This situation did not change in the sixth cen-
tury. There were plenty of Roman lawyers in Frankish Gaul and elsewhere who
were expert in “breaking” testaments by finding reasons to have bequests to the
church declared invalid.54 We must never forget the sheer secularity of the post-­
imperial barbarian kingdoms. They were the heirs of an empire that (to the great
horror of Salvian, as we have seen) had remained resolutely untouched by Chris-
tian values in its day-­to-­day handling of property matters and taxation.
    To take one well-­known example: King Chilperic of Neustria (561–­84) still
upheld this unabashed secular tradition. He was Gregory’s bête noir. Gregory
called him “the Herod of our times.”55 He recorded with evident disapproval the
fact that, as late as 577, Chilperic had built amphitheaters at Soissons and Paris.56
Above all, Chilperic was “assiduously devoted to the breaking of wills in favor of
the churches.”57 He also resented the fiscal privileges of bishops. He would fre-
quently complain: “Behold, our fisc has remained poor and our riches are passed
over to the churches.”58 This remark has been cited constantly by historians of
the Frankish kingdoms. But there was nothing new about Chilperic. Far from
registering the king’s reaction to a novel crisis brought about by the imbalance
between a grossly wealthy church and an impoverished Merovingian state, Chil-
peric’s remark merely showed that he was a vigilant ruler who took the interests
of the fisc—­the revenue office—­seriously. His like had been around in Gaul since
the days of the tight-­fisted and effective emperor Valentinian I.59 Such persons
acted as a constant brake on the expansion of church property.
    Altogether, gifts to the church were not always productive of wealth. Many
were legally vulnerable. Many donations consisted of widely scattered proper-
ties that were not always of high quality. They included tracts of underpopu-
lated land, which appear to have become more common in an agrarian world
overshadowed by recurrent violence and, perhaps, by climatic anomaly. Or they
were awkwardly placed plots that were not worth fighting over with one’s kins-
folk or neighbors. They could be handed over without regret to the church. In
this situation, the frequent addition of properties did not automatically add up
to growth.60

                                        495
                                  chapter 28


   We must remember that corporate wealth, in itself, had never been a formula
for economic success in the ancient world. The fate of the town councils in the
fourth and fifth centuries showed this clearly. The towns owned extensive prop-
erties. But, as Gilles Bransbourg has shown in a brilliant recent article, these
properties were notoriously mismanaged. They seriously underperformed in
producing revenue and were regularly pillaged by those who were supposed to
administer them.61 There was no reason why the lands of the church should not
have gone the same way.
   The lesson of the later empire had been that corporate bodies and their lands
were only safe when protected by imperial privileges. Dependence on exemp-
tions granted by the state lasted into post-­imperial times. The clergy knew,
for instance, that those who worked on imperial estates had claimed personal
immunities from corvée labor and similar burdens. This was a privilege many
churches went out of their way to obtain for their own lands. By the sixth cen-
tury, the lands associated with major shrines—­such as the lands of Saint Martin
around Tours—­were supposed to enjoy such exemptions. Passing armies could
not requisition goods and labor from the peasants who worked on them. In this
manner, the exemptions formerly associated with the “divine household” of the
emperor were now claimed by the “household of God”—­the church. They were
now granted by kings.62 Long after the empire had vanished, fiscal privileges in-
herited from imperial times and renewed by local kings remained crucial to the
social position of the churches. Landed wealth, in and of itself, was not enough.


     Erat strenuus in labore, ecclesias erigere, domos componere: He was
        strenuously active, setting up churches, organizing estates

                 The Rise of the Managerial Bishop

Yet none of these advantages could be taken for granted. They had to be fought
for. What the situation demanded was a bishop who was prepared to take the
offensive. First of all, he had to have skilled lawyers at his disposal in order to
hold onto what he received. We can see this happening all over Europe. From the
mid-­fifth century onward, ecclesiastical defensores—­lawyers skilled in defending
the interests of the church—­make their appearance in ever greater numbers.
They emerged as the right-­hand men of the bishops. By the time of Pope Gela­
sius (492–­96), the defensores of the church of Rome had come to be treated as
members of the clergy.63 Having secured his lands by means of such lawyers
against the lawyers employed by angry family members, against fiscal agents, and
against rapacious neighbors, the bishop then let loose upon his lands a team of
administrators who were devoted to making the best out of what properties the

                                       496
                wealth and conflict in the churches


local church had been able to retain. Hence the importance of the emergence of
a new figure in the landscape of wealth—­the rise of what may best be called “the
managerial bishop.”
   To be a managerial bishop was not for everyone. In 558–­59, Pope Pelagius I
(556–­61) wrote that the bishop of Narni should resign. He was far too nice for
the job:
   For the gentleness which goes with such inborn simplicity as his cannot
   govern the patrimony of the church. He cannot stand up to the city coun-
   cilors in matters of taxation, nor can he get himself involved in the trou-
   blesome business of hounding those who retain ecclesiastical properties.64
Pelagius himself knew only too well what qualities were needed; he displayed
them himself. Writing in around 560 to Julianus, bishop of Cingulum (Cingoli:
Macerata), about the workforce on the estates of the Roman church, he added
(possibly with his own hand):
   As for those peasants who could take out leases or become tenants, if you
   let go of a single hair of their heads, there will be no way in which you will
   be able to regain my good favor.65
    Such bishops are better documented in Italy from the lively correspondence
of the popes. But they were also important in Gaul and Spain. Gregory of Tours
admired just such qualities in his maternal uncle, Nicetius, who was bishop of
Lyons from 552 to 573: “He was a great almsgiver and strenuously active. He was
most diligently engaged in setting up churches, organizing estates, sowing fields
and digging and trenching vineyards.”66
    There were many bishops and clergymen like him in Gaul. A sixth-­century
letter adressed an archdeacon of Metz: “I salute Mactaric the archdeacon—­a man
who pants with enthusiasm for the re-­establishment of the church and is always
on the watch out for its material advantages.”67 Even the great north Frankish
politician duke Chrodinus funded his gifts to the church by model farming: “For
he was often at work, setting up estates from scratch, planting vines, building
farm houses, reclaiming land.”68
    The success of managerial bishops showed that one did not have to be a for-
mer aristocrat to be an effective guardian of the church’s wealth. It was not that
aristocrats were innocent of estate management. But when it came to increasing
the wealth of the church, the skills of a government clerk proved just as effective
as was an aristocrat’s command of the classics and long pedigree. The need for
efficient administrators ensured that the clergy remained a carrière ouverte aux
talents. Epiphanius, bishop of Pavia (466–­96), had been a mere ingenuus, a free-­
born citizen of Pavia. Enrolled in the church, he started learning shorthand at an
early age. By the 460s he was a subdeacon, conducting litigation on behalf of the

                                        497
                                  chapter 28


church among the farmers of the Po valley. Epiphanius’s biographer, Ennodius,
came from a noble family of southern Gaul. He presented his hero as the darling
of the nobility. But Epiphanius himself was not a nobleman. He had not come in
from the top as an aristocrat might have done. He had risen from relatively hum-
ble origins as a bureaucrat in the service of his church.69
    For all his nostalgia for the senatorial families of earlier days, Gregory of
Tours was very much the child of the new age of the managerial bishop. He was
the first boy in his family to grow up from childhood as a member of the clergy.
He may even have learned shorthand as a boy, as a preparation for administrative
duties.70 As Martin Heinzelmann has made clear, he took his senatorial back-
ground very much for granted. What he wished to be was not a senator but a
man of the church.71 He was a tenacious upholder of canon law procedures.72 We
would not have been able to read in the works of Gregory so many vivid tales of
rancor, treachery, and egotism among the clergy of Gaul if it were not for the fact
that Gregory regarded such actions as breaches of a church law to which he was
deeply committed. He liked a bishop to be strenuus in labore, an active and no-­
nonsense administrator, loyal to the laws of the church. He even noted with a
certain approval that the last act of bishop Praetextatus of Rouen, when mortally
wounded in 585 from a dagger thrust delivered by an assassin in the pay of
Queen Fredegund, was “to put in order his domus.” Propped up in bed, he con-
tinued to organize the administrative staff gathered in his palace.73


               Patrocinium immortalis ecclesiae: The patronage
                           of the undying church

             Institutional Continuity and Control
                       of the Peasantry

To emphasize the relative novelty of the figure of the managerial bishop is not
to claim that ecclesiastical landownership was in any way qualitatively different
from that of the lay world, either in the gentleness and honesty of its day-­to-­
day management or in its economic success.74 Both types of property—­lay and
ecclesiastical—­attempted in their high-­handed manner to make the best they
could of difficult times. Both faced recurrent warfare that threatened to scatter
their labor force. Many peasants were taken captive. Many more, one may sus-
pect, took advantage of the momentary breakdown of law and order to run away
from their lords.75 Both groups—­lay and clerical alike—­staggered through a
possible downturn in the weather. The letters of the popes show the same admin-
istrative practices and the same determination to control the land and those who
worked on it as was shown by great secular landowners. The correspondence of

                                       498
                wealth and conflict in the churches


 Gregory I reveals forms of estate management that are richly documented from
 the papyri of similar great landowners in sixth-­century Egypt.76
    But the estates of the church did have time on their side. Given to God and
the poor, the wealth of the church was deemed to be eternal. And so was the
­supervision exercised by the administrators of the church. This is shown very
clearly in the language of church councils when they touched on the charged
issue of the fate of freed slaves. For former slaves the bishops offered both good
news and bad news. The bishops gathered at the council of Mâcon in 585 de-
clared that slaves who had been manumitted on the estates of the church (or who
had been given as freedmen to the church) could not be reenslaved. They were
protected by the “patronage of the undying church.”77 But this did not mean
that they were freed from all obligations. Patronage came with a cost. Freedmen
merely changed from slaves into servants. The old Roman law had insisted that
freed slaves should continue to render obsequiuum—­personal service—­to their
 masters. This law was maintained with particular vigor in the church.78 In the
 words of the fourth council of Toledo (in 633 ad), the descendants of all slaves
 freed by the church were expected to continue to owe “service and obedience” to
 the church. They did this “because the church never dies.”79
    In a society where wealth depended on the annual mobilization of labor to
bring in the fruits of the land, the ability to control persons was decisive. It was
quite as important as the ownership of extensive lands. By offering protection to
freedmen from reenslavement in return for insisting on their continued obliga-
tions as servants of the church, the bishops of Gaul and Spain gave their weight
to a more widespread development. This was the emergence of estates worked by
a closely supervised labor force made up of slaves and semi-­servile peasants.80 In
 the late sixth and seventh centuries, work based on tight control over manpower,
 and not the collection of rent from widely scattered holdings (as had been the
 case in the fourth century), was what the powerful needed in order to generate
 their wealth. By insisting on their perpetual rights over freedmen and over other
 forms of tied labor, the administrators of the estates of the church pointed the
 way toward a general movement to reassert and tighten control over those who
 worked the land.
    The strenuous bishops admired by Gregory of Tours had the future before
 them. In collaboration with the Frankish kings, the newly formed nobility of
 northern Gaul reversed the effects of the dislocation of the fifth century. Far
 from continuing indefinitely into an ever deeper spiral of disorder (as we some-
 times imagine when talking of “Dark Age” Gaul), the nobles and bishops of the
 age of Gregory of Tours brought to a close the “Time of Troubles” associated with
 the breakdown of the Roman empire in the course of the fifth century. Having
 regained control of their peasants, the great landowners of the Frankish kingdoms
 (ecclesiastical and lay alike) came into greater wealth than did the aristocracy of

                                        499
                                   chapter 28


any other region in the West. They emerged in the seventh century as “the first
truly medieval nobilities of Europe.”81 They did this partly by sharing in the man-
agerial skills deployed by the bishops as guardians of the wealth of the “undying
church.”


                  An Age of Light: Building in Gaul and Italy

This development only got under way at the end of the sixth century. It did not
happen everywhere. We can see this if we look at ecclesiastical building in dif-
ferent regions. Here, signs of regression were evident all over the West, with the
possible exception of Africa.82 It is usually stated that in the sixth century south-
ern Gaul came to be covered with a white robe of churches due to the wealth “of
that Gallo-­Roman aristocracy, regenerated by Christianity.”83 But, in reality, the
building record of the cities of southern Gaul shows a notable slowing of pace.
Bishop Rusticus’s basilica at Narbonne had taken four years to complete in 445.
Bishop Namatius’s impressive basilica at Clermont, built in the 460s, took twelve
years. It took Gregory seventeen years to complete the repair of his own cathe-
dral in Tours; and its walls were covered with frescoes, not precious mosaics.84
The greatest churches in Gaul were not those built by the bishops. They were
built by members of the Frankish royal family.85
    When Venantius Fortunatus, the poet from northern Italy, came to Gaul in
566–­67, he was surrounded by bishops who expected their churches to be
praised. He presented each such church as a towering shrine, with golden ceilings
and inner domes in which “wandering light is caught and blazes with radiance
without a sun.”86 But the judgment of the archaeologist is somewhat more harsh.
Speaking of the excavation of the church dedicated to Saint Mary in Bordeaux,
for which Venantius praised bishop Leontius, the authors of the Topographie
chrétienne . . . de la Gaule remark that “the modest proportions of the construc-
tion that has been revealed barely agrees with the emphatic tones of Venantius’
poem.”87
    It is to sixth-­century Italy that we should turn to find real wealth and skill de-
ployed in the building of churches. The classic monuments of sixth-­century Italy
are the well-­known churches of Ravenna. But the splendid churches of Ravenna
were the product of unique conditions created by a major government center. A
changer of gold—­Julianus Argentarius—­spent 36,000 solidi on the now famous
church of San Vitale. Along with his son, Julianus spent at least 60,000 solidi in all
on San Vitale and on other churches in Ravenna. He was not a great landowner.
Rather, he offered crucial financial services to the aristocracy and the state.88
    For this reason, the foundations at Ravenna are somewhat unrepresentative.
If we want to appreciate what the new style of managerial bishop could do in an

                                         500
                wealth and conflict in the churches


Italian city that was not a government capital, we should look to the south, to
Canusium (Canosa di Puglia), on the Appian Way that led to Bari and to Brin-
disi. At Canusium, bishop Sabinus (531–­542/552) remodeled the entire city
so as to place the bishop’s stamp upon it.89 Above the former pagan shrine of
Minerva he placed a daring building, made up of four great conch-­like apses
arranged in a square.90 He expanded the episcopal center at San Pietro, drawing
water from an ancient aqueduct in order to feed a fountain near a large baptis-
tery.91 Another center at another corner of the city (Piano di San Giovanni) was
also expanded.92
    Sabinus even had his own brick factory. Brick stamps that bear his name show
that Sabinus left his mark on the church of the neighboring coastal port of Bar-
letta.93 Nothing like this was happening in distant Gaul. And yet Sabinus was
not an aristocrat but a bishop who knew how to get the most out of the wealth
of his church. On one occasion, he narrowly avoided being poisoned by his own
archdeacon. This, in itself, was a tribute to an active man. Sabinus knew how to
set his administrators to work so as to create a see that a fellow administrator, his
archdeacon, was (quite literally) prepared to kill for.94
    Not all of this building can be ascribed solely to economic success. The
churches were also triumphs of skill. Looking at the sixth-­century churches of
Italy, one is struck by the ingenuity with which bishops adjusted to harsher
times. The churches they built or repaired show that, in the West, the days of vast
basilicas had passed. Instead, churches were small but magical places, such as Ve-
nantius Fortunatus had praised in Gaul. Light seemed to be trapped in them.
The aim was to secure a play of light on mosaic. The light itself was made to fall
from unexpected angles. The ever-­changing shimmer of reflecting surfaces in-
fused cramped spaces with a sense of immensity. In around 510 the sanctuary
that contained the grave of Saint Felix at Cimitile was rebuilt. It still stands adja-
cent to the ruins of the great basilica Paulinus of Nola had built a century before.
The new sanctuary was smaller than its predecessor, but it was built with such
skill and elegance that it appears as a world in itself, filled with a mysterious radi-
ance: “A light now opens on to wide spaces.”95 Within one century, at Cimitile
as elsewhere, we have passed from a massive age of gold to a more economical but
no less magical age of light.
    Nothing illustrates this change more effectively than the remarkable study
by Ann Terry and Henry Maguire on the mosaics of the basilica rebuilt in 543 by
bishop Euphrasius of Poreč (former Parenzo in Istria, Croatia). Their patient work
has revealed the extraordinary skill shown by the mosaic artists who worked on
the building. This was a large building by sixth-­century standards. But this fact
makes the economy of means employed by bishop Euphrasius all the more impres-
sive. The artists set about their task with “both skill and frugality.”96 They were
sparing in their use of the most precious types of mosaic pieces. They used these

                                         501
                                   chapter 28


to produce an enormous variation of hues around central figures. They used gold
“as a wild card . . . [to] achieve a rippling, iridescent shimmer.” Yet this gold was
prudently mingled with plain, cheap stones so as to achieve maximum effect for
the least outlay.97 Patiently observing every tilt of the mosaic chips and the mix-
ture of precious and ordinary materials in the overall decoration of the building,
Terry and Maguire have taken us as far as we moderns can go to enter the imagi-
native world conjured up in the poems of Venantius Fortunatus. We are in
smaller buildings than before, but they have been endowed, through the unsur-
passed skills of craftsmen, with what the great basilicas of earlier, more prosper-
ous times could not achieve: “the apparent power to generate sacred light.”98
   Furthermore, it is in such buildings that we still can look into the eyes of the
bishops who commissioned them. Euphrasius at Poreč, Ecclesius and Maximia-
nus in San Vitale at Ravenna stand out for the robust realism with which they
were represented. With half-­shaven chins, furrowed brows, and great, gray eyes,
they stand out from the ethereal, idealized figures of saints and angels with
whom they mingle.99 These were manager-­bishops who knew how to bring glory
to the churches of the sixth-­century West.




                                        502
                          Chapter 29
                          •••••
   Servator fidei, patriaeque semper amator: Guardian
    of the faith, and always lover of [his] homeland
          Wealth and Piety in the Sixth Century




                  The Bishop and His City: Pastoral Power

It is a thrill for a historian of the west Roman empire in its last days to arrive
(through rooms devoted to a clutter of Victorian chinaware) at the small exhibit
of early medieval tombstones in the Museum of the Carmarthenshire Antiquar-
ian Society in southwest Wales. The crude inscriptions carved in local sandstone
speak of a region in western Britain that was fast losing its Roman face. One local
figure, named Voteporix, still bore the Roman military title of protector. But his
name was also carved in Irish ogham script on one side of his tall memorial stone.
He was a leader in a post-­Roman society that looked across the Irish sea rather
than to continental Europe. In the midst of such monuments to early Welsh and
Irish warriors, it is a surprise to find broken portions of a smaller square stone,
whose clumsy lettering and erratic spelling reveal on closer inspection a carefully
composed Latin inscription: “Here lies Paulinus servatur fidaei patrieq[ue] sem­
per amator guardian of the faith and always a lover of his home land.”1
    Paulinus may well have been a mid-­sixth-­century bishop in an area (near Caio,
Carmarthen) that still bears his name—­Pant-­y-­Polion: “Vale of Paulinus.” Pau-
linus was praised as “always a lover of his patria”—­his homeland. It was a phrase
that was also used across the sea in Gaul. Venantius Fortunatus, the Italian poet
and friend of Gregory of Tours, used it frequently in poems in praise of the bish-
ops of the cities of Gaul. Paulinus of Pant-­y-­Polion and the bishops addressed by
Venantius Fortunatus were almost exact contemporaries. Fortunatus honored his
patrons with phrases such as Decus Patriae, “Ornament of his Homeland,” Tutor
Patriae, “Guardian of his Homeland,” and Urbis Amator, “Lover of the City.”2
The message was plain. If a leading Roman was to love anything, it was above all
his patria—­his hometown—­which was supposed to claim his love. The inscrip-


                                       503
                                   chapter 29


tion of Paulinus in distant Wales shows that as late as the mid-­sixth century the
Christian bishop was expected to continue this deep-­rooted Roman love for a
specific community.
    Those who praised bishop Paulinus were the heirs of a long tradition. Two
centuries before, the title amator patriae had been used in faraway Lepcis Magna
(Libya) on the southern shore of the Mediterranean. It was a common phrase,
with long roots in the ancient world.3 For instance, it had been used in around
300 to praise Porphyrius, a rich citizen of Lepcis Magna. Porphyrius had shown
himself to be a “lover of the city and of his fellow-­citizens.” He had provided four
live elephants for the circus games. “The most splendid town council” of Lepcis
Magna had repaid his gesture by literally putting him on a pedestal. A statue that
showed him driving a two-­horse chariot was set up in the city’s market upon a
massive base marked twice over with his name—­Porphyrius.4
    Paulinus of Pant-­y-­Polion and the Gallic bishops praised by Venantius For-
tunatus no longer provided elephants in order to prove their love for the com-
munity. The change in what they were expected to provide sums up the turning
of an age. But what, exactly, had changed? One aspect of the change is obvious:
Paulinus was also praised as a servator fidei, a “guardian of the faith.” He was a
religious leader. What is less obvious is the specific nature of the power that came
from such leadership. As a Christian bishop, he wielded a “pastoral” power. It is
worthwhile to linger a little on the peculiarity of that kind of power, which had
come to the fore in Roman society with the spread of Christianity in the fourth,
fifth, and sixth centuries.
    In a series of lectures to the Collège de France in 1977–­78 (which have only
recently been published), the French philosopher Michel Foucault drew atten-
tion to the oddity and to the long destiny in European thought of the notion of
“pastoral” power. It had deep roots in the ancient Near East and in Early Chris-
tian discourse. It was “absolutely specific and different from political power” as it
had usually been conceived in the Greco-­Roman world.5 It was a power that was
thought of as more than usually insistent, wide-­ranging, and absorptive. It was
“directed to all and each” member of a flock of believers.6 The bishop was sup-
posed to love the members of his flock. He loved each one of them equally. And
he loved them all—­up to the very edge of the human community, where (as we
have often had occasion to see) the poor gathered like a black band on the far
horizon, marking the extreme edges of society.
    Indeed, the bishop’s pastoral love for his flock was no more than a specific,
localized manifestation of the inexhaustible love of God Himself for all human-
kind.7 Even in his own patria, the bishop’s love was not cramped by civic bound-
aries: it extended to all classes and it spilled over in such a way as to erase (or, at
least, in practice, to erode) the primary distinction between townsfolk and the
people of the countryside. Porphyrius, by contrast, like any other ancient civic

                                         504
               wealth and piety in the sixth century


benefactor, did not have to stretch his love so far. It was enough for him to love
only the city of Lepcis Magna and, within Lepcis Magna itself, only the clearly
defined core of the city, which consisted of his fellow citizens.
   More important still, pastoral power was unique in one other respect. To use
Foucault’s words, it was a form of power shorn of “all those disturbing features
that make men tremble before the power of kings.”8 The ideal relation of a bishop
to his flock was that of a father to his children and of a shepherd coaxing his
sheep. He was supposed to be bound by innumerable strands of fellow-­feeling
to all members of his congregation, like a head to a vast body.
   Sixth-­century persons did not need to be reminded by an alert French phi-
losopher of these peculiar aspects of the power ascribed to their bishops. One
need only turn to the poems of Venantius Fortunatus to be made aware of this.
Venantius described bishop Leontius of Bordeaux (a hardy relic of the ancien
regime, complete with a senatorial pedigree that may have reached back to the
family of Paulinus of Nola) as “second to none in nobility.” But he then went on
to describe Leontius’s relations to his congregation in Bordeaux in purely Chris-
tian, pastoral terms. He was their father, not their lord:
   One would say that he had begotten this people as their father. For he
   admonished them in so gentle a voice that you would think that he was
   speaking to parts of his own body.9
    In reality, we know that the Christian churches in east and west alike had
produced their fair share of bishops who were thugs, would-­be warriors, and
lordly rulers, just as the administrators of the wealth of the church included its
fair share of misers, land grabbers, and petty tyrants. But these were treated as
exceptions. For a bishop to flaunt any power other than “soft” pastoral power of
the sort Venantius praised in bishop Leontius of Bordeaux was to destroy the
basis of his legitimacy. By the middle of the sixth century, the bishop and his
clergy had found a niche for themselves by exercising just such soft power—­
power that was pointedly not normal power—­in the heart of every Christian
city of the Roman and post-­Roman world.
    The division between church and state had been unknown in the classical
world. It emerged only slowly in late antiquity and in very different ways in dif-
ferent regions. It was a division that grew from a remarkable polarization of the
social imagination, by which nonviolent pastoral power was pitted against mere
“worldly” power. It was a development which, in the year 300, had been un-
imaginable to persons such as Porphyrius as it was to the overwhelming majority
of the population of the Roman world who were not yet Christian. How was
this strange polarity between pastoral and worldly power expressed throughout
the sixth-­century West, and what was the relation (both real and imagined) be-
tween this power and the new wealth of the church?

                                       505
                                   chapter 29


                  Necatores pauperum: Murderers of the Poor

                         Poverty and the Sacred

In the first place, we should not take for granted that the nonviolent pastoral
power of the bishops went unchallenged in the cities of the sixth century. Still
less can we claim that this power had morphed effortlessly into another, hybrid
form of power in which spiritual and worldly power were joined in the person of
bishops who acted as the heads of what have been called Bischofsherrschaften—­
bishops’ lordships.
    In fact, lay power had by no means withered away in the sixth-­century West.
If we think that this happened, it is because of the peculiar quality of our sources
for the period. The literature of the age was overwhelmingly clerical and mainly
hagiographic. Like a photographic plate, which privileges blue tones over red, a
literature devoted to the deeds of saints and bishops did not register certain colors
as clearly as others. The vivid blues of a bishop’s activities stand out sharply, while
the great red mass of lay life against which these deeds were set remains subdued—­
much as, in astronomers’ photographs of the constellation of Orion, the vivid
blue of a dwarf star tends to swamp the prodigious red globe of Betelgeuse.10
    But if we look carefully at a city such as Tours, we find that a bishop such as
Gregory of Tours had to deal constantly with forceful representatives of worldly
power over whose activities he had far less control than he wished. The fiscal
agents of the Frankish kings remained as aggressive and as conscious of their
rights as had been the agents of any Roman emperor in the fourth century. As in
earlier times, the local lay elites fought each other over the distribution of taxes.
This involved recourse to tax registers over which Gregory, as a mere bishop, had
no control.11 Above all, it was the count (the representative of the king) and not
the bishop who led the militias of the cities out to war. War was a serious matter
in a city such as Tours whose geographical position (as a place of transit between
northern and southern Gaul, and between the Rhone valley and the Atlantic)
placed it at the center of disputes between rival Frankish rulers. In the crisp words
of Simon Loseby, a Bischofsherrschaft without a Heer—­a bishop’s lordship with-
out command of an army—­amounted to little.12 In a world where worldly power
had by no means backed off to leave the bishop in undisputed control of the city,
soft, pastoral power was what the bishop had and soft power only.
    The peculiar nature of the wealth of the church played a crucial role in the
exercise of this distinctive form of power. Obviously, the wealth of the church
provided the bishop with financial muscle. In many cities, the bishop’s landed
wealth had finally made him the equal of any other landowner. The bishop’s role
in local decision making derived from his position as one of the richest figures in
the region. It did not derive from any formal grant to the bishop of powers that

                                         506
               wealth and piety in the sixth century


had once been wielded by lay officials. The bishop did not succeed the lay defen­
sor of the cities (the small-­claims judge and legal representative set in place in
many cities in the fourth century).13 Nor was the bishop made an official head of
the town council. Rather, he was co-­opted into the town council on the strength
of his wealth and persuasive abilities.14 It was a powerful position, but it was not
a position that was institutionally formalized. It was his to lose. And the bishop
would lose it if he did not make skillful use of the prestige that came from what
was unique about him—­his pastoral power.
   Given this situation, the bishop’s standing in the community depended on his
ability to draw on a form of wealth that was carefully constructed as being quite
as distinctive as was his own unique power as a pastor. For just as the bishop’s
power took the strange form of power without power, so the wealth of the church
took the equally strange form of wealth without wealth. It was nominally “the
wealth of the poor.” It was wealth held in trust for non-­persons. It was through
basing themselves on counterfactual power joined to counterfactual wealth that
the bishops and clergy of the sixth century rose to prominence in a society where
worldly, lay power had remained as solid and abrasive as ever before.
   Let us, therefore, linger a little on the implications of the cluster of expecta-
tions that gathered around the wealth of the church and its relation to the care of
the poor. What exactly did contemporaries mean when they spoke of the estates
of the church as the “patrimonies of the poor”? In this, we are dealing with the
construction of a model of society that carried a considerable imaginative charge,
derived from very real preoccupations in society at large. These preoccupations
were shared by both those who administered the wealth of the church and those
who contributed to that wealth as donors. In the long run, it had palpable effects,
on the ground, for the deployment of wealth by the bishops. For it soaked the
routine administration of the wealth of the church with a pathos and a sense of
the untouchable that was lacking in any form of lay landownership.
   In the first place, the notion that the wealth of the church was the wealth of
the poor was mobilized to ensure that the administration of church lands was
kept clean. To disperse, embezzle, or misuse these properties was to rob the in-
numerable, helpless persons for whom this wealth was said to be held in trust.
Appeals to the rights of the poor brought to bear a heavy language of disappro-
bation on erring bishops and clergymen. The very last Senatus consultum of which
we know was issued by the Senate of Rome in 532. It was inscribed on marble
plaques that were set up in the great courtyard of Saint Peter’s. It concerned
church property. It warned competing candidates in an upcoming papal election
that they should not mortgage the lands of the church for funds to support their
election campaigns: “In such a way the properties of the poor are burdened with
debt so as to pay for election promises.”15 In the opinion of the Senate of Rome,
to rob the poor in this manner was unpardonable.

                                        507
                                  chapter 29


   But the appeal to the notion of the poor as the victims par excellence of the
misuse and appropriation of church wealth derived its power from yet wider
concerns. In the canons of the councils of fifth-­and sixth-­century Gaul we can
see the emergence of a distinctive discourse that linked the integrity of church
property to the perpetual rights of the poor. Those who robbed the church of its
lands—­both those who directly appropriated church property and those who
held back bequests made to the church by members of their family—­were deemed
to be nothing less than necatores pauperum, “murderers of the poor.”16 They were
solemnly cursed. At the council of Tours in 567 bishops and their clergy were
urged to gather together so as to chant the solemn malediction of Psalm 108 in
unison against such defaulters:
   Because he did not remember to show mercy but persecuted the poor and
   needy and sought to kill the broken hearted (Psalm 108 [109]:15).17
Everyone knew who the broken hearted were. They were not the poor gathered in
the courtyard of the church but the bishop and his clergy whose rights (exercised
on behalf of the poor) had been flouted.
    We are witnessing the mutation of an old Christian theme. In the fourth cen-
tury, to give to the poor had been presented as a supremely counterfactual gesture.
Christians who gave to the poor—­rather than lavish comforts on the narrow
core of their fellow citizens—­were thought to have reached out to claim the fur-
thest edges of society for the church. By the sixth century, this notion had hard-
ened into a means to protect the fragile edges of the lands of the church. The
notion that the poor were the “endangered species” of sixth-­century society,
for whose preservation the bishop was responsible, placed a cordon around the
properties of the church. The notion had the effect of setting up a system of
alarms that were calculated to go off at the slightest touch. Any attempt to ap-
propriate the wealth of the church or to misuse church funds was immediately
presented as an attack on the helpless poor.
    The bishops and clergy might use high words in defense of the poor, but their
curses were not always heeded. However, the notion of the poor as victims was
not without weight. It derived its explosive force from merging with more wide-
spread anxieties specific to the sixth-­century West. Let us look for a moment at
what these were.
    In the fluid world of the post-­imperial kingdoms, the honeycomb of carefully
graded social statuses that had protected free Romans—­as senators, as town
councillors, as honestiores—­had collapsed. What had survived best was the bru-
tal binary model in which the rich faced the poor with no intermediary classes
in between. This stark model of society had been conjured up for at least two
centuries by Christian preaching. Over the years, as we have seen, it had subtly
changed. It had become fused with a model of society derived from the Old Testa-

                                       508
               wealth and piety in the sixth century


ment. On this Old Testament model, the “poor” were not invariably thought of
as beggars. They were average persons who cried out for justice. What they
lacked was not money but power. In the same way, the rich were not simply the
wealthy. They were the powerful—­the potentes. What they were expected to give
to the poor were not alms but justice.18
    It was to this Old Testament image of the poor that bishops and lay statesmen
alike turned, so as to think about the nature of rule in the new, post-­Roman
kingdoms. It was easier to advise a king, a queen, or a count to show mercy on the
poor (in the manner of an Old Testament monarch) than to deliver a lecture on
the complicated rights of Roman citizens.19 As a result, talk about the poor be-
came a way to talk about the charged issue of what it was to be the subjects of
new, non-­Roman rulers. The decisions of the second council of Mâcon, in 585,
made this plain:

   Those to whom the cares of great affairs have been entrusted [as royal
   governors] should not pass over as of little esteem the affairs of the very
   smallest persons. For it so happens that, when the smallest of the land are
   despised, matters slowly grow to a great evil.20

Put bluntly, to tread on the poor was to threaten to tread on everybody else. In
Gaul and elsewhere, the bishops were able to crystallize intense feelings of vic-
timization around the figures of the poor “who lived beneath the veil” of their
protection. In so doing, they were able to bring to the surface the grievances and
fears of entire regions and of groups of persons who were far from being beggars.
The language mobilized for the protection of the poor had become the language
of all potential victims of the power of kings and their representatives.21


       Hic fuit amator pauperum et clerum ampliavit: He was a lover
                   of the poor and expanded the clergy

When talking of the imaginative logic that lay behind sixth-­century images of
the poor and their relevance to the anxieties of society at large, we should not be
too detached. Human feeling played a significant role in relations to the poor.
Many bishops did, indeed, love the real poor with real warmth. The pathos of the
identification of the poor with the humbled incarnate Christ (which had once
stirred great aristocrats such as Paulinus and had sharpened the pen of Jerome
against the rich of Rome) was still very much alive in the sixth century. Gregory
of Tours wrote with particular warmth of bishop Quintianus of Rodez:

   This holy bishop was magnificent in his giving of alms. Indeed, when he
   heard poor men cry out he used to say: “Run, I beg you, run to that poor

                                       509
                                 chapter 29


   man. . . . Why are you so indifferent? How do you know that this poor
   person is not the very One [Christ Himself ] Who ordained in his Gospel
   that one should feed Him in the person of the poor.”22

    As this quote shows, the notion that Christ was present in the poor in gen-
eral (upheld by so many preachers of the fourth and fifth centuries) had become
focused on the idea that, among the anonymous crowd of normal beggars, one
might light on at least one beggar who was Christ in disguise. The notion of a
hidden savior living among the poor was a theme of folklore common to Jews, to
Christians, and eventually to Muslims. Its spread in eastern and western Christi-
anity alike summed up an entire view of society. This was a society tested by God
not only from above—­from the vault of heaven—­but from below: from the si-
lent ranks of the poor among whom Christ lingered.23
    Quintianus, however, was something of a maverick. He was a refugee from
Vandal Africa and the bishop of a small see. Gregory relished the flamboyant
style with which he cared for the poor and rebuked the rich. The average bishop
of a major see found that he faced a more delicate task. He had to show love not
for one group alone but for two. He had to love the poor, but he was also well
advised to try to love his clergy. It is revealing that the two groups now appear
together for the first time in many texts. For both groups depended on the bish-
op’s generosity: the poor for their sustenance and the clergy for their salaries.
    The result of this situation was that clergy and poor tended to become amal-
gamated. In many great shrines (such as that of Saint Martin at Tours) select
members of the poor were promoted to a para-­clerical role. The long-­established
practice of enrolling the poor on the matricula of the church took on a new
meaning. Persons chosen from the poor roll formed the equivalent of a guild of
licensed beggars. They were called matricularii. These groups were not large:
they ranged from twelve to forty at most shrines. They stood out from the gray
mass of beggars as visible and well organized.24 They divided up the alms they
had been given at the church door. Heaven help the member of the worshipful
company of beggars who tried to keep for himself the alms he had received with-
out sharing them with his fellow members of the “blessed poor”!25 The matricu­
larii felt that they owned the shrine quite as much as did the clergy. At times of
crisis, the matricularii joined in, pelting the retinues of Frankish noblemen with
roof tiles in order to avenge the honor of Saint Martin when these retinues at-
tempted to drag fugitives from sanctuary at the saint’s tomb.26
    But it was the clergy—­and not the poor—­who were most vociferous in bring-
ing to bear on their bishop the ancient Roman pressure to show generosity to his
dependants. We can see this very clearly in the case of Rome. For the first time,
popes were praised as lovers both of the poor and of their own clergy. The author


                                       510
               wealth and piety in the sixth century


of the Liber Pontificalis (The Book of Pontiffs) wrote of Pope Gelasius (492–­96)
that he took good care of both groups: hic fuit amator pauperum et clerum
ampliavit—­“he was a lover of the poor and expanded the clergy.”27 Gelasius was
a stern manager of the estates of the church. As we have seen, he could be ada-
mant in asserting the rights of the church and in upholding the social order by
excluding slaves and tied farmers from the clergy. Compassion was not a notable
trait in his letters. But Gelasius knew to whom he should be generous—­and that
included not only the poor but also the proud clergy of Rome.
    Pope Symmachus (498–­514) followed Gelasius’s example. Symmachus needed
to be more than usually generous. A Sardinian from a pagan family, he was an
outsider to the clerical oligarchy of the city. He had made his way to the top as an
administrator. As we have seen, his authority was challenged for years on end by
a rival pope, Laurentius, who may have enjoyed more support from noble fami-
lies than did Symmachus. A high-­handed and obstinate man, Symmachus had a
reputation that was further tarnished by rumors of a liaison with a mistress called
Conditaria (Spice Girl).28 But he knew how to use the wealth of the church. Sym-
machus was a model of generosity. He ransomed captives. He provided money
and clothing for bishops exiled from Vandal Africa. He paid his clergy well.
    Above all, Symmachus loved the poor. To love the poor was to love all Rome.
As we have seen, Rome had fallen apart into separate islands of settlement, many
of which were dominated by the supporters of Laurentius, his rival. But the fine
dust of the poor that lay at the bottom of society was what all neighborhoods
had in common. Drawn from all over the city to receive alms at the shrine of
Saint Peter, the poor were the nearest thing to a united populus Romanus that
remained in the divided city of Rome. Symmachus made sure that the poor of
Rome knew who was their true pope and their true benefactor. He built hostels
for the poor near major shrines. He fitted out baths. He even installed a public
lavatory beside the courtyard of Saint Peter’s.29
    The tradition continued. In the 580s, in distant Mérida in southwestern
Spain, bishop Masona—­a former courtier of the Visigothic kings—­knew the
rules of the game. His generosity extended equally to the poor and to the clergy.
On becoming bishop, he immediately used what may have been his private for-
tune to set up an ambitious scheme of hospitals, food centers, and a bank for
cheap loans to the poor.30 But he also went out of his way to look after his clergy.
Thanks to his free spending, his clergy “and even the servants in his palace” were
able to appear in the great Easter procession dressed in silk robes “as if they were
marching in the procession of a king.”31
    If we look at panegyrics of sixth-­century bishops in action all over Europe, the
payment of the clergy and the care of the poor tended to merge into a single
golden blur. Together they created the hum associated with a well-­run bishopric.


                                        511
                                   chapter 29


In the case of the poor, the seemingly limitless nature of their demands was used
by hagiographers to heighten the impression of the bishop’s limitless wealth.
Hagiographic narratives of this period stressed the miraculous abundance of
wealth used for the poor. They contained stories that presented holy bishops
(such as Caesarius of Arles) as having been approached by tight-­fisted church
administrators who told them that they no longer had funds with which to feed
the poor. Undeterred by the parsimony of his officials, the bishop proceeded to
the storehouse only to find it filled with miraculous piles of grain. The imagina-
tive logic of these miracles was plain. If the poor were endless and ever-­present,
then the wealth that passed to them from the bishop’s palace could also be imag-
ined to be inexhaustible.32 In this way, the care of the poor was wrapped in an
aura of boundless wealth that contrasted strangely with the prudent setting up
of small and privileged begging associations, hostels, and food centers for groups
of “blessed poor” that rarely appear to have risen above forty.33 In reality, love of
the poor was never headlong. When, in 616, the great courtier-­bishop Bertram
of Le Mans drew up his will we find that he gave only one-­tenth of his vast wealth
to the poor.34
    This shortfall needs to be explained. No great poorhouses emerged in west-
ern Europe as they did in the contemporary eastern empire.35 This was not due
entirely to economic recession or to lack of generosity on the part of the bishops.
What mattered was that the poor should be localized and, wherever possible,
organized into small, manageable groups. The localization of the care of the poor
in the vicinity of holy places represented the culmination of a process that was
already under way in 400 ad in the porticoes and dining hall adjacent to the
shrine of Saint Felix at Cimitile and in the great open square in front of Saint
Peter’s in Rome. Treasure on earth could be imagined with greatest ease to be
transferred to heaven through giving to the poor at such shrines. For heaven and
earth were already joined at the tomb of a saint and through the constant prayers
of the monks and clergymen gathered in the shrine. Alms given to the poor in
these places were all the more certain to reach heaven.
    But we should also remember that poverty had its own, sixth-­century face.
Society had changed. The poor of Gaul, Spain, and even Italy were not the great
urban masses imagined by the preachers of earlier times—­the “systemic” poor
who formed a permanent underclass in the crowded cities of the fourth century.
The poor of the sixth-­century West were very largely what social scientists have
called the “conjunctural poor.” They were families ruined by crop failure (sad in-
dicators, perhaps, of the climatic anomaly posited by some modern scholars) and
by warfare. They had been forced to take to the roads. When the council of Tours
met in 567, among other items of business it had to deal with the needs of a so-
ciety tensed against the imminence of civil war. The “fury of the kings” threat-
ened to send a new wave of poor persons into the towns and villages in search of

                                        512
               wealth and piety in the sixth century


 food and alms. In order to cope with the emergency, local parishes were urged to
 feed their own poor rather than driving them to seek alms elsewhere.36
     But (in the eyes of a bishop such as Gregory of Tours) it was precisely the ter-
 rible rootlessness of the conjunctural poor that caused an aura of the sacred to
 flicker around the great shrines of Latin Europe. For, in the atrium of the shrine
 of Saint Martin at Tours (as elsewhere), it was as if the “hidden hand” of provi-
 dence itself had brought pilgrims with some money together with the broken
 victims of war, crop failure, and physical disability.
     A fresco at the west entrance to the shrine of Saint Martin at Tours showed
 the story of the Widow’s Mite. Beneath it was an inscription on almsgiving. It
 reminded every pilgrim that “rich and poor alike are liable to this law.”37 One
 was ill-­advised to enter into the presence of Martin without having given alms to
 the poor gathered in the great courtyard outside the shrine (and especially to the
 licensed matricularii who surrounded the sanctuary).
     Modest pilgrims would bring food and wine to feed the poor. One woman
 was cured of a paralyzed arm simply through the act of endlessly mixing punch
 at the banquet tables around which the poor would gather.38 There were terrible
 sights in that courtyard. A horribly deformed girl had first been paraded around
 the countryside as a freak show before she was finally dumped at the shrine of
 Saint Martin to be supported by gifts from pious pilgrims.39 There were also sights
of worldly glory brought low. Queen Ultrogotha (the wife of Childebert I) “pre-
sented many gifts” before she even dared to pass from the great courtyard into
the shrine, so as to stand before the sarcophagus in the presence of Saint Martin
himself.40
     We know so much about these shrines from the vivid writings of Gregory of
Tours. But we know very little about what happened outside them. One suspects
that there was considerably more religious mobility allied to the rootlessness of
poverty than Gregory’s accounts betray. The surprising evidence of graffiti at the
caves of hermits in both Gaul and Spain points to an ominously mobile popula-
tion consisting of the poor and of religious wanderers. They were like the Bozhii
ljudi, “God’s folk” in old Russia—­notorious spreaders of rumors and extravagant
pious tales. Their Christianity was not necessarily the well-­groomed Catholic
 “reverence” advocated by Gregory of Tours.41
     At times of plague and war, dangerous figures emerged. What is striking
is the speed with which they gathered money through donations from their
­followers (some of whom, Gregory noted with horror, were clergymen). In 591
a prophet began his preaching outside Bourges: “A crowd of the common peo-
ple flocked to him. . . . They brought him gold and silver and robes.”42 In 585 a
 diviner appeared outside Verdun: “Every day she gathered gold and silver, pro-
 cessing around the countryside loaded with jewelry, as if she was some divine
 being.”43

                                        513
                                  chapter 29


      Te itaque, sanctam ecclesiam catholicam . . . in qua omnis populus
    christianus exorat remedia peccatorum: [I give to] You, holy Catholic
       Church . . . in Whom all Christian people pray for the healing
                                 of their sins

For a bishop such as Gregory these were disturbing incidents. But for the histo-
rian of religious sentiment in the sixth-­century West, they reveal a situation that
is otherwise almost too big to be seen. Clergy and laity alike wished to give to
religious causes. As we have seen, they were not always generous in their gifts, nor
were they inevitably moved by deep piety. But they knew what they wanted both
from religious figures (even from the most bizarre figures of diviners, prophet-
esses, and wandering holy men) and from a religious institution. They wanted
remission of their sins and safety for their souls.
    The profile and the aims of lay donors are strangely muted. They are under­
exposed, as it were, compared with the vivid snapshots of bishops, monks, and
clergymen that dominate the literature of the period. We have easier entry into
the minds of the clergy. But just because the world of the laity is difficult of ac-
cess does not mean that it is entirely closed to us. What we can follow, through-
out western Europe, is the process by which the pressure of giving imposed a
distinctive shape upon the churches. Generation after generation, pious givers
molded the Latin Christianity of their time into their own image, as a church
that deserved to receive their gifts.
    It was this pressure of giving that did most to create a hiatus between the
Christianity of the sixth century and the Christianity of previous generations.
That earlier Christianity had grown from the soil of an ancient world that now
seemed glorious but strange. As Robert Markus has made plain in his luminous
short book, The End of Ancient Christianity, a profound change happened be-
tween the age of Augustine and the age of Gregory the Great (between 400 and
600 ad).44 But it has proved easier to describe this change than to account for it.
It did not come about only because of changes in the culture of the clerical elite.
Those particular changes have been brilliantly described by Markus. He points to
the process of cultural depletion, simplification, and “cognitive erasure” that took
place among the leading thinkers of the church. This process led to a “retreat of
the secular” and to an extension of Christian religious values to aspects of society
and culture that had hitherto been considered neutral.
    But there is more to the story than this. We tend to assume that the cultural
depletion to which Markus refers is easily explicable in terms of the narrowing
of cultural resources in the Latin churches, brought about by prolonged warfare
and economic recession. But the “end of ancient Christianity” did not happen
only because of a loss of cultural riches and a clamping down of intellectual ho-
rizons. This is too narrow and too intellectual a view of what happened between

                                        514
               wealth and piety in the sixth century


400 and 600 ad. We also have to reckon with a significant change of goals within
Christianity itself. In order to sense the turn of the tide that brought about this
change of goals we must look away from the clergy to the wide and dimly visible
ocean of religious giving from which this tide arose.
   For this we have precious evidence. A few original wills and charters written
on papyrus have miraculously survived in the church treasuries of Ravenna and
Gaul. What they show is the force of a piety focused on the need to obtain the
forgiveness of one’s sins through the intercession of others. All over the West,
churches and similar pious institutions received legacies because (in the words
of a papyrus preserved in Ravenna) they were the places in qua omnis populus
christianus exorat remedia peccatorum”—­“in which all Christian people pray for
the relief of their sins.”45
   In these formulae, Augustine’s somber sense of daily giving for the expiation of
sins and Salvian’s dramatic close-­up of judgment beyond the grave were brought
together. Religious giving was placed against the grand setting of the Last Judg-
ment (as it was imagined in the sixth century), the final, grand theater of am-
nesty.46 This is not exactly what it had been in the Gospels. In the great scene of
the Last Days in chapter 25 of the Gospel of Matthew (Matt. 25:31–­46), Christ
(“the Son of Man”) separated the sheep from the goats. The sheep who had shown
mercy on others were placed on His right hand and were welcomed into His
kingdom. But Christ showed no mercy to the goats. They were told to “go away
into eternal punishment.” In the sixth century, by contrast, it was precisely the
potential goats who expected Christ’s mercy. They expected to gain that mercy
through the intercessions of the saints. Sinners could hope to receive venia—­
“amnesty,” “forgiveness”—­from God at the very last moment of the Last Judg-
ment.47 Gregory of Tours had no doubts as to the working out of that scenario:
   And when, at the Last Judgment, I am to be placed on the left hand [among
   the goats destined for Hell], Martin will deign to pick me out from the
   middle of the goats with his sacred right hand. He will shelter me behind
   his back, as the angels tell the King: “This is the man for whom Saint Mar-
   tin pleads.”48
This is what the great bishop Bertram of Le Mans also had in mind when he drew
up his will: vel venia—­“forgiveness at the very least”—­was what he wanted: “May
God, through the wide-­handed grace of His pity grant some kind of amnesty.”49
It was wrong to ask for more than mere forgiveness. “Glory” belonged only to
the saints, whose intercessions at the Last Judgment Bertram went on to elicit by
drawing up a list of bequests and pious foundations that originally filled a papy-
rus roll seven meters long.
   We are looking at a rare focusing of the religious gift around a single purpose.
In Christian circles, the religious gift had become the central transaction of a

                                       515
                                  chapter 29


“vibrant piety of intercession” whose rise in the West has recently been evoked
by Tom Head.50 It is worthwhile to linger a little on what this means. Interces-
sion demanded intercessors. And, in the sixth-­century West, the most effective
intercessors were deemed to be those figures who in this life and the next were
most starkly different from the donor. It was the difference that mattered. Put in
a nutshell: the way to the great Other beyond the grave lay through human be-
ings who, themselves, had (in one way or another) become “other” to the average
Christian. The poor, the monks, the saints, and the priests who offered the Eu-
charist on behalf of the faithful were each—­if each in a different way—­seen as
intercessors whose effectiveness derived from their otherness.
    Hence the manner in which the churches of Latin Christianity came to be
surrounded by a coral reef of institutions devoted to intercession. Many of these
had not enjoyed such prominence or so clear a function in earlier centuries.
Often they now became prominent because they were compact. The associations
of matricularii, the hospitals, and the hostels for the poor that were founded at
that time were never enough to absorb the gray poverty that surrounded them.
But their appeal was precisely that “small is beautiful.” These carefully organized
groups made the otherness of the poor visible, orderly, and, for that reason,
efficacious.
    This was not an entirely recent development of the sixth century. As we have
seen, the rhetorical logic of the preaching of fourth-­century Christians had al-
ways teetered as if on an imaginative tightrope between reaching out to the poor
as “brothers” and treating them as “others”—­as total outsiders, whom only the
paradox of Christian mercy could embrace. The sixth-­century logic of interces-
sion came down firmly on the side of the latter view, at least for a selected seg-
ment of the poor. As humane modern persons, we may regret a situation in which
“weaker members of society are seen as others rather than brothers.”51 But it was
only through being seen as the ultimate others in society that the poor in the
courtyard of Saint Martin and of similar shrines could be believed to lead the
average believer who gave them alms into the unthinkable otherness of heaven.
    It was also as a function of the imaginative logic of a search for a way to the
Other through others that monasteries and convents suddenly leaped into focus
in the sixth century. As Albrecht Diem has made plain in his groundbreaking
study, Das monastische Experiment (The Monastic Experiment), the principal
goal of the monastic reformers of Gaul and elsewhere in the sixth century was
to create powerhouses of prayer. Although the monks were expected to work, on
the Egyptian model propounded by Cassian, these powerhouses of prayer were
not self-­supporting. They were almost entirely supported by lay giving.52
    This was a significant change. Previously, monasteries had been founded by
individual spiritual guides. It was the abbot who was imagined to have “built”
the monastery by gathering his disciples around him. Now, all over the West, it

                                       516
                wealth and piety in the sixth century


became possible for a pious clergyman or a layperson to state that he or she had
built a monastery for the abbot and his monks. They set up and endowed care-
fully constructed monasteries in which they placed either monks or nuns as mas-
ters of intercessory prayer. For instance, the monastery attached to the shrine
of the Theban martyrs at Saint Maurice d’Agaune (Valais, Switzerland) was built
for its monks by King Sigismund of Burgundy “with great care and attention to
detail.”53 In so doing, donors showed that they had found an other who could be
relied upon to bring them to God. As the monastic foundations of the Frankish
nobility and of their kings made clear toward the end of the sixth and through-
out the seventh century, lay patrons were prepared to put a lot of money into
these magnetically attractive others, established in well-­organized convents and
monasteries.54
    In this way, monks gradually came to eclipse the poor as the privileged others
of the Christian imagination. The monks alone had become the “holy poor.” In a
contemporary monastic rule, lay gifts were instantly sanctified and made effec-
tive by being brought into the chapel to be prayed over by the nuns or monks.55
It is a solution whose high-­pitched emphasis on the “holy poor”—­on monks and
nuns to the exclusion of the real poor—­as the only truly reliable, because truly
other, recipients of alms for the safety of the soul would have struck a fourth-­
century Christian as vaguely Manichaean.56 With this shift from the poor to the
monks as the primary intercessors for the sins of all Christians, an ancient Chris-
tianity died.


      Toward the Great Simplification: The “Othering” of the Clergy

In the sixth and early seventh centuries, the pressure of religious giving accounted
for the most striking feature of the age. As givers, the laity came to insist that the
clergy should be clearly other to themselves. If they were not, gifts to the churches
would not work for the relief of the sins of the givers.
    Hence we witness a progressive “othering” of the clergy. They became a sacral
class. Their dress, hairstyle, and sexual behavior were increasingly expected to be
sharply different from that of the laity. Religious dress became sharply distin-
guished from lay dress.57 The tonsure was taken on as a sine qua non of both the
clerical and the monastic state. It is notable that the origins of the tonsure did
not lie in any clerical regulations. It came from the ground up. The cutting of hair
(both of beards and of the top of the head) had long been treated by Romans as
a sign of special dedication. The tonsure emerged as a response to lay demand for
such a sign. Those who interceded for the laity, as a sacral class, were to be clearly
designated by means of a ritual of shaving the crown of the head that had deep
roots in the ancient folklore of hair.58

                                         517
                                   chapter 29


    Above all, continence was imposed on all grades of the clergy. Slowly but
surely, roughly between 400 and 500 ad and at different paces in different re-
gions, every member of the clergy of the Latin churches—­bishops, priests, dea-
cons, and even sub-­deacons—­came to be expected to refrain on a permanent
basis from intercourse. For, at one moment or another during the celebration
of the Eucharist, their hands had touched holy things—­the body and blood of
Christ and the sacred dishes and vessels (the patens and the chalices) in which
these divine substances were carried.59
    We must be careful, at this point, not to allow modern debates on the celi-
bacy of the clergy in the Roman Catholic Church to lure us into anachronism.
What was at stake at this time was not the commitment of the clergy from child-
hood onward to a permanent renunciation of sex. Many clergymen did adopt
this practice (one thinks of Ambrose, whose lifelong celibacy puzzled the un-
converted Augustine).60 But such celibacy was never mandatory. What mattered
was what one might call “post-­marital” celibacy. It was taken for granted that a
priest or a bishop might have had a wife and children. But ordination meant that
they had to cease sexual relations with their wives.61 It was deemed prudent that
spouses should no longer live together. The bishop’s or the priest’s wife moved
out, often to the safety—­and the relative comfort—­of a convent. This last was
a precautionary measure that was not invariably acted on by aristocrats. As we
saw in chapter 14, Paulinus of Nola had continued to live with his wife, Therasia,
when already a priest. The wife of Sidonius Apollinaris was remembered (by
Gregory of Tours) as creeping out of the bishop’s palace—­where she still lived—­to
buy back the family silverware that her husband had lavished improvidently on
the poor.62
    Not all contemporaries saw this development with the same sense of inevita-
bility as do modern scholars. Post-­marital celibacy was not taken for granted
by every wife of every bishop. Gregory of Tours tells how (as late as the 550s) the
wife of bishop Felix of Nantes was convinced that her spouse had ceased to have
sexual relations with her for the obvious reason—­the bishop had a mistress.
Bursting into his room at the time of the siesta, she saw Felix sleeping alone with
a radiant lamb curled up on his chest. Christ had claimed Felix from her, as His
bishop and as the dispenser of His holy things.63
    In the fifth and sixth centuries, the issue of the continence of the clergy
loomed so large precisely because the boundary between the celibate and the lay
world was still so precarious. Formerly married persons, who had been accus-
tomed to having sexual relations with each other, were expected to refrain from
intercourse simply because of the husband’s involvement with the Eucharist. It
was a prohibition that was notoriously difficult to maintain.
    In this situation, the price of purity was eternal vigilance. As early as the 400s,
the clergy of Bruttium (modern Basilicata in southern Italy) were denounced by

                                         518
               wealth and piety in the sixth century


a layman (appropriately enough, a retired agens in rebus—­a former member of
a cadre of imperial agents who were notorious for their spying activities) for
“polluting” the church by continuing to beget children.64 The insistence on the
continence of the clergy at this time is striking. One-­third of the rulings of the
sixth-­century councils of Gaul were concerned, in one way or another, with this
issue. Modern scholars speak with ill-­disguised discomfort of “the obsessive drive
to regulate” that provoked a veritable luxe de précautions—­an overkill of precau-
tions.65 Why did this attempt to patrol so fragile a boundary become so marked
a feature of the sixth-­century church?
    The usual tendency of modern scholarship has been to blame the clergy. His-
torians of the early medieval church all too readily assume that any rulings that
offend the sensibilities of our own age (such as the imposition of celibacy on the
clergy and the segregation of women from contact with male priests) must have
derived from the decisions of an austere elite of clergymen. They are the villains
of the story. They are assumed to have imposed their own ascetic codes upon
their weaker colleagues and upon an otherwise fun-­loving but passive laity. Alto-
gether, there is a tendency to view the history of Christianity in the early Middle
Ages in terms of a top-­down model. On this top-­down model, clerical power is
seen as always triumphing over the laity—­and usually with results of which we
disapprove. Such a view is to be strongly resisted. The demand for a continent
clergy came as much from the bottom up as from the top down. It is significant
that in Africa, among churches where (as we have seen) the views of the populus
counted for much, the imposition of continence did not result from any concil-
iar ruling. The bishops of Africa merely adopted the lay custom of demanding
celibacy of their clergy.66
    The imposition of celibacy on the clergy was what we would call “consumer
driven.” In 567 the bishops gathered at the council of Tours set in place an entire
set of rulings to preserve the chastity of their clergy. Priests who traveled in the
countryside on church business were to be chaperoned. Any form of cohabita-
tion between clergymen and women was to be avoided.67 But these minute regu-
lations were drawn up so as to satisfy the laity. They were intended to counter
“the suspicion of the populace” that their priests were not true others to them-
selves.68 The effectiveness of the Eucharist as a privileged vehicle of intercession
was at stake. In the words of a bishop summing up similar regulations taken at the
council of Mâcon in 585, a priest had to be continent “because he did not come
forward as intercessor for his own sins only, but for those of others.”69
    In the inland regions of Gaul, the laity were wealthy and, for that reason,
doubly exacting. We need only move 150 miles to the west—­to the Atlantic
coast of Brittany—­to find holy priests who traveled from house to house in order
to celebrate the Eucharist with the help of conhospitae—­women companions.
To the bishops of Gaul, this was a practice “which can not be spoken of without

                                        519
                                  chapter 29


a shudder of the soul.”70 But the Bretons were a society of recent settlers. They
were governed by chieftains of low social profile. Their soul did not shudder at
the behavior of their clergy. This was, perhaps, because the Breton laity had less
wealth to give to the church; and so they had less money riding on the utter
otherness of their clergy. In any case, the Breton bishop Lovocatus, who was
denounced by the bishops of western Gaul, was not seen by his Breton flock as
a wayward clergyman. A monk-­bishop in the ascetic tradition of the Celtic
churches, Lovocatus’s austerity placed him beyond suspicion even when he con-
sorted with women. His “otherness” was unchallenged. He was later revered in
Brittany as a saint and a founder of churches.71 The average clergyman of Gaul,
however, was no ascetic hero. He had to be watched more carefully.
    In order to understand the weight of the pressure toward a sacral, celibate
clergy, we must remember that the circle of those who depended on monks and
the clergy for intercession had widened considerably. For this was the time when
Christianity ceased to be confined to the cities and spread throughout the coun-
tryside. The creation of a rural Christianity in Spain, Gaul, and Italy remains the
dark side of the moon in the study of the churches in this period. Yet it is one of
the great changes of the age.72 In Gaul alone two hundred country parishes are
known to have been founded in the fifth and sixth centuries.73 In southwestern
Spain and southern Portugal, small churches appear beside many villas for the
very first time.74
    In Gaul and Spain these churches were staffed by priests. But many of these
priests became the equivalent of bishops. They gained control of the wealth of
their church and refused to surrender more than a portion of it to their nominal
superior, the bishop of the neighboring city.75 In parts of Italy, one might even
say that country Christianity created towns rather than that the towns created
country Christianity. Bishops (and not mere priests) appear in a significant num-
ber of non-­urban sites in Italy, giving them a quasi-­urban status.76 Nothing like
this had happened in western Europe since the spread of country bishoprics in
fourth-­century Africa.
    As we saw in the case of southern Italy, in many areas the spread of churches
in the countryside owed as much to lay initiatives as to the urban clergy. Lay
patrons often did more than did the urban bishops to build shrines and to pro-
vide churches. In Spain, for instance, the evidence is painfully fragmentary but
vivid. Often no more than fragments of inscriptions survive to mark the activi-
ties of lay founders. For instance, at Nativola, near modern Granada in southern
Spain, count Gundileva provided three churches for the region between 594 and
610 ad. He did so “with the help of the saints, with the labor of the workers of
his estates, at his own expense.”77
    Gundileva’s churches were big enough to be marked by the proud inscription
that outlasted them all. Others were more modest. In Gaul many little chapels

                                       520
                wealth and piety in the sixth century


were made of wood.78 What is striking is that the founders of such churches were
by no means great landowners. In Spain some churches were even built by associa-
tions of slaves on the royal estates, who contributed “from their poverty” to put-
ting up a shrine.79 We need only think back to the majestic mausoleum-­churches
connected to the villas of fourth-­century Castile or to the villa-­monastery of
Sulpicius Severus at Primuliacum (with its twin basilicas, baptistery, and care-
fully executed mosaic portraits of its founders and their favorite saints, accompa-
nied by inscriptions written in high-­quality verse) to realize that we are witnessing
a true democratization of religious building in the countryside.80
    The priests who were hired to serve these modest churches had little to offer
by way of culture or preaching. But they did offer the Mass, and to offer the Mass
effectively on behalf of their patrons and on behalf of a congregation that may
have consisted largely of workers on the lands of their patrons, they had to be
continent. Celibacy was the only thing that made members of this “clerical pro-
letariat” different from the peasants among whom they lived.81 As peasant-­priests,
celibacy was their only distinguishing mark of otherness. Patrons watched that
celibacy closely lest it be lost, with the hard eyes of persons who had paid for
intercession.
    These were the humble roots from which the principal feature of post-­Roman
society in the West emerged. This was the division of society into two castes—­a
caste of priests and a caste of warriors, the one notionally separated from the
other by a distinction of archaic sharpness. In a well-­chosen phrase, Walter Gof-
fart has described the change from a late antique to an early medieval society as
a “process of simplification.”82 This great simplification was well under way in
the sixth century.
    It was not a development that was confined to “barbarian” northern Europe.
One need only visit an urban site in north Africa, such as Sufetula (Sbeitla, in
southwestern Tunisia), to see the process of simplification frozen, as it were, on
the ground. The last, sixth-­century phase of the city (and not the city of Roman
times) is what the modern visitor sees first when he or she comes to the site. At
one end of the town, the classical amphitheater had become a fortress that
housed a garrison. Around the city, fortified towers scanned the horizon. At the
other end of Sbeitla, substantial basilicas built in the sixth century stand side by
side to form a massive bishop’s quarter. In between, the forum, the marketplace,
and all the busy life we associate with the center of a classical Roman city had
become (and still remains) a faceless open space, crossed by random paths.
    It is easy to see, in the stark features of sixth-­century Sbeitla, the outlines of
the Islamic city of the future, where the mosque and the casbah—­the place of
religion and the place of armed power, respectively—­faced each other across a
maze of winding lanes. Already by the sixth century, in what had once been one
of the most heavily urbanized regions of the late Roman world, a Roman city

                                         521
                                   chapter 29


with a clear civic center had been replaced by a city divided between the two
poles of pastoral and worldly power.83 This distancing of the two poles and the
disappearance of the once vigorous neutral ground that had stood between them
(in the form of an ancient city, with its pre-­Christian joys and values) is the mea-
sure of the change that occurred when the Christianity of the Latin West slipped
from its late antique to its early medieval form.
   In a perceptive review of Chris Wickham’s magnificent analysis of the social
and economic developments of the later Roman empire and the early middle
ages—­Framing the Early Middle Ages—­Ian Wood has observed: “The extent
to which the church came to dominate in the society and economy of western
Europe ought to be recognized as truly astonishing.”84 But how had this situa-
tion come about? Massive and inevitable though it might seem in retrospect, the
emergence of the clergy as a separate and superior caste of sacred persons did not
happen automatically. The militarization of society alone does not explain it, nor
(as we have just seen) can we blame it on a monasticization of the clergy imposed
from on top by an elite of forceful bishops. It was the laity that wanted its clergy
to be different. C’est le premier pas qui coûte: it is the first step that counts. Once
the tacit decision was taken to make the clergy different, the passing of time
made them dominant.


      Magnum et mirabile Dei donum est: It is a great and amazing gift
                                of God

                     Wealth and the Other World

So what does this change involve for the meaning of wealth itself ? Put briefly,
 we are no longer in a world where wealth could be mythologized, as it had been
 in the days of the great villa owners connected with Ausonius of Bordeaux. It
 could no longer be imagined as a shimmering overflow of the abundance of the
­saeculum—­a quasi-­divine material cosmos on whose riches the wealthy drew
 with unreflecting zest. Wealth had been problematized. But it had not been de-
 monized. Few Christian thinkers of the later fifth and sixth centuries thought that
 wealth should be rejected out of hand. The heady days of Pinianus, Melania the
 Younger, and the Pelagian author of the De divitiis were over. What won out was
 a combination of Paulinus of Nola’s poetic sense of the romance of treasure placed
 in heaven by a spiritual exchange with Augustine’s sad emphasis on daily giving as
 the remedy for daily sin. To this was added the dry view upheld by later Augustin-
 ians that wealth itself was a gift of God that demanded forms of management as
 strict and as careful as that exercised by any procurator on an imperial estate.


                                         522
               wealth and piety in the sixth century


    But this still leaves us with a psychological riddle. It is an observed fact that
other-­worldly religions—­whether this be late antique Christianity or its exact
contemporary at the other end of Eurasia, the Buddhism of central Asia and
western China—­often manage to become very rich very soon. As Chinese ob-
servers noted, with characteristic economy of words, there was a lot of wealth to
be gotten from fo-­shih—­from “Buddha business.”85
    We can treat this fact (as many late antique Christians did) as sad evidence of
the decline of the church from a first moment of imagined virtue. Or we might
be tempted to view it with a certain worldly-­wise complacency. After all, we say,
idealism never lasts. Traditional social mores tend to prevail. If these are the
mores of a Roman aristocracy, we are somewhat relieved. It is comforting to
think that the views of upholders of the good old Roman ways did not give way
entirely to the extremist views on wealth proposed by doctrinaire Christians. If
we are historians of Christian theology, we can even be content to say that the
wealth of the church—­like the British Empire as described by Benjamin Disraeli
—­simply happened “in a fit of absence of mind.” We do not feel obliged to study
it and still less to meditate on the paradox of its existence.
    Yet it may be possible to go further than these somewhat banal answers. We
need to find some way to integrate the sincere otherworldliness of the Christian
movement with its considerable worldly success in the late antique period. I
would suggest that, faced with this problem, Buddhists and Christians may have
found their way to a common solution. They knew that those who supped with
the Devil of wealth needed a long spoon. But it was, perhaps, precisely the length
of the spoon that gave them an advantage. An ideal of detachment from worldly
things took the glamour out of wealth. But it did not make wealth go away. In-
deed, the ideal of detachment subtly reinforced the notion that if wealth was
there it was there for a reason. It was there to be used—­to be administered in
a no-­nonsense and effective manner for the good of the church. Bluntly, wealth
was given a higher purpose. It was swept into the pastoral image of the church,
to which Michel Foucault referred in his lectures to the Collège de France on the
nature of pastoral power: it was made subject “to a power that guides towards an
end and functions as an intermediary towards that end.”86
    As we have seen, we should not exaggerate the effect of this high view on the
actual administration of the wealth of the churches in the sixth century. But it
did affect the way in which this wealth was seen by those who approached the
church as donors. Because its use was directed toward supernatural and eternal
ends, the wealth of the church came to be viewed as wealth that radiated a future
even on earth. It was wealth subtly touched by expectations of eternity.
    The idea of the wealth of the church rested on a mighty paradox that had long
haunted the late antique imagination. Even the smallest gift to the poor or to


                                        523
                                  chapter 29


the church brought about a miraculous joining of heaven and earth. In such gifts,
time and eternity were joined. In the words of the donation of Palladius of Aux-
erre to the convent of St. Julian in 635:
   It is a great and amazing gift of God—­magnum et mirabile donum Dei—­
   that with things bound by time and destined to bankruptcy prizes can be
   acquired in heaven that will last without end.87
And, as another charter put it:
   The world perishes and those things that are in the world (1 John 2:17). That,
   however, which has been transferred to the churches, to the shrines of
   saints or to the poor never perishes.88
For such donors, wealth did not stand in the way of heaven. Rather, when given
to the church, wealth opened a high road to the future and a prospect of proper-
ties and institutions that might enjoy an indefinite future on earth because they
were bathed in the soft glow of perpetual treasure in heaven. They were little
oases of eternity in a changing world. The hopes expressed in the charters were
almost proved right. The poorhouse founded in Le Mans by bishop Bertram in
616 lasted until 1789; that founded in Trier by the rich deacon Adalgisel Grimo,
in 634, lasted up to the time of Napoleon.89


      Ut numquam sit neque hora noctis absque luminaria ipsa basilica
      sancta: That this holy basilica should not be without lighting for
                          a single hour of the night

It is now time to conclude by pointing out how shifts in the style and aims of
religious giving may account for some differences between the Christianity of
the year 400 and that of the year 600. A Christian of the age of Augustine, had
he or she been able to visit a basilica of the year 600, might have noticed certain
significant changes.
    Looking toward the altar, our visitor would have noticed that certain noisy
and bustling ceremonies no longer happened. In many regions, the faithful no
longer proceeded in person to the altar bearing gifts. Nor did donors any longer
receive the acclamation of the congregation as their names were read aloud. The
Mass had ceased to be a ceremony that reached one of its high points in a sol-
emn moment of lay giving. Instead, it had become a high sacrifice, offered by the
clergy alone. The holy vessels in gold and silver filled with the body and blood of
Christ that stood upon the altar were the true offerings. They were carried by the
priests alone who brought them to God on behalf of the laity.90


                                        524
                wealth and piety in the sixth century


    In the body of the church itself, the quality of the light might also have seemed
different. In 400, in the great basilicas of Rome, Carthage, and elsewhere, light
was thought to stream into the columned hall from the spacious courtyard out-
side. Perfumed chandeliers blazed throughout the basilica. But this light spoke
stridently of the general magnificence and joy of the Christian community. In 600
the newly built churches would have been much smaller. But now they carried
within themselves the magic of perpetual light. As we saw in our last chapter, the
supreme achievement of the sixth-­century mosaic artist had been to create a
world where “the day remains through art.”91 To this, donors added lighting in
the form of innumerable oil lamps or great candles. They may not have given more
of these than had their predecessors. But they now gave them with greater insis-
tence and for a clearer purpose. Bertram of Le Mans insisted in his will that “this
holy basilica should not ever be without lighting for a single hour of the night . . .
so that it might blaze without pause all the time.”92 Now that the transport of
olive oil from Mediterranean countries had become an increasingly difficult op-
eration, oil to fuel the lamps of churches (once a common commodity) took on
associations of almost supernatural luxury similar to that of the bales of Chinese
silk that wrapped the great Buddhas of Central Asia.93
    This was because light now stood for Paradise. More than that, it stood for
the individual soul in Paradise. The lights Bertram maintained at great expense
at his tomb in the church showed that the great bishop now rested in a world of
unflickering, perpetual light. This also was a change. Those who listened to Au-
gustine and to similar preachers in 400 were in no doubt that they belonged to
a group on its way to heaven. But, by 600, the church itself had become a little
heaven. In a small church, filled with the light of so many lamps and candles, the
average believers felt less that they were members of a happy group bound even-
tually for the Heavenly Jerusalem. Rather, they stared directly, with a longing
tinged with fear, into a world beyond this world.
    The pavement of the church itself would have told our visitor a similar story.
In the fourth and early fifth centuries, a scatter of small mosaic panels had enliv-
ened the pavements of the basilicas of fourth-­century Aquileia, northern Italy,
and Istria. In the sixth century, these panels no longer spoke of a community sup-
ported by small donors. The hierarchy of donors was more clearly defined, leav-
ing less room for minor figures. Only the leaders of local society appeared. When
the mosaics of the pavement of the cathedral church of Grado were laid down, in
around 550, the names of the local elite, clerical and lay, were carefully distrib-
uted in due order around the bishop’s dedicatory inscription.94 In Poreč, in Istria,
the basilica of the great managerial bishop Euphrasius rose above a church once
paved by little people. The earlier pavement was buried. It had contained a patch-
work of donors, such as Clamosus, “the teacher of children,” his wife, Secundina,


                                         525
                                   chapter 29


and with other parishioners, each of whom contributed panels worth around
three solidi each. This was not the case in Euphrasius’s magnificent new church.
It was a church of the elite, headed by their bishop. It was no longer a church that
depended on the support of little men and their families.95
    Furthermore, the tone of the dedications themselves had subtly changed. In
the well-­chosen words of Ville Vuolanto: “Donations were no longer seen as
made for the community and for the honor of the family, but became a personal
matter between God and individuals.”96 The donors of the mosaic dedications
were no longer, as it were, looking around them in the basilica to see and to be
seen by the community to which they had contributed. Rather, they looked up-
ward, to place their souls in the hands of God.
    Nothing shows this shift more clearly than what happened to the splendid
inlaid marble benches of the priests that lined the back wall of the apse in the
basilica of Euphrasius at Poreč.97 From the sixth century to the eleventh, the spaces
near the benches came to be covered with carved graffiti. These graffiti bore the
names and the days of the death of the elite of Poreč—­lay and clerical. They were
not made at random. Scratched into the priceless panels of marble and mother
of pearl, they clustered around the altar where Mass was celebrated. In two cen-
turies we have passed from the Cockney confidence of Clamosus, who added a
cheap new mosaic panel to the pavement of his church so as to add to the honor
of the Christian community, to a silent array of elite names, pushing close to the
altar, where the Eucharistic prayer was recited on behalf of their own souls.
    This shift in donors and in what they paid for is the measure of the changing
of an age. A Christian community that had bloomed in the last, strident days of
the ancient world seems to have turned its back on the warm and sociable light
of the Forum and of the cheap but spacious church building of the late fourth
century. Its members now sought a future in the light beyond the grave. Whether
they turned away in this manner from the world of the living in real life can
be doubted. But this was how Christians now wished to spend their money in
church, in preparation for the long journey of the soul.




                                        526
                         Conclusion
                          •••••




The changes that took place between the years 500 and 650 proved decisive. A
new conglomerate of notions about the use of wealth, about the nature of the
Christian community, and about the destiny of the Christian soul slid into place.
In all later centuries, this particular conglomerate of notions—­which linked to-
gether the wealth of the church, the care of the poor, and the fate of the soul—­
became fixed in the minds of the populations of western, Catholic Europe.
    By the year 1000, western Europeans were supposed to take this inherited
conglomerate with them wherever they went, even to the edges of the known
world. Some went very far. In 1020 the first European settler in Greenland to
become a Christian, Thorstein the son of Eric the Red, lay dying at Lysefjord
(Ameralik in Greenland). Just before he died, Thorstein summoned his wife,
Gudrid. In a manner associated with Norse tales of prophecy, he sat up suddenly
(as if returned from the dead) and gave her this advice: “He bade her beware of
marrying a Greenlander and then he urged her to bestow their money upon the
church or to give it to the poor; and then he sank back for the last time.”1
    Recounted some centuries later, in the Saga of the Greenlanders, the story
carried with it the heavy weight of common sense concerning the proper use of
wealth shared by all Catholic Christians. It was what any believer, such as Thor-
stein Eiriksson, was expected to do when he or she faced death, even when settled
on the fringes of the Arctic.
    In 350 ad, however, little of this was clear. This book has traced a long pro-
cess. We began with a hesitant age. As a result of the conversion of Constantine
in 312 ad, the Christian churches of the West had become privileged. But they
had not become wealthy. The majority of the upper-­class inhabitants of the
Roman West were still encouraged by long tradition to show generosity to their
cities and to their fellow citizens—­not to the churches and still less to the poor.
Only in the last quarter of the fourth century did the wealthy enter the church in

                                       527
                                 conclusion


growing numbers, often stepping into leadership roles as bishops and as Chris-
tian writers. It was the entry of new wealth and talent into the churches from
around the year 370 onward, rather than the conversion of Constantine in 312,
which marks the turning point in the Christianization of Europe. From then
onward, as members of a religion that had been joined by the rich and powerful,
Christians could begin to think the unthinkable—­to envision the possibility of
a totally Christian society.
    But this new wealth brought its own problems. The structures of fourth-­
century society ensured that there would be a lot of new wealth, held in the
hands of competing groups. Many of these groups were anxious to make their
mark by fostering the new religion. Yet the churches to which the new rich
turned in the last quarter of the fourth century were already, in many ways, old-­
fashioned institutions. They were set in their ways. Christian habits of religious
giving reached back for centuries to traditions and to texts shared by Christian-
ity and Judaism. In both Christianity and Judaism these habits had been formed
to one side of the dominant models of public benefaction provided for the rich
by the cities of the Greco-­Roman world.
    The imaginative effect of Christian giving was to break down traditional
boundaries that had been maintained by the ancient city. Gifts to the city gained
fame in this world and in this world only. By contrast, gifts within the churches
were thought to join this world to a boundless world beyond the stars. Further-
more, giving was not only for the rich. All believers of all classes were encouraged
to contribute to the care of the poor and to the upkeep of the church and clergy.
Furthermore, to give to the poor was very different from giving to a clearly de-
fined core of fellow citizens. It was to reach out to a group that was imagined to
be as immense and as silent as heaven itself.
    Even before the conversion of Constantine, these notions had created a dis-
tinctive style of giving for religious causes in Christian circles. In the 250s the
letters of a bishop such as Cyprian showed how much financial muscle could
be developed—­through regular almsgiving and through occasional collections—
­by communities whose social composition was, for the most part, limited to the
moderately wealthy inhabitants of the cities.
    The rich encountered such Christian communities toward the end of the
fourth century. This encounter did not lead to the smooth absorption of the
churches into the orbit of the wealthy. Instead, we enter troubled waters. Between
around 370 and 430, we are faced with an explosion of writing on the subject of
wealth, associated with writers and preachers such as Ambrose, Jerome, Augus-
tine, Paulinus of Nola, and the supporters of Pelagius. There was good reason for
this explosion. In the Christian churches of the time, distinctive traditions of
 giving and attitudes toward wealth reached back to before the age of Constan-
 tine. They were often associated with low-­profile styles of leadership that drew

                                       528
                                 conclusion


their support from distinctly average congregations. These low-­profile styles of
giving and leadership frequently clashed with the expectations for a bright new
age brought into the churches by the wealthy and the vocal few.
    Because of this, the famous controversies about the use of wealth in the Chris-
tian churches that occurred at this time—­such as those connected with Priscil-
lian in the 380s, with Jerome in the 380s and 390s, and with the teachings of
Pelagius in the 400s—­were no mere rhetorical fireworks. They were impressive
eddies raised by the force of currents that flowed deep within the Christian com-
munities themselves, as new wealth and new radical attitudes toward wealth
clashed with the tenacious if less articulate habits of the average Christian laity
and of the average members of the clergy.
    Hence the irony of the situation that emerged when much of the wealth cre-
ated in the fourth century evaporated or changed its structures in the brutal cri-
sis of the fifth century. Having recently passed from an age of relative mediocrity
to an age of affluence, the Christian churches now found themselves in a gener-
ally impoverished world.
    For this reason we can trace a double movement in the Christian communi-
ties of that time. As the fifth century progressed, the central institutions of the
Roman world lost much of their mystique. Tensions between the sacred and the
profane that had been veiled in a more confident generation were revealed ever
more clearly. Faced with massive losses of income and by a widespread weakening
of its authority in large areas of the West, the imperial structure inherited from
the fourth century showed no intention of surrendering. Instead, the empire—­
the Respublica—­went down fighting. And it went down fighting as a frankly secu-
lar institution. Government circles made plain that they would not yield any of
the prerogatives of the Roman state to the Christian bishops. The disillusion-
ment of the African bishops in their dealings with the court of Ravenna in the
late 420s and the memorable anger of Salvian of Marseilles against the abuses of
the Roman state in Gaul and Spain in the late 430s document a new, sharp mood.
    In this time of crisis, the choice of personnel in the churches also came to be
challenged. The lively controversies among the writers of Provence were not
driven only by theological issues such as grace, free will, and predestination.
They also included a vigorous debate on the nature of Christian leadership in a
changed age. This problem had been brought to the fore in the 430s by a clash
between new aristocratic ideals of leadership (allied to a vigorous monastic move-
ment) and more old-­fashioned, more plebeian models of the Christian commu-
nity that had been upheld in the cities of southern Gaul and Italy.
    At the same time, the crisis of the fifth century had brought about consolida-
tion on the local level. Radical critiques of wealth were abandoned. Rather than
denouncing the evil origins of wealth and insisting on its total renunciation,
writers of the fifth century came to emphasize how wealth could be used to con-

                                       529
                                    conclusion


solidate the Christian community. In major cities, such as Rome, the outreach to
the poor, which had once taken the form of care only for the destitute, slowly but
surely changed its function so as to embrace the care of average citizens in times
of stress.
    Last, but not least, the greatest surprise of all occurred in the late fifth century.
The leaders of the churches realized that they—­and not the great lay landowners
whose fortunes had previously dwarfed the wealth of the churches—­were, at
last, truly wealthy. The collapse of the traditional aristocracies left the church in a
unique position. The administrative and ideological effort deployed by so many
bishops and clergymen of the late fifth and sixth centuries in making the best of
this new situation—­from the popes of Rome and well-­known figures such as
Gregory of Tours to up-­and-­coming clergymen as far apart as Mérida, Pavia, and
Metz—­was truly remarkable. It was an age of managerial bishops and their cleri-
cal staffs. We can still admire their skill as administrators and builders in the
luminous shrines of Italy and elsewhere. Yet the secret of their success was not a
total novelty. The notion of the sacral character of the corporate wealth of the
church that flourished at this time went back many centuries to the sense of the
collective nature of the wealth of the faithful that had been fiercely maintained,
in the name of the care of the poor, among the more low-­profile churches of the
third and fourth centuries.
    It was the weight of this new collective wealth, combined with the support of
a new constituency of lay donors—­drawn from many levels of society but most
prominently from the new aristocracies of the post-­imperial West—­that exerted
a discreet and continuous pressure on the churches of Latin Europe around 600
ad. This pressure hastened the great turn toward the other world that has been
held to mark the end of the ancient world and the beginning of the middle ages.
Led by a clergy made ever more starkly different from themselves in culture and
lifestyle, the laity sought out new ways to place their wealth beyond the grave for
the salvation of their souls. As Thorstein Eiriksson made plain in his last mo-
ments, wealth for the church and for the poor had become wealth for the dead.
    This book has sought to bring readers back to those centuries, roughly be-
tween the years 350 and 550 ad. To do this has meant entering a very ancient
world in order to encounter a very ancient Christianity. It was in this world that
the conglomerate of ideas that medieval persons took for granted was first formed.
As we have seen, these ideas emerged slowly, in a hesitant and conflict-­laden
manner very different from the way that they would later come to circulate in the
triumphant Catholicism of the Latin West and in the various Christianities of
more modern times. If this book has helped readers make the journey back to
a world before our world—­a world from which so many of our own views on
wealth and poverty have derived—­I will be content.


                                          530
        A b b r e v i at i o n s
           •••••




CCSL 	Corpus Christianorum, Series Latina

CSEL	Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum

MGH      Monumenta Germaniae Historica

PL       Patrologia cursus completus, series Latina

SC 	Sources Chrétiennes




                          531
                               Notes
                              •••••




                                        Preface

      1.	I think, in particular, of the Latin-­speaking Balkans: see esp. S Ćurčić, Architec­
ture in the Balkans from Diocletian to Süleyman the Magnificent (New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 2010). It was a joy and an honor to explore this neglected world through
repeated conversations with Danny Ćurčić as he brought to completion his masterpiece
of unflinching, all-­embracing scholarship. See also the challenging body of neglected evi-
dence assembled by M. Handley, “Two Hundred and Sixty-­Four Addenda and Corri-
genda to PLRE from the Latin-­Speaking Balkans,” Journal of Late Antiquity 3 (2010):
113–­57; and the fine fourth-­century mausolea at Sopiane (Pécs) in Hungary: K. Hudák
and L. Nagy, A Fine and Private Place: Discovering the Early Christian Cemetery of Sopiane/
Pécs, Heritage Booklets 6 (Pécs: Örökség Ház, 2009).
      2. L. Gernet, Le génie grec dans la religion (Paris: Renaissance du Livre, 1932), 370.
      3. Jerome, Vita Malchi: Patrologia Latina 23: 53C.
      4.	On the nature of the Jewish communities and the meaning of pious gifts within
them I have learned much from S. Schwartz, Imperialism and Jewish Society, 200 B.C.E.
to 640 C.E. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001); and idem, Were the Jews a
Mediterranean Society? Reciprocity and Solidarity in Ancient Judaism (Princeton: Prince­
ton University Press, 2010); and from J. Niehoff-­Panagiotidis, “Byzantinische Lebenswelt
und rabbinische Hermeneutik: Die griechischen Juden in der Kairoer Genizah,” Byzan­
tion 74 (2004): 51–­109 at pp. 88–­100, on the distinctive meaning of almsgiving.
      5. W. K. Lowther Clarke, Saint Basil the Great: A Study in Monasticism (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1913), 14.

                                       Chapter 1
                                        Aurea aetas

    1. H. Dessau, Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae, no. 7457 (Berlin: Weidmann, 1916),
3:781–­82. My colleague Brent Shaw has demonstrated that this inscription dates from

                                            533
                                 notes to pages 4–9


the fourth century: see Shaw, Bringing in the Sheaves: Economy and Metaphor in the
Roman World (Toronto: forthcoming).
       2. P. Brown, Power and Persuasion in Late Antiquity: Towards a Christian Empire
(Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1992), 52–­54; see P. Garnsey, Social Status and
Legal Privilege in the Roman Empire (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970); and R. Rilinger,
Humiliores-­Honestiores: Zu einer sozialen Dichotomie im Strafrecht der römischen Kaiser­
zeit (Munich: Oldbourg, 1988).
       3. F. Jacques, Le privilège de liberté: Politique impériale et autonomie municipale dans
les cités de l’Occident romain (161–­244), Collection de l’école française de Rome 76 (Rome:
Palais Farnèse, 1984); H. Inglebert, Histoire de la civilisation romaine (Paris: Presses Uni-
versitaires de France, 2005), 73–­75; and P. Gros, “La ville comme symbole: Le modèle
central et ses limites,” in Inglebert, Histoire de la civilisation romaine, 155–­232. A.H.M.
Jones, The Later Roman Empire: A Social, Economic and Administrative Survey, 284–­602
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1964), 2:722–­57 remains the best short synthesis in English.
       4. P. F. Bang, “Trade and Empire—­In Search of Organizing Concepts for the Roman
Empire,” Past and Present 195 (2007): 3–­54 at p. 13.
       5. G. Charles-­Picard, “Civitas mactaritana,” Karthago 8 (1957): 1–­156; C. Lepelley,
Les cités de l’Afrique romaine au Bas-­Empire, vol. 2, Notices d’histoire municipale (Paris:
Études Augustiniennes, 1981), 289–­95.
       6. Records of the Grand Historian of China, translated from the Shih Chi of Ssu-­ma
Ch’ien, trans. B. Watson, Columbia Records of Civilization 65 (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1961), 499; see Ying-­shih Yü, Trade and Expansion in Han China: A
Study in the Structure of Sino-­Barbarian Economic Relations (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1967).
       7. J. Lendon, Empire of Honour: The Art of Government in the Roman World (Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 1997), 30.
       8. Novella of Valentinian III 3.4 (AD 439). This fixed a minimum below which per-
sons would not be co-­opted into the town council: see Jones, The Later Roman Empire,
2:738–­39.
       9.	Charles-­Picard, “Civitas mactaritana,” 40.
     10.	I take this figure from W. C. Scheidel and S. J. Friesen, “The Size of the Economy
and the Distribution of Income in the Roman Empire,” Journal of Roman Studies 99
(2009): 61–­91, at p. 77.
     11.	See the map in Inglebert, Histoire de la civilisation romaine, 72–­73, and map 1,
p. 7.
     12.	Scheidel and Friesen, “The Size of the Economy,” 91.
     13. The classic statements are F. Lot, The End of the Ancient World and the Beginnings
of the Middle Ages (New York: Knopf, 1931); and M. Rostovtzeff, The Social and Eco­
nomic History of the Roman Empire (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1926). From an abundant
bibliography, see the titles that have influenced the present author in P. Brown, “The
World of Late Antiquity Revisited,” Symbolae Osloenses 72 (1997): 5–­90. It goes without
saying that the debate on this issue remains as vigorous as ever: for views different from
my own, see J.W.H.G. Liebeschuetz, The Decline and Fall of the Roman City (Oxford:



                                             534
                               notes to pages 9–11


Oxford University Press, 2001); and A. Giardina, “Esplosione di tardoantico,” Studi
Storici 40 (1999): 157–­80.
    14. F. de Callataÿ, “The Graeco-­Roman Economy in the Super Long-­Run: Lead,
Copper and Shipwrecks,” Journal of Roman Archaeology 18 (2005): 361–­72; B. Ward-­
Perkins, The Fall of Rome and the End of Civilization (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2005), 87–­104.
    15. G. Halsall, Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 376–­568 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2007), 69.
    16.	Ibid., 72; J. Haas, Die Umweltkrise des 3. Jahrhunderts n. Chr. im Nordwesten des
Imperium Romanum, Geographica Historica 22 (Stuttgart: Steiner, 2006).
    17.	R. P. Duncan-­Jones, “The Impact of the Antonine Plague,” Journal of Roman
Archaeology 9 (1996): 108–­36; M. McCormick, Origins of the European Economy: Com­
munications and Commerce, A.D. 300–­900 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2001), 30–­41.
    18.	I have found that the best modern accounts are by J.-­M. Carrié and A. Rousselle,
L’empire romain en mutation: Des Sévères à Constantin, 192–­337 (Paris: Du Seuil, 1999),
49–­126, 651–­718. D. S. Potter, The Roman Empire at Bay, AD 180–395 (London: Rout-
ledge, 2004), 85–298. See also K. Strobel, Das Imperium Romanum im “3. Jahr­hundert”:
Modell einer historischen Krise? Historia Einzelschrift 75 (Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 1993);
C. Witschel, “Re-­Evaluating the Roman West in the 3rd Century A.D.,” Journal of
Roman Archaeology 17 (2004): 251–­81; Deleto paene imperio Romano: Transformazions­
prozesse des römischen Reiches im 3. Jahrhundert und ihre Rezeption in der Neuzeit, ed.
K.-­P. Johne, T. Gerdhardt, and U. Hartmann (Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2006).
    19.	See C. Witschel, Krise-­Rezession-­Stagnation? Der Westen des römischen Reiches
im 3. Jahrhundert n. Chr. (Frankfurt: M. Clauss, 1999), 239–­74 on Spain and Britain.
See now P. Reynolds, Hispania and the Roman Mediterranean, A.D. 100–­700: Ceramics
and Trade (London: Duckworth, 2010), 24–­32, 69–­74.
    20.	R. B. Hitchner, “The Kasserine Archaeological Survey, 1982–­1985,” Africa 11–­
12 (1992–­93): 158–­259; idem, “The Kasserine Archaeological Survey, 1982–­1986” and
“The Kasserine Archaeological Survey, 1987,” Antiquités africaines 24 (1988): 7–­41 and
26 (1990): 231–­59; D.P.S. Peacock, F. Bejaoui, and N. Ben Lazreg, “Roman Pottery Pro-
duction in Central Tunisia,” Journal of Roman Archaeology 3 (1990): 59–­84.
    21.	C. Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine, vol. 1, La permanence d’une civilisation
municipale (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1979), 59–­120. For Italy, see B. Ward-­Perkins,
From Classical Antiquity to the Middle Ages: Urban Public Building in Northern and Cen­
tral Italy, 300–­850 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984), 1–­48.
    22. Halsall, Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 83–­85; J. Crow, “Fortifica-
tions and Urbanism in Late Antiquity,” in Recent Research in Late Antique Urbanism, ed.
L. Lavan, Journal of Roman Archaeology: Supplement 42 (Portsmouth, RI: Journal of
Roman Archaeology, 1996), 89–­105; P. Garmy and L. Maurin, eds., Enceintes romaines
d’Aquitaine: Bordeaux, Dax, Périgueux, Bazas (Paris: Editions de la Maison des Sciences
de l’Homme, 1996); H. Dey, “Art, Ceremony and City Walls: The Aesthetics of Imperial
Resurgence in the Late Roman West,” and B. S. Bachrach, “The Fortification of Gaul and



                                            535
                               notes to pages 11–14


the Economy of the Third and Fourth Centuries,” Journal of Late Antiquity 3 (2010):
3–­37, 38–­64; C. Fernández Ochoa and A. Morillo Cerdán, “Walls in the Urban Land-
scape of Late Roman Spain: Defense and Imperial Strategy,” in Hispania in Late Antiq­
uity: Current Perspectives, ed. K. Bowes and M. Kulikowski (Leiden: Brill, 2005): 299–­
340; R. Rebuffat, “Enceintes urbaines et insécurité en Maurétanie tingitaine,” Mélanges
de l’École française de Rome: Antiquité 86 (1974): 501–­22.
    23. J.-­M. Carrié, “Dioclétien et la fiscalité,” Antiquité tardive 2 (1994): 33–­64.
G. Brans­bourg, “Fiscalité impériale et finances municipales au IVe siècle,” Antiquité tar­
dive 16 (2008): 255–­96 is a significant new contribution.
    24. D. Bonneau, La crue du Nil, divinité égyptienne, à travers milles ans d’histoire (322
av.–­641 ap. J.-­C.) (Paris: Klincksieck, 1964). In the sixth century the Nile was still called
“Most Sacred”: C. Kreuzsaler, “Ho hierôtatos Nilos auf einer christlichen Nilstandsmar­
kierung,” Journal of Juristic Papyrology 34 (2004): 81–­86.
    25. P. Erdkamp, The Grain Market in the Roman Empire: A Social, Political and Eco­
nomic Study (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 322–­25; P. Horden and
N. Purcell, The Corrupting Sea: A Study of Mediterranean History (Oxford: Blackwell,
2000), 152; P. Garnsey, Famine and Food Supply in the Graeco-­Roman World: Responses to
Risk and Crisis (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 8–­16.
    26.	Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 9.7.10.
    27. Council of Elvira, canon 49, ed. E. J. Jonkers, in Acta et symbola conciliorum quae
saeculo quarto habita sunt (Leiden: Brill, 1954), 16.
    28. P. A. Février, Approches du Maghreb romain: Pouvoirs, différences et conflits, vol. 2
(La Calade: Édisud, 1990), 17; A. Mastrocinque, “Magia agraria nell’impero cristiano,”
Mediterraneo antico 7 (2004): 795–­836.
    29. M. Meslin, La fête des kalendes de janvier dans l’empire romain: Étude d’un rituel
de Nouvel An (Brussels: Latomus, 1970).
    30.	Caesarius of Arles, Sermon 192.3.
    31. Jerusalem Talmud: Yoma 5.2, trans. M. Schwab, Le Talmud de Jérusalem (Paris:
Maisonneuve, 1932–­33), 3:218.
    32. Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 1:451–­60.
    33.	Ibid., 1:462–­69.
    34. D. Vera, “Forme e funzioni della rendita fondiaria nella tarda antichità,” in Soci­
età romana e impero tardoantico, vol. 1, Istituzioni, ceti, economie, ed. A. Giardina (Bari:
Laterza, 1986), 367–­447 at pp. 441–­43; and idem, “L’altra faccia della luna: La società
contadina nella Sicilia di Gregorio Magno,” Studi Storici 47 (2006): 437–­61. See also
C. Wickham, Framing the Early Middle Ages: Europe and the Mediterranean, 400–­800
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 68.
    35. Augustine, New [Divjak] Letter 14* and 15*.3, in Bibliothèque Augustinienne
46B, Lettres 1*–­29* (Paris: Desclée de Brouwer, 1987), 262–­69, trans. R. B. Eno, in St.
Augustine: Letters: Volume VI (1*–­29*), Fathers of the Church 81 (Washington, DC:
Catholic University of America Press, 1989), 112–­16.
    36. J. Banaji, Agrarian Change in Late Antiquity: Gold, Labour, and Aristocratic
Dominance (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), 16.
    37.	Erdkamp, The Grain Market, 324.


                                             536
                               notes to pages 14–17


     38. Horden and Purcell, The Corrupting Sea, 205, 214.
     39. J. Alarcão, R. Étienne, and F. Mayet, Les villas romaines de São Cucufate (Portu­
gal) (Paris: Boccard, 1990), 149–­55.
    40. M. McCormick, “Bateaux de vie, bateaux de mort: Maladie, commerce et le pas-
sage économique du bas-­empire au moyen-­âge,” in Morfologie sociali e culturali in Eu­
ropa fra Tarda Antichità e Alto Medioevo, Settimane di Studi del Centro Italiano di Studi
sull’Alto Medioevo 45 (Spoleto: Centro di Studi sull’Alto Medio Evo, 1998), 35–­118 at
pp. 35–­37.
     41. J. Haldon, “Comes horreorum—­Komès tès Lamias,” Byzantine and Modern Greek
Studies 10 (1986): 203–­9.
     42. Banaji, Agrarian Change in Late Antiquity, 39–­88 develops with great force a
view inspired by S. Mazzarino, Aspetti sociali del quarto secolo (Rome: Bretschneider,
1951), 47–­216. See now F. Carlà, L’oro nella tarda anrichità: Aspetti economici e sociali
(Turin: Silvio Zamorani, 2009), 117–­57.
     43. Anonymus de rebus bellicis 2.1–­2, ed. and trans. E. A. Thompson, A Roman Re­
former and Inventor (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952), 94; see Banaji, Agrarian Change
in Late Antiquity, 46–­49; and A. Giardina, ed., Anonimo: Le cose della guerra ([Milan]:
Mondadori, 1989), with commentary and full discussion of the possible dates and con-
text of the treatise. See now Carlà, L’oro nella tarda anrichità, 125–­31.
    44. J.-­P. Callu, “Le ‘centenarium’ et l’enrichissement monétaire au Bas-­Empire,”
Ktèma 3 (1978): 301–­16. On the flow of gold in the empire as revealed by hoards of
solidi beyond the frontier, see esp. P. Guest, “Roman Gold and Hun Kings: The Use
and Hoarding of Solidi in the Late Fourth and Fifth Centuries,” in Roman Coins outside
the Empire: Ways and Phases, Contexts and Functions, ed. A. Bursche, R. Ciołek, and
R. Wolters, Collection Moneta 82 (Wetteren: Moneta, 2008), 295–­307. For a spectacu-
lar hoard of solidi discovered close to the capital at Trier, see now Moselgold: Der römische
Schatz von Machtum, ed. F. Reinert (Luxembourg: Musée national d’histoire et d’art,
2008). I owe knowledge of this to the kindness of Johannes Hahn.
     45. Jorge Luis Borges, A Personal Anthology, ed. A. Kerrigan (New York: Grove Press,
1967), 131.
     46.	Olympiodorus, History: Fragment 41.1–­2, ed. R. C. Blockley, The Fragmentary
Classicising Historians of the Later Roman Empire: Eunapius, Olympiodorus, Priscus and
Malchus, vol. 2 (Liverpool: Francis Cairns, 1983), 204–­6.
     47. W. C. Scheidel, “Finances, Figures and Fiction,” Classical Quarterly 46 (1996):
222–­38.
     48.	C. Wickham, The Inheritance of Rome: A History of Europe from 400 to 1000 (Lon-
don: Allen Lane, 2009), 29.
     49. Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 2:537–­39.
     50. The Life of Melania 15, ed. D. Gorce, Vie de sainte Mélanie, SC 90 (Paris: Le Cerf,
1962), 156, trans. E. A. Clark, The Life of Melania the Younger (New York: Edwin Mellen,
1984), 38.
     51. Life of Melania 17, Gorce, p. 160, Clark, p. 40.
     52. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 27.11.1, ed. and trans. J. C. Rolfe, Ammianus
Marcellinus, Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1952),


                                            537
                               notes to pages 17–20


3:72–­74; also trans. W. Hamilton, The Later Roman Empire, A.D. 354–­378 (Harmonds­
worth, UK: Penguin, 1986), 345–­46.
     53. A. Gillett, “The Date and Circumstances of Olympiodorus of Thebes,” Traditio
48 (1993): 1–­29.
     54.	T. D. Barnes, Ammianus Marcellinus and the Representation of Historical Reality
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998), 117–­19.
     55.	Vera, “Forme e funzioni della rendita fondiaria,” 412.
     56.	Rostovtzeff, Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire, 475–­77 with
plate IX.2.
     57.	Summary: Du latifundium au latifondo: Un héritage de Rome, une création
médiévale ou moderne? Publications du Centre Pierre Paris 25 (Paris: Boccard, 1995),
460. For a similar dismantling of certitudes in Italian archaeology (related to the “slave
villa” and the implied rise of the latifundium), see A. Marzano, Roman Villas in Central
Italy: A Social and Economic History, Columbia Studies in the Classical Tradition 30
(Leiden: Brill, 2007), 125–­53.
     58. P. Sillières, “Approche d’un espace rural antique: L’exemple de Vila de Frades en
Lusitanie méridionale,” in Du latifundium au latifondo, 21–­29.
     59. D. Vera, “Massa fundorum,” Mélanges de l’École française de Rome: Antiquité 111
(1999): 991–­1025.
     60.	See esp. P. Van Ossel, “Rural Impoverishment in Northern Gaul at the End of
Antiquity: The Contribution of Archaeology,” in Social and Political Life in Late Antiq­
uity, Late Antique Archaeology 3:1, ed. W. Bowden, A. Gutteridge, and C. Machado
(Leiden: Brill, 2006), 533–­65.
     61. J.-­M. Carrié, “Le ‘colonat du Bas-­Empire’: Un mythe historiographique?” Opus 1
(1982): 351–­70; C. Grey, “Contextualizing Colonatus: The Origo of the Late Roman
Empire,” Journal of Roman Studies 97 (2007): 155–­75.
     62.	See esp. the vigorous arguments of J. Banaji, “Lavoratori liberi e residenza coatta:
Il colonato romano in prospettiva storica,” in Terre, proprietari e contadini dell’impero
romano: Dall’affitto agrario al colonato tardoantico, ed. E. Lo Cascio (Rome: Nuova Italia
Scientifica, 1997), 253–­80; and idem, “Aristocracies, Peasantries and the Framing of the
Early Middle Ages,” Journal of Agrarian Change 9 (2009): 59–­91 at p. 67. For the relation
between demands for a tied peasantry and emergencies caused by barbarian raids, see
S. Schmidt-­Hofner, Reagieren und Gestalten: Die Regierungsstil des spätrömischen Kaisers
am Beispiel der Gesetzgebung Valentinians I, Vestigia 58 (Munich: C. H. Beck, 2008),
269–­87, esp. 276–­80. Though based on evidence from the eastern provinces, K. Harper,
“The Greek Census Inscriptions of Late Antiquity,” Journal of Roman Studies 98 (2008):
83–­119 at pp. 105–­6 is most revealing for the role of slaves and dependent tenants in the
labor force of the rich.
     63. A. Giardina, “The Transition to Late Antiquity,” in The Cambridge Economic
History of the Greco-­Roman World, ed. W. Scheidel, I. Morris, and R. Saller (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2007), 743–­68 at p. 752.
     64. J. Wacher, Roman Britain, 2nd ed. (Stroud, UK: Sutton, 1998), 131–­36; Mar­
zano, Roman Villas in Central Italy, 141. The landmark works that led to this revision are
Mazzarino, Aspetti sociali del quarto secolo; L. Cracco Ruggini, Economia e società nell’


                                            538
                               notes to pages 20–23


“Italia annonaria”: Rapporti fra agricoltura e commercio dal IV al VI secolo d.C. (Milan:
Giuffrè, 1961; 2nd ed., Bari: Edipuglia, 1995); and Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine.
    65.	N. Duval, “Deux mythes iconographiques de l’antiquité tardive: La villa fortifiée
et le ‘chasseur vandale,’” in Humana sapit: Études d’Antiquité Tardive offertes à Lellia
Cracco Ruggini, ed. J.-­M. Carrié and R. Lizzi Testa, Bibliothèque d’Antiquité Tardive 3
(Turnhout: Brepols, 2002), 333–­40.
    66. The grandeur of Piazza Armerina, in particular, has led to excessively dramatic
interpretations of the role of late Roman villas as places for the show of power: see esp.
S. Ellis, “Power, Architecture and Décor: How the Late Roman Aristocrat Appeared to
His Guests,” in Roman Art in the Private Sphere: New Perspectives on the Architecture and
Decor of the Domus, Villa, and Insula, ed. E. K. Gazda (Ann Arbor: University of Michi-
gan Press, 1991), 117–­34.
    67.	See now esp. K. Bowes, Houses and Society in the Later Roman Empire (London:
Duckworth, 2010), 77–­82, 95–­98. One should note the wide range of the sizes and
wealth of villas in all regional surveys: see esp. C. Balmelle, Les demeures aristocratiques
d’Aquitaine: Société et culture de l’Antiquité tardive dans le Sud-­Ouest de la Gaule (Bor-
deaux and Paris: Ausonius and Aquitania, 2001); A. Chavarría Arnau, El final de las
“villae” en “Hispania” (siglos IV–­VIII) (Turnhout: Brepols, 2007); S. Scott, Art and Soci­
ety in Fourth Century Britain: Villa Mosaics in Context, Oxford School of Archaeology
Monographs 53 (Oxford: Oxbow, 2000).
    68.	I. Rodá, “Iconografía y epigrafía en dos mosaicos hispanas: Las villas de Tossa y de
Dueñas,” in VI Coloquio internacional sobre mosaico antiguo (Palencia/Mérida: Associ-
ación Español del Mosaico, 1994), 35–­42 at p. 35.
    69. W. Scheidel, “Stratification, Deprivation and Quality of Life,” in Poverty in the
Roman World, ed. M. Atkins and R. Osborne (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2006), 40–­59 at p. 54.
    70. For Africa, see esp. P. Leveau, Caesarea de Maurétanie: Une ville romaine et ses
campagnes, Collection de l’École française de Rome 70 (Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1984),
477–­85; for Gaul, see Wickham, Framing the Early Middle Ages, 167–­74.
    71. P. Heather, “New Men for New Constantines? Creating an Imperial Elite in the
Eastern Mediterranean,” in New Constantines: The Rhythm of Imperial Renewal in Byzan­
tium, 4th–­13th Centuries, ed. P. Magdalino (Aldershot: Variorum, 1994), 11–­34; and
idem, “Senators and Senates,” in The Cambridge Ancient History, vol. 13, The Late Em­
pire, A.D. 337–­425, ed. A. Cameron and P. Garnsey (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998), 184–­210; Schmidt-­Hofner, Reagieren und Gestalten, 103–­15.
    72.	R. Lizzi Testa, Senatori, popolo, papi: Il governo di Roma al tempo dei Valentini­
ani (Bari: Edipuglia, 2004), 209–­305; idem, “Alle origini della tradizione pagana su
Costantino e il senato romano,” in Transformations of Late Antiquity: Essays for Peter
Brown, ed. P. Rousseau and M. Papoutsakis (Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2009), 85–­127 at
pp. 120–­23.
    73. Alan Cameron, “The Antiquity of the Symmachi,” Historia 48 (1999): 477–­505;
and F. Jacques, “L’ordine senatorio attraverso la crisi del III secolo,” in Società romana e
impero tardoantico, 1:81–­225, with the map on p. 110. This decisive shift to the south of
the Roman economy has been revealed through a remarkable tradition of Italian scholar-


                                            539
                             notes to pages 23–27


ship that is well summed up by C. Wickham, “Marx, Sherlock Holmes and Late Roman
Commerce,” Journal of Roman Studies 78 (1988): 183–­93; and now idem, Framing the
Early Middle Ages, 708–­12.
    74. B. Shaw, “After Rome: Transformations of the Early Mediterranean World,” New
Left Review 51 (2008): 89–­114, an admirably independent-­minded review of Wickham,
Framing the Early Middle Ages.
    75. Anonymus de rebus bellicis 2.3, p. 94.
    76.	C. Kelly, Ruling the Later Roman Empire (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2004), 107–­13, 148–­58.
    77.	Ibid., 145–­48; Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine, 2:468–­70.
    78. Kelly, Ruling the Later Roman Empire, 138–­45. The two best accounts of the
frustrations of the curiales in the later empire as a whole remain Jones, The Later Roman
Empire, 2:737–­57; and Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine, 1:243–­92.
    79. Halsall, Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 79–­96 provides a fine survey
of the regional divergences among the local elites of the late Roman West.
    80. D. Crane, Scott of the Antarctic: A Life of Courage and Tragedy in the Extreme
South (New York: Harper Percival, 2006), 45.
    81. J.-­U. Krause, Spätantike Patronatsformen im Westen des römischen Reiches, Ves-
tigia 38 (Munich: C. H. Beck, 1987), 20–­67; P. Garnsey, “Roman Patronage,” in From the
Tetrarchs to the Theodosians: Later Roman History and Culture, 284–­450 CE. For John
Matthews on the Occasion of His 70th Birthday, Yale Classical Studies 34, ed. S. McGill,
C. Sogno, and E. Watts (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 33–­54 at
pp. 47–­53.
    82. Calendar of 354, ed. T. Mommsen, Chronica Minora, MGH: Auctores Antiquis-
simi 9 (Berlin: Weidmann, 1892), 1:47.
    83. Augustine, Contra academicos 2.2.2; see Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine,
2:176–­82.
    84. Augustine, Confessions 5.13.23; see now J. V. Ebbeler and C. Sogno, “Religious
Identity and the Politics of Patronage: Symmachus and Augustine,” Historia 56 (2007):
230–­42.
    85. Augustine, Confessions 6.11.19.
    86. Augustine, Confessions 6.9.15.
    87. Augustine, Confessions 6.10.16.
    88. J. F. Matthews, “The Letters of Symmachus,” in Latin Literature of the Fourth
Century, ed. J. W. Binns (London: Routledge, 1974), 58–­99; R.B.E. Smith, “‘Restored
Utility, Eternal City’: Patronal Imagery at Rome in the Fourth Century AD,” in “Bread
and Circuses”: Euergetism and Municipal Patronage in Roman Italy, ed. K. Lomas and
T. Cornell (London: Routledge, 2003), 142–­66; C. Sogno, “Roman Matchmaking,” in
From the Tetrarchs to the Theodosians, 51–­71 at pp. 63–­66.
    89. M. Harlow, “Clothes Maketh the Man: Power Dressing and Elite Masculinity in
the Later Roman World,” in Gender in the Early Medieval World: East and West, 300–­
900, ed. L. Brubaker and J.M.H. Smith (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004),
44–­69 at pp. 44–­54; for a slightly later period, see P. von Rummel, “Habitus Vandalo­
rum? Zur Frage nach einer gruppen-­spezifischen Kleidung der Vandalen in Afrika,” An­


                                          540
                               notes to pages 27–29


tiquité tardive 10 (2002): 131–­141. “Barbarian” dress is the dress of courtiers and hunt-
ers, not specifically of Vandals. See now P. von Rummel, Habitus barbarus: Kleidung und
Repräsentation spätantiker Eliten im 4. und 5. Jahrhundert, Reallexikon der germanischen
Altertumskunde, Ergänzungsband 55 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2007), 401–­7.
     90.	R. MacMullen, “Some Pictures in Ammianus Marcellinus,” Art Bulletin 46
(1964), now in Changes in the Roman Empire: Essays in the Ordinary (Princeton: Prince­
ton University Press, 1990), 78–­106; F. Morelli, “Tessuti e indumenti nel contesto eco-
nomico tardoantico: I prezzi,” Antiquité tardive 12 (2004): 55–­78.
     91. Life of Melania 19 and 21, Gorce, pp. 164, 172, Clark, pp. 41, 44; Liber Pontifi­
calis 42: Innocent I, trans. R. Davis, The Book of Pontiffs (Liber Pontificalis): The Ancient
Biographies of the First Ninety Roman Bishops to AD 715 (Liverpool: Liverpool Univer-
sity Press, 1989), 31.
     92. Pap. Ital. 8.III.7–­13, ed. and trans. J.-­O. Tjäder, Die nichtliterarischen Papyri
Ita­liens aus der Zeit 445–­700, Skrifter utgivna av Svenska Institutet i Rom 4.19 (Lund:
Gleerup, 1955), 242.
     93.	C. Witschel and B. Borg, “Veränderungen im Repräsentationsverhalten der rö-
mischen Eliten während des 3. Jhrdts. n. Chr.,” Inschriftliche Denkmäler als Medien der
Selbstdarstellung in der römischen Welt, ed. G. Alföldy and S. Panciera (Stuttgart: F. Steiner,
2001), 47–­120 at pp. 97–­99.
     94. H. Maguire, “The Good Life,” in Late Antiquity: A Guide to the Postclassical
World, ed. G. W. Bowersock, P. Brown, and O. Grabar (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1999), 238–­57 at pp. 242–­43.
     95.	See M. Kulikowski, Late Roman Spain and Its Cities (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 2004), 137–­47, on the contrast between El Ruedo (Cordova), with its
local sandstone and stucco work, and the truly imperial use of eastern marbles in Car-
ranque (Toledo).
     96. J. W. Salomonson, “Late Roman Earthenware with Relief Decoration Found in
Northern-­Africa and Egypt,” Oudheidkundige Mededelingen 43 (1962): 53–­95; J. Spier,
“A Lost Consular Diptych of Anicius Auchenius Bassus (A.D. 408) in the Mould for an
ARS Plaque,” Journal of Roman Archaeology 16 (2003): 251–­54. See now the hoard of
nineteen items of copper and lead alloy tableware found by Chris Jarrett at Draper’s Gar-
dens, London: G. Cleland, “Unearthed after 1,600 Years, Dinner Set Hidden by Fleeing
Romans,” Daily Telegraph, December 7, 2007.
     97. M. J. de Almeida and A. Carvalho, “Villa romana da Quinta das Longas (Elvas,
Portugal): A lixeira baixo-­imperial,” Revista Portuguesa de Arqueologia 8 (2005): 299–­368.
I owe this reference to my student Damian Fernández.
     98.	I. Baldini Lippolis, La domus tardoantica: Forme e rappresentazioni dello spazio
domestico nelle città del Mediterraneo (Imola: University Press of Bologna, 2001), 73.
     99.	R. Bland and C. Johns, The Hoxne Treasure: An Illustrated Introduction (Lon-
don: British Museum Press, 1993), frontispiece.
   100. J. T. Smith, Roman Villas: A Study in Social Structure (London: Routledge, 1997),
182–­83.
   101. L. M. Stirling, The Learned Collector: Mythological Statuettes and Classical Taste
in Late Antique Gaul (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2003), 128–­33, 190.


                                             541
                              notes to pages 30–33


  102.	S. E. Cleary, The Ending of Roman Britain (London: Batsford, 1989); Wickham,
Framing the Early Middle Ages, 306–­10.


                                      Chapter 2
                                      Mediocritas

       1.	R. Syme, Ammianus and the Historia Augusta (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968),
210.
      2. From a superabundant literature, I have found the most reliable account of the
reign and possible intentions of Constantine to be T. D. Barnes, Constantine and Euse­
bius (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981) and now Constantine: Dy-
nasty, Religion, and Power in the Later Roman Empire (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell,
2011). R. Van Dam, The Roman Revolution of Constantine (New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2007) does justice to the extent and complexity of Constantine’s non-­
religious commitments. See also The Cambridge Companion to the Age of Constantine,
ed. N. Lenski (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006); and T. D. Barnes, “Was
There a Constantinian Revolution?” Journal of Late Antiquity 2 (2009): 374–­84. See
now K. W. Wilkinson, “Palladas and the Age of Constantine,” Journal of Roman Studies
99 (2009): 36–­60, and idem, “Palladas and the Foundation of Constantinople,” Journal
of Roman Studies 100 (2010): 179–­94, important articles which, if accepted, give a
more drastic impression of the impact of Constantine on the paganism of the eastern
provinces.
      3.	Readers acquainted with this literature will see that I favor a “minimalist” rather
than a “maximalist” view of the intentions—­and hence the impact—­of Constantine in
his support of the Christian faith. The debate is summed up by E. D. Digeser, The Making
of a Christian Empire: Lactantius and Rome (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
2000), 167–­71. There is much to be learned from the views expressed, with vigor and a
characteristic sense of paradox, by P. Veyne, Quand notre monde est devenu chrétien (312–­
394) (Paris: Albin Michel, 2007), now translated as When Our World Became Christian,
312–­394 (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2010).
      4.	Compare Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, 191, with R. Lane Fox, Pagans and
Christians (New York: A. Knopf, 1987), 265–­335.
      5. K. M. Hopkins, “Christian Number and Its Implications,” Journal of Early Chris­
tian Studies 6 (1998): 185–­226. On the expansion of Christianity before Constantine,
see now M.-­F. Baslez, Comment notre monde est devenu chrétien (Tours: Éditions CLD,
2008), 127–­200, in response to Veyne, Quand notre monde est devenu chrétien, 35–­91,
When Our World Became Christian, 17–­45.
      6. J. B. Bury, History of the Later Roman Empire from the Death of Theodosius I to the
Death of Justinian (A.D. 395–­A.D. 565) (London: MacMillan, 1923), 1:366.
      7.	N. H. Baynes, Constantine the Great and the Christian Church, 2nd ed. with
preface by Henry Chadwick (London: Oxford University Press for the British Academy,
1972), 9–­10, 29–­30; Veyne, Quand notre monde est devenu chrétien, 33, When Our World
Became Christian, 16.


                                           542
                              notes to pages 33–35


      8. Letter of Constantine (of 313) to the bishop of Syracuse: Eusebius, Ecclesiastical
History 10.5.21.
      9. Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius, 208–­44; idem, Athanasius and Constantius:
Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1993), 165–­75. See now P. Just, Imperator et Episcopus: Zum Verhältnis vom Staats­
gewalt und christlicher Kirche zwischen dem 1. Konzil von Nicaea (325) und dem 1. Konzil
von Konstantinopel, Potsdamer Altertumswissenschaftliche Beiträge 8 (Stuttgart: F. Steiner,
2003); P. Barceló, Constantius II. und seine Zeit: Die Anfänge des Staatskirchentums
(Stuttgart: Klett-­Cotta, 2004); and Veyne, Quand notre monde est devenu chrétien, 141–­
58, When Our World Became Christian, 73–­84.
     10.	C. Sotinel, “La sphère profane dans l’espace urbain,” in Les frontières du profane
dans l’antiquité tardive, ed. É. Rebillard and C. Sotinel, Collection de l’École française de
Rome 428 (Rome: École française de Rome, 2010), 319–­49 at p. 344; Veyne, Quand
notre monde est devenu chrétien, 78–­91, When Our World Became Christian, 39–­45.
     11. Augustine, Dolbeau Sermon 25.25.510, ed. F. Dolbeau, Vingt-­six sermons au peuple
d’Afrique (Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 1996), 266, trans. E. Hill, in Sermons
(Newly Discovered) III/11, The Works of Saint Augustine: A Translation for the 21st
Century (Hyde Park, NY: New City Press, 1997), 382; see P. Brown, Augustine of Hippo:
New Edition with an Epilogue (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), 459–­61.
     12.	Veyne, Quand notre monde est devenu chrétien, 159, When Our World Became
Christian, 84.
     13.	R.S.O. Tomlin, “The Curse Tablets,” in The Temple of Sulis Minerva at Bath, vol. 2,
The Finds from the Sacred Spring, ed. B. Cunliffe (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988),
323–­24.
     14. For the general notion of exemptions to cultic practitioners, see R. M. Grant,
Early Christianity and Society: Seven Studies (New York: Harper and Row, 1977), 44–­65;
and M. Weinfeld, Social Justice in Ancient Israel and in the Ancient Near East (Minneapo-
lis: Fortress; Jerusalem: Magnes, 1995), 16–­17, 79–­80. Individual performers of rituals
could also qualify for exemptions: see J. Alvar, Romanising Oriental Gods: Myth, Salva­
tion and Ethics in the Cults of Cybele, Isis and Mithras, trans. and ed. R. Gordon, Religions
of the Greco-­Roman World 165 (Leiden: Brill, 2008), 266, for exemption for a person
who had performed a taruobolium “for the safety of the emperor.” For exemptions issued
by Constantine for the leaders of Jewish synagogues, see Codex Theodosianus 16.8.2,
16.8.4; A. Linder, ed. and trans., The Jews in Roman Imperial Legislation (Detroit: Wayne
State University Press; Jersusalem: Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities, 1987),
131–­38; and M. Jacobs, Die Institution des jüdischen Patriarchen, Texte und Studien zum
Antiken Judentum 52 (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1995), 274–­84. For teachers as “doctors
of the soul,” see Syro-­Roman Law Book 116, ed. and trans. J. Furlani, Fontes Iuris Romani
Anteiustiniani, ed. S. Riccobono (Florence: G. Barberà, 1968), vol. 2, part 1, p. 794.
     15.	See esp. Codex Theodosianus 16.2.1–­16, from 313 to 361 AD, with the edition
with notes by R. Delmaire, Le code Théodosien: Livre XVI, SC 497 (Paris: Le Cerf, 2005),
122–­55. K. L. Noethlichs, “Zur Einflussnahme des Staates auf die Entwicklung eines
christlichen Klerikerstandes,” Jahrbuch für Antike und Christentum 15 (1972): 136–­54;
R. Lizzi Testa, “Privilegi economici e definizione di status: Il caso del vescovo cristiano,”


                                            543
                                notes to pages 35–37


Rendiconti dell’Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei: Classe di scienze morali, storiche e filo­
logiche, ser. 9, no. 11 (2000): 55–­103; C. Rapp, Holy Bishops in Late Antiquity: The Na­
ture of Christian Leadership in an Age of Transition (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2005), 234–­60; R. Van Dam, “Bishops and Society,” in The Cambridge History of
Christianity, vol. 2, Constantine to c. 600, ed. A. Casiday and F. W. Norris (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2007), 343–­66 at pp. 345–­47. The reader should be aware
that the respective dates of many of these laws remain uncertain.
    16.	See esp. Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 2:734–­37, 858–­59 for a description of
the extent and variety of these duties.
    17. Codex Theodosianus 16.2.16 (361).
    18. Lizzi Testa, “Privilegi economici e definizione di status,” 91–­96; Jones, The Later
Roman Empire, 1:118.
    19. A.H.M. Jones, “The Social Background of the Struggle between Paganism and
Christianity,” in The Conflict between Paganism and Christianity in the Fourth Century,
ed. A. Momigliano (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963), 17–­37 at p. 21.
    20. For Italy, see esp. C. Sotinel, “Le personnel épiscopal: Enquête sur la puissance
de l’évêque dans la cité,” in L’évêque dans la cité du IVe au Ve siècle: Image et autorité, ed.
É. Rebillard and C. Sotinel, Collection de l’École française de Rome 248 (Rome: École
française de Rome, 1998), 105–­26, esp. at pp. 125–­26, reprinted as “The Bishop’s Men:
Episcopal Power in the City,” in Church and Society in Late Antique Italy and beyond
(Farnham, UK: Ashgate/Variorum, 2010), article VII; idem, “Le recrutement des évêques
en Italie aux IVe et Ve siècles,” in Vescovi e pastori in epoca Teodosiana, Studia Ephemeridis
Augustinianum 58 (Rome: Institutum Pontificium Augustinianum, 1997), 193–­204,
reprinted in Church and Society, article VI; idem, “Les évêques italiens dans la société de
l’Antiquité tardive: L’émergence d’une nouvelle élite?” in Le trasformazioni delle “élites” in
età tardoantica, ed. R. Lizzi Testa (Rome: Bretschneider, 2006), reprinted as “The Bish-
ops of Italy in Late Antique Society: A New Elite?” in Church and Society, article VIII;
G. A. Cecconi, “Vescovi e maggiorenti cristiani nell’Italia centrale fra IV e V secolo,”
Vescovi e pastori in epoca Teodosiana, 205–­24. For the eastern provinces, see now Rapp,
Holy Bishops, 172–­88, 205–­44; S. Hübner, Der Klerus in der Gesellschaft des spätantiken
Kleinasiens (Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2006). The recent appearance of the Prosopographie
chrétienne du Bas Empire, vol. 3, Diocèse d’Asie (325–­641), ed. S. Destephen (Paris: CNRS,
2008) will greatly enrich our knowledge of the social status of the clergy of the eastern
provinces.
    21. J.-­M. Carrié, “Les associations professionnelles à l’époque tardive: Entre munus
et convivialité,” in Humana sapit, 309–­32.
    22. É. Rebillard, Religion et sépulture: L’Église, les vivants et les morts dans l’Antiquité
tardive (Paris: Éditions de l’École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, 2003), 51–­71,
now translated as The Care of the Dead in Late Antiquity (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 2009), 37–­56.
    23.	C. R. Galvão-­Sobrinho, “Funerary Epigraphy and the Spread of Christianity in
the West,” Athenaeum, n.s., 83 (1995): 421–­66.
    24. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, ed. E. Diehl (Zurich: Weidmann, 1970),
no. 666.


                                             544
                               notes to pages 37–40


    25. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, vol. 1, nos. 602, 604A, 668. D. Mazzo-
leni, “Il lavoro nell’epigrafia Cristiana,” in Epigrafi del mondo cristiano antico (Rome: Lat-
eran University Press, 2002), 39–­48 collects the evidence with plates, along with an ele-
vating but insubstantial disquisition on the dignity of labor in Christian circles.
    26. Inscriptiones Christianae Urbis Romae Septimo Saeculo Antiquiores, ed. Giovanni
Battista de Rossi and Angelo Silvagni, n.s., vol. 5, Coemeteria reliqua viae Appiae, ed.
A. Ferrua (Vatican: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 1971), no. 13655, p. 133.
    27. J. Dresken-­Weiland, Sarkophagbestattungen des 4.–­6. Jahrhunderts im Westen des
römischen Reiches, Römische Quartalschrift Supplementband 55 (Rome: Herder, 2003),
78.
    28.	Ibid., 73–­75.
    29. P. Veyne, L’empire gréco-­romain (Paris: Seuil, 2005), ch. 3, “Existait-­il une classe
moyenne en ces temps lointains?” 117–­62 at pp. 126–­29.
    30. Codex Thedosianus 12.1.53 (362) in general. The most notable laws against the
ordination of rich plebeians are Codex Theodosianus 16.2.3 (320) and 16.2.17 (364).
    31. Athanasius, Historia Arianorum 78.1.
    32. Augustine, New [Divjak] Letter 22*.2, p. 348, trans. Eno, St. Augustine: Letters
VI, 156.
    33.	Veyne, L’empire gréco-­romain, 119.
    34. Pacianus of Barcelona, Sermo de Paenitentibus 10.3, ed. and trans. C. Granado,
Pacien de Barcélone: Écrits, SC 410 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1995), 138.
    35. I mosaici della basilica di Aquileia, ed. G. Marini (Aquileia: CISCRA Edizioni,
2003), 24–­27 combines magnificent photos and foldouts of the mosaics with a commen-
tary devoid of scholarly value. See esp. C. Sotinel, Identité civique et christianisme: Aquilée
du IIIe au VIe siècle, Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises d’Athènes et de Rome 324 (Rome:
École française de Rome, 2006), 72–­89; and J.-­P. Caillet, L’évergétisme monumental chré­
tien en Italie et à ses marges d’après les pavements de mosaïque (IVe–­VIIe s.), Collection de
l’École française de Rome 175 (Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1993), 123–­41. See now A. Zettler,
Offerenteninschriften auf den frühchristlichen Mosaikfußböden Venetiens und Istriens (Ber-
lin: de Gruyter, 2001), 138–­43; and esp. V. Vuolanto, “Male and Female Euergetism in
Late Antiquity: A Study on Italian and Adriatic Church Floor Mosaics,” in Women,
Wealth and Power in the Roman Empire, ed. P. Setälä et al., Acta Instituti Romani Fin-
landiae 25 (Rome: Finnish Institute, 2002), 245–­302.
    36.	Caillet, L’évergétisme monumental chrétien, 139 discusses the possible meanings
of this inscription, which is rendered opaque by bad grammar.
    37.	Caillet, L’évergétisme monumental chrétien, 141.
    38.	Ibid., 410–­11; and Zettler, Offerenteninschriften, 73–­75, 155–­56. I have adopted
Caillet’s view that the inscription is contemporary with Theodorus’s basilica.
    39. W. Ameling, ed., Inscriptiones Judaicae Orientis, vol. 2, Kleinasien, Texts and
Studies in Ancient Judaism 99 (Tübingen: Siebeck Mohr, 2004), no. 19, pp. 119–­22.
    40.	Ibid., no. 90, pp. 261–­62; T. Rajak, “The Gifts of God at Sardis,” in Jews in a
Graeco-­Roman World, ed. M. Goodman (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998),
229–­39. The date of the Sardis synagogue is disputed: the inscriptions with the distinc-
tive formulae could be considerably later than those in the basilica of Aquileia: see J. Mag-


                                             545
                               notes to pages 40–43


ness, “The Date of the Sardis Synagogue in the Light of the Numismatic Evidence,”
American Journal of Archaeology 109 (2005): 443–­75 at p. 443.
     41.	Sotinel, Identité civique et christianisme, 89–­99.
     42.	Schwartz, Imperialism and Jewish Society, 284–­88. The subject is now superbly
documented and fully discussed with reference to all known synagogues in Inscriptiones
Judaicae Orientis, vol. 1, Eastern Europe, ed. D. Noy, A. Panayatov, and H. Bloedhorn,
Texts and Studies in Ancient Judaism 101 (Tübingen: Siebeck Mohr, 2002); vol. 2, Klei­
nasien; and vol. 3, Syria and Cyprus, ed. D. Noy and H. Bloedhorn, Texts and Studies in
Ancient Judaism 102 (Tübingen: Siebeck Mohr, 2004). For similar mosaic panels in
Christian churches in the East, see R. Haensch, “Le financement de la construction des
églises pendant l’Antiquité tardive et l’évergétisme antique,” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006):
47–­58.
     43. Inscriptiones Judaicae Orientis, 3:139–­46.
     44.	Sotinel, Identité civique et christianisme, 270–­74.
     45.	Caillet, L’évergétisme monumental chrétien, 416, 432–­33, 451–­59.
     46.	Caillet, L’évergétisme monumental chrétien, 372: an inscription on the mosaic of
a baptistery in Emona (Ljubljana).
     47.	I. Schrüfer-­Kolb, Roman Iron Production in Britain: Technological and Socio-­
economic Landscape Development along the Jurassic Ridge, British Archaeological Reports
380 (Oxford: Archaeopress, 2004); R. E. Leader-­Newby, Silver and Society in Late Antiq­
uity: Functions and Meanings of Silver Plate in the Fourth to Seventh Centuries (Aldershot:
Ashgate, 2003), 82–­88.
     48.	E. Magnani, “Almsgiving, donatio pro anima and Eucharistic Offering in the
Early Middle Ages of Western Europe (4th–­9th Century),” in Charity and Giving in
Monotheistic Religions, ed. M. Frenkel and Y. Lev, Studien zur Geschichte und Kultur des
islamischen Orients, n. F. 22 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2009), 111–­21; and idem, “Du don aux
églises au don pour le salut de l’âme en Occident (IVe–­XIe siècle): Le paradigme eucha-
ristique,” in Pratiques de l’eucharistie dans les Églises d’Orient et Occident (Antiquité et
Moyen Âge), ed. N. Bériou, B. Caseau, and D. Rigaux (Paris: Institut d’Études Augustini-
ennes, 2009), 1021–­42.
     49. P. Brown, Poverty and Leadership in the Later Roman Empire, Menahem Stern
Jerusalem Lectures (Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 2002), 16–­26.
     50.	Cyprian, De ecclesiae catholicae unitate 25; De lapsis 6 and 35; De opere et elee­
mosynis 2.9 and 26.
     51.	Cyprian, Letters 22.2, 5.1, 7, 10.5, 14.2. These letters are brilliantly translated and
commented upon by G. W. Clarke, The Letters of St. Cyprian of Carthage, vol. 1, Ancient
Christian Writers 43 (New York: Newman Press, 1984).
     52. G. Schöllgen, Ecclesia Sordida? Zur Frage der sozialen Schichtung frühchristlicher
Gemeinden am Beispiel Karthagos zur Zeit Tertullians, Jahrbuch für Antike und Chris-
tentum: Ergänzungsband 12 (Münster: Aschendorff, 1984).
     53. M. M. Sage, Cyprian, Patristic Monographs Series 1 (Cambridge, MA: Philadel-
phia Patristic Foundation, 1975), 329; H. Chadwick, The Church in Ancient Society: From
Galilee to Gregory the Great (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), 106. See now J. P.
Burns, Cyprian the Bishop (London: Routledge, 2002), 16–­20; C. García Mac Gaw, Le


                                             546
                               notes to pages 43–47


problème du baptême dans le schisme donatiste, Scripta Antiqua 21 (Bordeaux: Ausonius,
2008): 46–­49; and P. Bernardini, Un solo battesimo, una sola chiesa: Il concilio di Carta­
gine del settembre 256 (Bologna: Mulino, 2009), 65–­125.
     54.	Cyprian, De habitu virginum 11.
     55.	Cyprian, De dominica oratione 32; Letter 24.1.
     56.	Cyprian, Letter 62.
     57.	Clarke, The Letters of St. Cyprian 1:165.
     58.	Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 6.43.11.
     59.	E.g., Codex Theodosianus 16.2.14, justifying clerical exemption from trade taxes.
See esp. Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 29–­32; C. Corbo, Paupertas: La legislazione tar­
doantica (Naples: Satura, 2006), 114–­38; and C. Freu, Les figures du pauvre dans les
sources italiennes de l’antiquité tardive (Paris: Boccard, 2007), 174–­77.
     60. Codex Theodosianus 16.2.6; Lizzi Testa, “Privilegi economici e definizione di sta­
tus,” 71.
     61. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 27.2.15, Rolfe, 3:20, Hamilton, 336.
     62.	R. A. Kaster, Guardians of Language: The Grammarian and Society in Late An­
tiquity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), 133.
     63. Council of Serdica, canon 13 [Latin] = 10 [Greek], trans. H. Hess, The Early De­
velopment of Canon Law and the Council of Serdica (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2002), 220, 232. See now P.-­G. Delage, “Le canon 13 de Sardique ou Les inquietudes
d’évêques d’origine modeste,” in Les Pères de l’Église et la voix des pauvres, ed. P.-­G. Delage
(La Rochelle: Histoire et Culture, 2006), 55–­74.
     64. M. R. Salzman, The Making of a Christian Aristocracy: Social and Religious Change
in the Western Roman Empire (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002), 69–­
137, 178–­99. For disagreement on the statistical basis of these conclusions, especially as
they affect the role of women in the conversion of the aristocracy, see R. W. Mathisen,
“The Christianization of the Late Roman Senatorial Order: Circumstances and Scholar-
ship,” International Journal of the Classical Tradition 9 (2002): 257–­78 at pp. 265–­67,
with the rejoinder of Salzman in 12 (2005): 123–­37 and the response of Mathisen in 14
(2007): 123–­47. See also T. D. Barnes, “Statistics and the Conversion of the Roman Ar-
istocracy,” Journal of Roman Studies 85 (1995): 135–­47; and Veyne, Quand notre monde
est devenu chrétien, 185–­97, When Our World Became Christian, 98–­106.
     65. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 1753.1.
     66. Lactantius, Divine Institutes 5.19.32, 6.24.14, trans. A. Bowen and P. Garnsey
(Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2003), 323, 385.
     67.	S. Diefenbach, Römische Erinnerungsräume: Heiligenmemoria und kollektive
Identitäten im Rom des 3. bis 5. Jahrhunderts n. Chr., Millennium-­Studien 11 (Berlin: de
Gruyter, 2007), 38–­80.
     68.	Schwartz, Were the Jews a Mediterranean Society? 18, 31n19.
     69.	E.g., M. T. Griffin, Seneca: A Philosopher in Politics (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1976), 315–­66; J. A. Francis, Subversive Virtue: Asceticism and Authority in the Second-­
Century Pagan World (University Park: Pennsylvania University Press, 1995), 1–­19;
Veyne, L’empire gréco romaine, ch. 11, “Passions, perfection et âme matérielle dans l’utopie
stoïcienne,” 683–­712 at pp. 693–­95.


                                             547
                              notes to pages 48–55


      70. J. Bodel, “From Columbaria to Catacombs: Collective Burial in Pagan and Chris-
 tian Rome,” in Commemorating the Dead: Texts and Artifacts in Context. Studies of Roman,
  Jewish, and Christian Burials, ed. L. Brink and D. Green (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2008), 177–­
  242 at p. 219.
      71.	Ibid., 220.
      72.	Ibid., 224.
      73.	Caillet, L’évergétisme monumental chrétien, 91, 95; see also M. Humphries, Com­
  munities of the Blessed: Social Environment and Religious Change in Northern Italy, AD
  200–­400 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 84–­85.
      74.	Caillet, L’évergétisme monumental chrétien, 80.
      75. Dresken-­Weiland, Sarkophagbestattungen, 94; Repertorium der christlich-­antiken
  Sarkophage, vol. 3, Frankreich, Algerien, Tunesien, ed. B. Christern-­Briesenick (Mainz:
  P. Zabern, 2003), no. 21, p. 21, and plate 11.
      76. Bodel, “From Columbaria to Catacombs,” 222.
      77. K. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change in Late Antiquity
  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008).
      78. K. Cooper, The Fall of the Roman Household (Cambridge: Cambridge University
 Press, 2007).
      79.	Sotinel, Identité civique et christianisme, 67–­71.
      80.	See esp. Potter, The Roman Empire at Bay, 441–581.
      81. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 30.9.1, Rolfe, 3:368, Hamilton, p. 407. For
 a careful study of the administration of Valentinian in action, see Schmidt-­Hofner,
 ­Reagieren und Gestalten.
      82.	See esp. H. C. Brennecke, Hilarius von Poitiers und die Bischofsopposition gegen
Konstantius II: Untersuchungen zur dritten Phase des Arianischen Streites (337–­361),
­Patristische Texte und Studien 26 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1984); D. H. Williams, Ambrose of
 Milan and the End of the Arian-­Nicene Conflicts (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).
      83. J. F. Matthews, Western Aristocracies and Imperial Court, A.D. 364–­425 (Oxford:
  Clarendon Press, 1975), 145–­59.
      84.	N. B. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan: Church and Court in a Christian Capital
  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), 1–­52.
      85.	V. Escribano, “Heresy and Orthodoxy in Fourth Century Hispania: Arianism
  and Priscillianism,” in Hispania in Late Antiquity, 121–­49.


                                      Chapter 3
                                      Amor civicus

      1. Augustine, Sermon 177.1.
      2.	C. Geertz, “Common Sense as a Cultural System,” in Local Knowledge: Further
Essays in Interpretive Anthropology (New York: Basic Books, 1983), 73–­93 at p. 90.
      3. J.-­M. Carrié, “Pratique et idéologie chrétiennes de l’économique (IVe–­VIe siè-
cle),” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 17–­26 at p. 18.



                                           548
                                notes to pages 55–59


      4. J. C. Mann, review of Roman Government’s Response to Crisis, A.D. 235–­337, by
R. MacMullen, Journal of Roman Studies 69 (1979): 191.
      5.	Sozomen, Ecclesiastical History 7.25.
      6. Brown, Power and Persuasion, 41–­61; Lendon, Empire of Honour, 15.
      7. Freu, Les figures du pauvre, 19. It is the same with medieval descriptions of the
“orders” of society: O. Brunner, Land and Lordship: Structures of Governance in Medieval
Austria, trans. H. Kaminsky and J. van Horn Melton (Philadelphia: University of Penn-
sylvania Press, 1992), 329–­33.
      8.	Rilinger, Humiliores-­Honestiores, 278 rightly insists that these vertical links were
stronger than were more general horizontal categorizations, such as that between hones­
tiores and humiliores.
      9. M. Lüthi, The European Folktale: Form and Nature, trans. J. D. Niles (Blooming-
ton: University of Indiana Press, 1982), 56–­58.
     10. Libanius, Oratio 7.12.
     11.	C. Ando, Imperial Ideology and Provincial Loyalty in the Roman Empire (Berke-
ley: University of California Press, 2000), 26.
     12. M. Salzman, On Roman Time: The Codex-­Calendar of 354 and the Rhythms of
Urban Life in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990), figure 13.
     13.	R. Osborne, “Introduction: Roman Poverty in Context,” in Poverty in the Roman
World, 1–­20 at p. 13; E. Gabba, Del buon uso della ricchezza: Saggi di storia economica e
sociale del mondo antico (Milan: Guerini, 1988), 19–­26.
     14. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 31.5.14, Rolfe, 3:416, Hamilton, p. 420.
     15. Barnes, Ammianus Marcellinus, 175–­80.
     16. Lendon, Empire of Honour. For an illuminating comparative treatment, see M. E.
Lewis, “Gift Circulation and Charity in the Han and Roman Empires,” in Rome and
China: Comparative Perspectives on Ancient World Empires, ed. Walter Scheidel (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2009), 121–­36.
     17.	R. Duncan-­Jones, “The Finances of the Younger Pliny,” Papers of the British
School at Rome 33 (1965): 177–­88; S. Mratschek, Divites et praepotentes: Reichtum und
soziale Stellung in der Literatur der Prinzipatszeit, Historia Einzelschriften 70 (Stuttgart:
F. Steiner, 1993).
     18. Zosimus, Historia nova 2.38.1, ed. L. Mendelssohn, Zosimi comitis et exadvocati
fisci Historia nova (Leipzig: Teubner, 1887), 96, trans. R. T. Ridley, Zosimus: New History
(Canberra: American Association of Byzantine Studies, 1982), 40; Anonymus de rebus
bellicis 2.1.
     19. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 27.11.2, Rolfe, 3:74, Hamilton, p. 345.
     20.	Claudian, On the Consuls Probinus and Olybrius 42–­47, ed. and trans. M. Plat-
nauer, in Claudian, Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1956), 1:4–­6.
     21.	E. Bickerman, Four Strange Books of the Bible (New York: Schocken, 1967), 163.
     22. P. Veyne, Le pain et le cirque: Sociologie historique d’un pluralisme politique (Paris:
Le Seuil, 1976), 45, trans. B. Pierce, Bread and Circuses: Historical Sociology and Political
Pluralism (London: Allen Lane Penguin, 1990), 20.



                                             549
                              notes to pages 57–61


    23. G. Arena, “Il ‘potere di guarire’: L’attività medica fra politica e cultura nella
tarda antichità,” in Poveri ammalati e ammalati poveri: Dinamiche socio-­economiche,
trasformazioni culturali e misure assistenziali nell’Occidente romano in età tardoantica,
ed. R. Marino, C. Molè, and A. Pinzone (Catania: Edizioni del Prisma, 2006), 387–­424
at p. 422; J. Kabiersch, Untersuchungen zum Begriff der Philanthropia bei dem Kaiser Ju­
lian, Klassisch-­Philosophische Studien 21 (Wiesbaden: Harassowitz, 1960).
    24. A. Parkin, “‘You do him no service’: An Exploration of Pagan Almsgiving,” in
Poverty in the Roman World, 60–­82 at p. 65.
    25.	Ibid., 68; Libanius, Oration 2.30, 30.20.
    26.	Veyne, “Existait-­il une classe moyenne en ces temps lointains?” in L’empire gréco-­
romaine, 117–­62 at pp. 142–­48.
    27.	Veyne, Le pain et le cirque, 16, 164n2, English trans., p. 6.
    28. G. Woolf, “Writing Poverty in Rome,” in Poverty in the Roman World, 83–­99 at
pp. 84–­85.
    29. Parkin, “‘You do him no service,’” 69–­70.
    30. M. Albana, “Archiatri . . . honeste obsequi tenuioribus malint quam turpiter servire
divitibus (CTH 13,3,8),” in Poveri ammalati e ammalati poveri, 253–­79 at pp. 264–­66.
    31. Libanius, Oration 46.21.
    32. L. Robert and J. Robert, “Bulletin épigraphique,” Revue des études grecques 97
(1984): 419–­522, no. 468 at p. 500.
    33. G.H.R. Horsley, New Documents Illustrating Early Christianity (Sydney, NSW:
Ancient History Documentary Research Centre, 1982), 2:55–­56.
    34. The Story of Apollonius King of Tyre 12.9, trans. G. N. Sandy, in Collected Ancient
Greek Novels, ed. B. P. Reardon (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989), 744.
    35. W. Robins, “Romance and Renunciation at the Turn of the Fifth Century,” Jour­
nal of Early Christian Studies 8 (2000): 531–­57 at pp. 548–­54.
    36. B. Shaw, “‘A Wolf by the Ears’: M. I. Finley’s Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideology
in Historical Context,” introduction to M. I. Finley, Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideol­
ogy (Princeton: M. Wiener, 1998), 3–­74 at pp. 43–­49.
    37.	E. M. Shtaerman and M. K. Trofimova, La schiavitú nell’Italia imperiale: I–­III
secolo (Rome: Riuniti, 1975), 199.
    38. Porphyry, Letter to Marcella 35, ed. A. Nauck, Porphyrii philosophi Platonici
opuscula selecta (Leipzig: Teubner, 1886), 296.
    39.	S. Knoch, Sklavenfürsorge im Römischen Reich: Formen und Motive, Sklaverei—­
Knechtschaft—­Zwangsarbeit 2 (Hildesheim: G. Olms, 2005), 240–­50. See now Y. Rivière,
“Une cruauté digne des féroces barbares? À propos du De emendatione servorum (c.Th.
IX.12),” in Le Code Théodosien: Diversité des approches et nouvelles perspectives, edited by
Sylvie Crogiel-­Pétrequin and Pierre Jaillette, Collection de l’École française de Rome 412
(Rome: École française de Rome, 2009), 171–­208.
    40.	Council of Elvira, canon 5, in Acta et symbola conciliorum quae quarto saecula
habita sunt, 6.
    41. Recueil des inscriptions chrétiennes de la Gaule, vol. 15, Viennoise du Nord, ed.
F. Descombes (Paris: CNRS, 1985), 197–­98, see esp. the early seventh-­century group
from Briord, nos. 263–­69, pp. 676–­99.


                                           550
                                 notes to pages 61–65


     42. A. J. Festugière, La révélation d’Hermès Trismégiste, vol. 2, Le Dieu cosmique
(Paris: Belles Lettres, 1981), 301–­9, on philanthropia in the Hellenistic age.
     43. Augustine, Enarrationes in Psalmos 83.7.
     44. Augustine, Erfurt Sermon 4.5, ed. I. Schiller, D. Weber, and C. Weidmann,
“Sechs neue Augustinuspredigten: Teil 2 mit Edition dreier Sermones zum Thema Al-
mosen,” Wiener Studien 122 (2009): 1–­34 at p. 104.
     45. The classic statement is that of Veyne, Le pain et le cirque; see esp. O. Murray, in-
troduction to the English translation, Bread and Circuses, vii–­xxii at pp. xx. Linked to the
Greco-­Roman city, euergetism played a prominent role in what was “the most successful
and long-­lasting form of social organization that man has yet invented.”
     46. Inscriptiones Christianae Italiae, vol. 1, Volsinii: Regio VII, ed. C. Carletti (Bari:
Edipuglia, 1985), nos. 2 and 18 at pp. 3 and 20.
     47. L’Année épigraphique 1990, no. 211, at pp. 65–­67, admirably commented by
J. Harries, “Favor populi: Pagans, Christians and Public Entertainment in Late Antique
Italy,” in “Bread and Circuses,” 125–­41 at pp. 126–­27.
     48. Harries, “Favor populi,” 128.
     49. A. Giardina, “Amor civicus: Formule e immagini dell’evergetismo romano nella
tradizione epigrafica,” in La terza età dell’epigrafia, ed. A. Donati (Faenza: Fratelli Lega,
1988), 67–­87; P. Le Roux, “L’amor patriae dans les cités sous l’empire romain,” in Idéolo­
gies et valeurs civiques dans le monde romain: Hommage à Claude Lepelley, ed. H. Ingle-
bert (Nanterre: Picard, 2002), 143–­61.
     50.	C. Witschel, “Statuen auf spätantike Platzanlagen in Italien und Afrika,” in Sta­
tuen in der Spätantike, ed. F. A. Bauer and Witschel (Wiesbaden: Reichert, 2007), 113–­
69, esp. p. 124.
     51. Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum, vol. 8, ed. G. Wilmanns and T. Mommsen
(Berlin: G. Reimer, 1881), no. 5366.
     52. Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine.
     53.	C. Hugoniot, Les spectacles de l’Afrique romaine: Une culture officielle municipale
sous l’empire romain (Lille: Atelier National de Réproduction de Thèses, 2003).
     54. G. A. Cecconi, Governo imperiale e élites dirigenti nell’Italia tardoantica: Pro­
blemi di storia politico-­amministrativa (270–­476 d.C.) Biblioteca di Athenaeum 24 (Como:
New Press, 1994); E. Savino, Campania Tardoantica (284–­604 d.C.) (Bari: Edipuglia,
2005).
     55. Liebeschuetz, The Decline and Fall of the Roman City, 29–­103.
     56.	Cecconi, Governo imperiale e élites dirigenti, 141–­56. On a parallel development
in the eastern empire, see D. Slootjes, The Governor and His Subjects in the Later Roman
Empire, Mnemosyne Supplements 275 (Leiden: Brill, 2006), 77–­97.
     57.	See V. Malineau, “Le théâtre dans les cités de l’Italie tardo-­antique,” in Les cités de
l’Italie tardo-­antique (IVe–­VIe siècle): Institutions, économie, société, culture et religion, ed.
M. Ghilardi, C. J. Goddard, and P. Porena, Collection de l’École française de Rome 369
(Rome: École française de Rome, 2006), 187–­203 on the drastic recession of theaters
in Italy.
     58. Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine, 295 (a slender list of buildings and
repairs).


                                               551
                              notes to pages 66–70


    59. Hugoniot, Les spectacles, 590–­92.
    60. Augustine, Sermo Denis 24.13; Dolbeau Sermon 6.13.222–­26, in Vingt-­six ser­
mons au peuple d’Afrique, 466–­67.
    61. Hugoniot, Les spectacles, 113–­18.
    62.	Inglebert, Histoire de la civilisation romaine, 63–­67 is the most trenchant short
summary of this issue.
    63. Gros, “La ville comme symbole,” 187–­209; Jacques, Le privilège de liberté, 379–­
434.
    64.	C. Roueché, “Acclamations in the Late Roman Empire: New Evidence from
Aphrodisias,” Journal of Roman Studies 74 (1984): 181–­99; C. Hugoniot, “Les acclama-
tions dans la vie municipale tardive et la critique augustinienne des violences lors des
spectacles africains,” in Idéologies et valeurs civiques, 179–­87.
    65. Hugoniot, Les spectacles, 97.
    66. A. Zuiderhoek, “The Icing on the Cake: Benefactors, Economics and Public
Building in Roman Asia Minor,” in Patterns in the Economy of Roman Asia Minor, ed.
S. Mitchell and C. Kaksari (Swansea: Classical Press of Wales, 2005), 167–­86; Hugoniot,
Les spectacles, 825.
    67. Borg and Witschel, “Veränderungen im Repräsentationsverhalten,” 97–­99.
    68. Hugoniot, Les spectacles, 393–­95; K.M.D. Dunbabin, The Mosaics of Roman
North Africa: Studies in Iconography and Patronage (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978),
67–­68, with plate xxii, figure 53.
    69.	R. J. Rowland, “The ‘Very Poor’ and the Grain Dole at Rome and Oxyrhynchus,”
Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 21 (1976): 69–­73; J.-­M. Carrié, “Les distribu-
tions alimentaires dans les cités de l’empire romain tardif,” Mélanges de l’École française
de Rome: Antiquité 87 (1975): 995–­1101.
    70. Hugoniot, Les spectacles, 196–­200.
    71. The groundbreaking study remains Mazzarino, Aspetti sociali del quarto secolo,
217–­47.
    72.	On the development of the Roman annona, see in general Garnsey, Famine and
Food Supply in the Graeco-­Roman World, 218–­68.
    73. P. Garnsey, “Mass Diet and Nutrition in the City of Rome,” in Cities, Peasants
and Food in Classical Antiquity: Essays in Social and Economic History (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1998), 226–­52; L. V. Rutgers et al., “Stable Isotope Data from
the Early Christian Catacombs of Ancient Rome: New Insights into the Dietary Habits
of Rome’s Early Christians,” Journal of Archaeological Science 36 (2009): 1127–­34.
    74. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 28.4.32, Rolfe, 3:158, Hamilton, p. 63; Am-
brose, De Officiis 3.45–­51.
    75.	C. Virlouvet, Tessera frumentaria: Les procédés de la distribution du blé public à
Rome à la fin de la République et au début de l’Empire, Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises
d’Athènes et de Rome 296 (Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1995), 243–­62; D. Vera, “Giustiniano,
Procopio e l’approvvigionamento di Costantantinopoli,” in Politica, retorica e simbolismo
del primato: Roma e Costantinopoli (secoli IV–­VII), ed. F. Elia (Catania: Spazio Libri,
2004), 9–­44.



                                           552
                               notes to pages 70–75


    76. G. Woolf, “Food, Poverty and Patronage: The Significance of the Epigraphy of
the Roman Alimentary Schemes in Early Imperial Italy,” Papers of the British School at
Rome 58 (1990): 197–­228 at p. 215; C. Virlouvet, La plèbe frumentaire dans les té­
moignages épigraphiques: Essai d’histoire sociale et administrative du peuple de Rome an­
tique, Collection de l’École française de Rome 414 (Rome: École française de Rome,
2009), 187–­270.
    77. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 27.3.5, Rolfe, 3:14–­16, Hamilton, p. 335; see
now Lizzi Testa, Senatori, popolo, papi, 77–­85.
    78.	Inglebert, Histoire de la civilisation romaine, 483.


                                       Chapter 4
                                   “Treasure in Heaven”

     1. A. Cameron, Christianity and the Rhetoric of Empire: The Development of Chris­
tian Discourse (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), 79.
     2. Based on the calculations of A. Mandouze, Saint Augustin: L’aventure de la rai­
son et de la grâce (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1968), 624–­25.
     3. Augustine, Erfurt Sermon 4.6, p. 32.
     4.	Ibid.
     5.	Veyne, Le pain et le cirque, 383–­98.
     6. J. T. Peña, “The Mobilization of State Olive Oil in Roman Africa: The Evidence
of the Late Fourth-­Century Ostraca from Carthage,” in Carthage Papers, ed. Peña et al.,
Journal of Roman Archaeology Supplement 28 (Portsmouth, RI: Journal of Roman Ar-
chaeology, 1998), 117–­238.
     7. Augustine, Enarrationes in Psalmos 149.9.
     8.	See now L. Lugaresi, “Regio aliena: L’atteggiamento della chiesa verso i luoghi di
spettacolo nelle città tardoantiche,” and N. Belayche, “Des lieux pour le ‘profane’ dans
l’empire tardo-­antique? Les fêtes entre koinônia sociale et espaces de rivalités religieuses,”
Antiquité tardive 15 (2007) [= Jeux et spectacles dans l’Antiquité tardive]: 21–­34 and 35–­
46. Veyne, “Païens et charité chrétienne devant les gladiateurs,” in L’empire gréco-­romaine,
545–­631.
     9. John of Ephesus, Ecclesiastical History 5.17, trans. R. Payne Smith (Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 1860), 226; see P. Brown, The Rise of Western Christendom: Triumph
and Diversity, A.D. 200–­1000, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 2003), 170–­72.
    10. A. D. Momigliano, “Introduction: Christianity and the Decline of the Roman
Empire,” in The Conflict between Paganism and Christianity, 9.
    11. K. M. Hopkins, Death and Renewal (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1983), 9.
    12. L. B. Namier, The Structure of Politics at the Accession of George III, 2nd ed. (Lon-
don: Macmillan, 1957), 162–­72.
    13. Concilium in Causa Apiarii, canon 15, Concilia Africae, a. 345–­a. 525, ed.
C. Munier, CCSL 149 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1974), 105.



                                             553
                              notes to pages 76–85


    14. J. Gernet, Buddhism in Chinese Society: An Economic History from the Fifth to the
Tenth Centuries (New York: Columbia University Press, 1995), 241.
    15. Jerome, Letter 22.11–­25 (to Paula on Eustochium).
    16. Jerome, Letter 66.5–­11 (to Pammachius).
    17. P. Brown, The Body and Society: Men, Women and Sexual Renunciation in Early
Christianity, reprint with new introduction (New York: Columbia University Press,
2008), 341–­86.
    18. Artemidorus, Oneirocriticon 3.53, trans. R. J. White, The Interpretation of Dreams
(Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes Press, 1975), 171.
    19. Lactantius, Divine Institutes 6.11.18 and 28 with 6.12.2, Bowen and Garnsey,
pp. 353 and 355.
    20. Freu, Les figures du pauvre, 390–­418.
    21. G. Himmelfarb, “The Culture of Poverty,” in The Victorian City: Images and
Realities, ed. H. J. Dyos and M. Wolff (London: Routledge; Boston: Kegan Paul, 1973),
2:726.
    22. Prudentius, Peristephanon 2.141–­81, ed. and trans. H. J. Thomson, Loeb Classi-
cal Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1961), 2:116–­18.
    23. Ambrose, Letter 73 (18).16.
    24. Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 45–­48.
    25.	Scheidel, “Stratification, Deprivation and Quality of Life,” 44.
    26. Freu, Les figures du pauvre, 264–­68.
    27.	S.v. “ebyôn,” Theologisches Wörterbuch zum Alten Testament, ed. G. J. Botterweck
and H. Ringgren (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1973), 1:27–­43; trans. J. T. Willis, Theological
Dictionary of the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1974), 1:27–­41.
    28.	See in general Weinfeld, Social Justice in Israel and in the Ancient Near East.
    29. Jerome, Commentary on Isaiah 2.5, PL 24:79C.
    30. Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum, vol. 10, Inscriptiones, Bruttiorum, Lucaniae,
Campaniae, Siciliae, Sardiniae Latinae, ed. T. Mommsen (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1883),
no. 1194; Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 70–­73.
    31.	R. MacMullen, “What Difference Did Christianity Make?” Historia 35 (1986):
322–­43, now in Changes in the Roman Empire, 142–­53.
    32.	Y. Duval and L. Pietri, “Évergétisme et épigraphie dans l’Occident chrétien
(IVe–­VIe s.),” in Actes du Xe Congrès international d’épigraphie grecque et chrétienne, ed.
M. Christol and O. Masson (Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne, 1997), 371–­96 at p. 371.
    33. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 10.
    34. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 1062b.5–­8.
    35. J. Parry, “The Gift, the Indian Gift and the ‘Indian Gift,’” Man, n.s., 21 (1986):
453–­73 at p. 466.
    36. M. Bloch and J. Parry, introduction to Money and the Morality of Exchange, ed.
Parry and Bloch (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 1–­32 at p. 2.
    37. Dante, Inferno 7.122, derived from Virgil, Aeneid 6.436.
    38.	S. Mrozek, “Les phénomènes économiques dans les métaphores de l’Antiquité
tardive,” Eos 72 (1984): 393–­407.



                                           554
                              notes to pages 86–90


    39. G. A. Anderson, “Redeem Your Soul by the Giving of Alms: Sin, Debt and the
‘Treasury of Merit’ in Early Jewish and Christian Tradition,” Letter and Spirit 3 (2007):
36–­69; idem, Sin: A History (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009), 135–­51,
164–­88.
    40. Augustine, Sermon 66.5; see R. Finn, Almsgiving in the Later Roman Empire:
Christian Promotion and Practice, 313–­450 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 47.
    41. Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine, 2:347–­352 (competing families at Lepcis
Magna).
    42.	See now S. Giglio, “Il ‘munus’ della pretura a Roma e a Costantinopoli nel tardo
impero romano,” Antiquité tardive 15 (2007): 65–­88.
    43.	C. Sotinel, “Le don chrétien et ses retombées sur l’économie dans l’Antiquité tar-
dive,” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 105–­16 at p. 115, translated as “The Christian Gift
and Its Economic Impact in Late Antiquity,” in Church and Society, article IX.
    44. J. P. Dolan, The Immigrant Church: New York’s Irish and German Catholics, 1815–­
1865 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1975), 165–­67.
    45. L. R. Iannacone, “Skewness Explained: A Rational Choice Model of Religious
Giving,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 36 (1997): 141–­57.
    46.	On the tituli of Rome, see now Diefenbach, Römische Erinnerungsräume, 379–­
400. On the basilica Constantia in Arles (possibly built in the early 420s by the military
commander and later emperor Constantius), see M. J. Heijmans, Arles durant l’Antiquité
tardive: De la duplex Arelas à l’urbs Genesii, Collection de l’École française de Rome 324
(Rome: École française de Rome, 2004), 193–­94. For a list of lay patrons who subscribed
to the rebuilding of the main basilica at Narbonne in 445, see esp. H.-­I. Marrou, “Le dos-
sier épigraphique de l’évêque Rusticus de Narbonne,” Rivista di archeologia cristiana 3–­4
(1970): 331–­49. The list was carved on the lintel of the main entrance. For Rheims, see
Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 61 (the church built by Jovinus, a Master of
the Cavalry and consul, in 367, which in this period bore his name). On Ambrose’s pri-
vate foundation of a church in Milan that was immediately known as the basilica Ambro­
siana, see McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 209–­11.
    47.	V. Fiocchi Nicolai, “Evergetismo ecclesiastico e laico nelle iscrizioni paleocris-
tiane del Lazio,” in Historiam pictura refert: Miscellanea in onore di Padre Alejandro Recio
Veganzones O.F.M., Studi di Antichità Cristiana 51 (Vatican: Pontificio Istituto di Ar-
cheologia Cristiana, 1994), 237–­52 at pp. 240–­41.
    48. G. Algazi, “Introduction: Doing Things with Gifts,” in Negotiating the Gift: Pre-­
Modern Figurations of Exchange, ed. Algazi, V. Groebner, and B. Jussen (Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 2003), 9–­27 at p. 10.
    49. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 997; Finn, Almsgiving, 198–­201.
    50. J. Kieschnick, The Impact of Buddhism on Chinese Material Culture (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2003), 211.
    51. H.-­I. Marrou, Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique: Retractatio, Biblio-
thèque de l’École française d’Athènes et de Rome 145 (Paris: Boccard, 1949), 690. See
now the pertinent remarks of J.-­M. Carrié, “Nihil habens praeter quod ipso die vestieba­
tur: Comment définir le seuil de la pauvreté à Rome?” in Consuetudinis amor: Fragments



                                           555
                                notes to pages 90–97


d’histoire romaine (IIe–­VIe siècles) offerts à Jean-­Pierre Callu, ed. F. Chausson and É. Wolff
(Rome: Bretschneider, 2003), 71–­102 at pp. 77–­84.


                                        Chapter 5
                                        Symmachus

     1. Expositio totius mundi et gentium, ed. and trans. J. Rougé, SC 124 (Paris: Le Cerf,
1966), 192.
     2. Augustine, Contra Secundinum 3. The Anician palace has recently been un-
earthed: see H. Broise, M. Dewailly, and V. Jolivet, “Scoperta di un palazzo tardoantico
nella piazzale di Villa Medici,” Rendiconti: Pontificia Accademia Romana di Archeologia
72 (1999–­2000): 1–­17.
     3.	On Probus in general, see esp. Lizzi Testa, Senatori, popolo, papi, 306–­19.
     4. Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae, no. 1265, 1:281.
     5. H. Niquet, Monumenta virtutum titulique: Senatorische Selbstdarstellung im
spätantiken Rom im Spiegel der epigraphischen Denkmäler (Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2000),
25–­35 and tables of inscriptions on pp. 270–­81.
     6.	C. Badel, La noblesse de l’empire romain: Les masques et la vertu (Seyssel: Champ
Vallon, 2005); B. Näf, Senatorisches Standesbewusstsein in spätrömischer Zeit, Paradosis
40 (Freiburg, Switzerland: Universitätsverlag, 1995).
     7. Badel, La noblesse de l’empire romain, 188.
     8.	Ibid., 12, 65–­105.
     9. Jacques, “L’ordine senatorio attraverso la crisi del III secolo,” 135.
    10. Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 2:555. For the marriages of the Anicii, see most
recently A. van den Hoek, “Peter, Paul and a Consul: Recent Discoveries in African Red
Slip Ware,” Zeitschrift für Antikes Christentum 9 (2005): 197–­246 at pp. 210–­12 and the
family tree on p. 230.
    11.	Cameron, “The Antiquity of the Symmachi”; Jacques, “L’ordine senatorio attra-
verso la crisi del III secolo,” 108–­20.
    12. Lizza Testa, Senatori, popolo, papi, 381–­99. See now the trenchant conclusions
of John Weisweiler, State Aristocracy: Resident Senators and Absent Emperors in Late An­
tique Rome, c. 320–­400 (D. Phil, Cambridge, 2011).
    13. Meslin, La fête des kalendes de janvier, 21–­22.
    14. El disco de Teodosio, ed. M. Almagro-­Gorbea, Estudios del Gabinete de Antigüe-
dades 5 (Madrid: Real Academia de la Historia, 2000). Leader-­Newby, Silver and Society
in Late Antiquity, 48–­49 provides a convincing reinterpretation of the making and func-
tion of this disc.
    15. Ausonius, Gratiarum actio 5.21–­22. See chap. 12, n. 12.
    16.	Symmachus, Oratio 6.1.
    17. The letters of Symmachus are now edited with a French translation by J. P. Callu,
Symmaque: Lettres, 4 vols. (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1972–­2002). Exhaustive commentary
is provided in a Commento storico al libro . . . dell’epistolario di Q. Aurelio Simmaco (Pisa:
Giardini, 1981–­2002)—­so far we have vol. 2, G. A. Cecconi (2002); vol. 3, A. Pellizzari


                                             556
                              notes to pages 97–100


(1998); vol. 4, A. Marcone (1987); vol. 5, P. Rivolta Tiberga (1992); vol. 6, Marcone
(1983); and vol. 9, S. Roda (1981); and, for the Relationes of Symmachus, D. Vera, Com­
mento storico alle “Relationes” di Quinto Aurelio Simmaco (Pisa: Giardini, 1981). See now
M. R. Salzman and M. Roberts, The Letters of Symmachus: Book 1 (Atlanta, Ga.: Society
of Biblical Literature, 2011), with an excellent introduction as a commentary.
     18.	C. Sogno, Q. Aurelius Symmachus: A Political Biography (Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 2006), 60–­63.
     19.	Olympiodorus, History: Fragment 41.1–­2, pp. 204–­6; well commented by Cam-
eron, “The Antiquity of the Symmachi,” 493–­98. See also Matthews, Western Aristocracies
and Imperial Court, 12–­31.
     20.	Sogno, Symmachus, 1–­30; A. Cameron, The Last Pagans of Rome (Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 2011).
     21.	Symmachus, Letter 1.52 (AD 376), Callu, 1:114; see Lizzi Testa, Senatori, popolo,
papi, 297.
     22. A. Chastagnol, “Le Sénat dans l’oeuvre de Symmaque,” in Colloque genèvois sur
Symmaque, ed. F. Paschoud (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1986), 73–­92 at p. 75. Lizzi Testa, Se­
natori, popolo, papi, 355–­72 offers a substantially new analysis of the wider political aims
and ideals of Symmachus.
     23. Lizzi Testa, Senatori, popolo, papi, 361–­64.
     24.	Symmachus, Oratio 6.1.
     25.	Symmachus, Oratio 7.4.
     26. Baldini Lippolis, La domus tardoantica, 267–­68; N. Christie, From Constantine
to Charlemagne: An Archaeology of Italy, AD 300–­800 (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2006), 240.
     27.	Symmachus, Letter 1.7.1, Callu, 1:71.
    28. D. Vera, “Simmaco e le sue proprietà: Struttura e funzionamento di un patri­
monio aristocratico del IV secolo d.C.,” in Colloque genèvois sur Symmaque, 231–­76 at
pp. 237–­42.
     29.	Symmachus, Letter 1.1.5, Callu, 1:62; A. Chastagnol, “Un scandale du vin à
Rome sous le Bas-­Empire: L’affaire du Préfet Orfitus,” Annales 5 (1950): 166–­83.
     30.	Symmachus, Letter 1.3.4, Callu, 1:67.
     31. M. R. Salzman, “Travel and Communication in The Letters of Symmachus,” in
Travel, Communication and Geography in Late Antiquity: Sacred and Profane, ed. L. Ellis
and F. L. Kidner (Aldershot: Variorum, 2004), 81–­94 at pp. 87, 92; idem, “Symmachus
and His Father: Patriarchy and Patrimony in the Late Roman Senatorial Elite,” in Le
trasformazioni delle “élites” in età tardoantica, 357–­75 at pp. 368–­72.
     32. P. Arthur, Romans in Northern Campania: Settlement and Land-­Use around the
Massico and the Garigliano Basin, Archaeological Monographs of the British School at
Rome 1 (London: British School at Rome, 1991), 89–­94.
     33.	Symmachus, Letters 1.11.3, Callu, 1:77 and 2.60.2, Callu, 1:195.
     34. The best introduction in English to this much-­studied topic remains Matthews,
“The Letters of Symmachus.” See also S. Roda, “Polifunzionalità della lettera commenda-
ticia: Teoria e prassi nell’epistolario simmachiano,” in Colloque genèvois sur Symmaque, 177–­
207; Smith, “‘Restored Utility, Eternal City’”; M. R. Salzman, “Symmachus and the ‘Bar-
barian’ Generals,” Historia 55 (2006): 352–­67. See now Cameron, Last Pagans, 366–­82.


                                            557
                              notes to pages 100–107


    35.	Sogno, Symmachus, 71–­85.
    36. Matthews, “The Letters of Symmachus,” 62.
    37.	Symmachus, Letter 9.141, Callu, 4:82.
    38.	Symmachus, Letter 2.35, Callu, 1:177.
    39. É. Rebillard, “Augustin et le rituel épistolaire de l’élite sociale et culturelle de son
temps: Éléments pour une analyse processuelle des relations de l’évêque et de la cité dans
l’Antiquité tardive,” in L’évêque dans la cité du IVe au Ve siècle, 127–­52.
    40. s.v. “pagan,” Late Antiquity: A Guide to the Postclassical World, 625. Cameron,
Last Pagans, 14–­25 is a useful discussion.
    41.	Symmachus, Letter 1.64.1, Callu, 1:121–­22. See esp. Ebbeler and Sogno, “Reli-
gious Identity and the Politics of Patronage,” 236; M. R. Salzman, “Symmachus’ Ideal of
Secular Friendship,” in Les frontières du profane, 247–­72.
    42.	C. J. Goddard, “Les formes festives de l’allégeance au Prince en Italie centrale,
sous le règne de Constantin: Un suicide religieux?” Mélanges de l’École française de Rome:
Antiquité 114 (2002): 1025–­88.
    43. Barnes, “Statistics and the Conversion of the Roman Aristocracy.”
    44.	S. Mazzarino, “La propaganda senatoriale nel tardo imperio,” Doxa 4 (1951):
121–­48; P. Brown, “Dalla ‘plebs romana’ alla ‘plebs Dei’: Aspetti della cristianizzazione
di Roma,” in Governanti e intellettuali: Popolo di Roma e popolo di Dio, I–­VI secolo, Pas-
satopresente 2 (Turin: Giapichelli, 1982), 123–­45 at pp. 126–­28. See now esp. P. F. Mit-
tag, Alte Köpfe in neuen Händen: Urheber und Funktion der Kontorniaten, Antiquitas
3:38 (Bonn: Habelt, 1999), 180–­226; and Cameron, Last Pagans, 691–­94.
    45.	R. Lizzi Testa, “Christian Emperor, Vestal Virgins and Priestly Colleges: Recon-
sidering the End of Roman Paganism,” Antiquité tardive 15 (2007): 251–­62 at pp. 254–­
56; Cameron, Last Pagans, 33–­51.
    46. Ambrose, Letter 17.9, trans. J.W.H.G. Liebeschuetz (with C. Hill), Ambrose of
Milan: Political Letters and Speeches (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2006), 66.
See esp. Lizzi Testa, “Christian Emperor, Vestal Virgins,” 258; and R. M. Errington,
Roman Imperial Policy from Julian to Theodosius (Chapel Hill: University of North Caro-
lina Press, 2006), 200–­204.
    47.	Sogno, Symmachus, 49.
    48.	Symmachus, Relatio 3, translated by R. H. Barrow, Prefect and Emperor: The Re-
lationes of Symmachus, A.D. 384 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973), 34–­47; and now by
Liebeschuetz, Ambrose of Milan, 71–­78. Outstandingly the best commentary is provided
by Vera, Commento storico alle “Relationes” di Quinto Aurelio Simmaco, 12–­53.
    49. Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae, no. 4934; A. D. Nock, “A diis electa: A Chapter
in the Religious History of the Third Century,” Harvard Theological Review 23 (1930):
251–­74 at p. 273, now in Essays on Religion and the Ancient World, ed. Z. Stewart (Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1972), 1:252–­70.
    50.	Symmachus, Letter 1.46.2, Callu, 1:109.
    51.	Symmachus, Relatio 3.16, Barrow, p. 45.
    52.	Symmachus, Relatio 3.8 and 3.9, Barrow, pp. 39 and 41.
    53. M. Edwards, “The Beginnings of Christianization,” in The Cambridge Compan­
ion to the Age of Constantine, 137–­56 at pp. 141–­42.


                                             558
                             notes to pages 107–110


     54.	Symmachus, Relatio 3.3, Barrow, p. 37.
     55. P. J. Coveney, introduction to France in Crisis, 1620–­1675, ed. Coveney (Totowa,
NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1977), 43.
     56. Lizzi Testa, Senatori, popolo, papi, 447–­54; see Aurea Roma: Dalla città pagana
alla città cristiana, ed. S. Ensoli and E. La Rocca (Rome: Bretschneider, 2000), 462–­63.
     57. A. D. Nock, “The Emperor’s Divine Comes,” Journal of Roman Studies 37 (1947):
102–­16, now in Essays on Religion and the Ancient World, 653–­75.
     58.	C. Roueché, “The Image of Victory: New Evidence from Ephesus,” Travaux et
mémoires 14: Mélanges Gilbert Dagron, ed. V. Déroche (Paris: Boccard, 2002), 527–­46,
esp. pp. 541–­44.
     59. Lizzi Testa, “Christian Emperor, Vestal Virgins,” 260.
     60. Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae, no. 4269. See Cameron, Last Pagans, 143.
     61.	Cecconi, Governo imperiale e élites dirigenti, 141–­56.
     62.	C. J. Goddard, “The Evolution of Pagan Sanctuaries in Late Antique Italy (Fourth–­
Sixth Centuries A.D.): A New Administrative and Legal Framework: A Paradox,” in Les
cités de l’Italie tardo-­antique (IVe–­VIe siècle), 281–­308; and idem, “Au coeur du dialogue
entre païens et chrétiens: L’‘adventus’ des sénateurs dans les cités de l’Antiquité tardive,”
in Pagans and Christians in the Roman Empire (IVth–­VIth Century A.D.): The Breaking
of a Dialogue, Proceedings of the International Conference at the Monastery of Bosé,
October 2008, ed. P. Brown and R. Lizzi Testa (Münster: Lit, 2011), 371–­400.
     63. D. E. Trout, “Lex and iussio: The Feriale Campanum and Christianity in the
Theodosian Age,” in Law, Society, and Authority in Late Antiquity, ed. R. W. Mathisen
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), 162–­78. See now Cameron, Last Pagans, 59.


                                      Chapter 6
                                   Avidus civicae gratiae

      1.	On the overall population of fourth-­century Rome as this can be discovered
from official documents on the annona, the groundbreaking study remains Mazzarino,
Aspetti sociali del quarto secolo, 217–­47. No consensus has been reached: see W. V. Harris,
introduction to The Transformations of Vrbs Roma in Late Antiquity, ed. Harris, Journal
of Roman Archaeology: Supplementary Series 33 (Portsmouth, RI: Journal of Roman
Archaeology, 1999), 13.
      2.	On the development of the Roman annona, see in general Garnsey, Famine and
Food Supply in the Greco-­Roman World, 218–­68. The sheer scale and complexity of this
undertaking is studied in all its aspects in Nourrir la plèbe: Actes du colloque tenu à Genève
les 28. et 29. IX. 1989 en hommage à Denis Van Berchem, ed. A. Giovannini, Schweize­
rische Beiträge zur Altertumswissenschaft 22 (Basel: F. Reinhardt, 1991); on pork, see
S.J.B. Barnish, “Pigs, Plebeians and Potentes: Rome’s Economic Hinterland, c. 350–­600
A.D.,” Papers of the British School at Rome 55 (1987): 157–­85; on oil from Carthage, see
Peña, “The Mobilization of State Olive Oil in Roman Africa.”
      3. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 19.10.1–­4, Rolfe, 1:522–­24, Hamilton, pp.
177–­78.


                                            559
                            notes to pages 111–116


      4. Cosmographia 1.25, ed. A. Riese, Geographi Latini Minores (Heilbronn: Hein-
ninger, 1878), 83. See now R. Lizzi Testa, “Insula ipsa Libanus Almae Veneris nuncu­
patur: Culti, celebrazioni, sacerdoti pagani a Roma, tra IV e VI secolo,” in Istituzioni,
carismi ed esercizio del potere (IV–­VI secolo d.C.), ed. G. Bonamente and R. Lizzi Testa
(Bari: Edipuglia 2010), at pp. 273–­76.
      5.	Vera, “Giustiniano, Procopio e l’approvvigionamento di Costantantinopoli,”
9–­44.
      6.	Virlouvet, Tessera frumentaria, 243–­62.
      7. Garnsey, “Mass Diet and Nutrition in the City of Rome.”
      8.	Symmachus, Relatio 18.3, Barrow, p. 98; see Vera, Commento storico alle “Relatio­
nes” di Quinto Aurelio Simmaco, 135–­42; E. Lo Cascio, “Canon frumentarius, suarius,
vinarius: Stato e privati nell’approvvigionamento dell’Vrbs,” in Transformations of Vrbs
Roma, 163–­82.
      9. Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 693.
    10.	On the Rome of Symmachus, see esp. N. Purcell, “The Populace of Rome in
Late Antiquity: Problems of Classification and Historical Description,” in The Trans­
formations of Vrbs Roma, 135–­61. See also J. R. Curran, Pagan City and Christian Capi­
tal: Rome in the Fourth Century (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000); and Aurea
Roma: Dalla città pagana alla città cristiana, the catalogue of a superb exhibition with
articles.
    11.	Symmachus, Letter 4.54.2 (AD 397), Callu, 2:133.
    12.	Symmachus, Letter 3.55 (AD 389), Callu, 2:58.
    13.	Symmachus, Letter 3.55.2; Salzman, “Symmachus and the ‘Barbarian’ Generals.”
    14.	Symmachus, Letter 2.6 (AD 385), Callu, 1:155.
    15.	Symmachus, Letter 1.44 (AD 376), Callu, 1:107.
    16. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 27.3.3–­4, Rolfe 3:14, Hamilton, p. 336.
    17. Purcell, “The Populace of Rome,” 150–­56.
    18. Though open to challenge in detail, the groundbreaking study remains Cracco
Ruggini, Economia e società nell’ “Italia annonaria,” 19–­152.
    19. For the full background of the incident (which suggests the role of noble factions
in leading popular opinion), see Lizzi Testa, Senatori, popolo, papi, 327–­43.
    20.	Symmachus, Letter 7.1 (AD 399), Callu, 3:47.
    21. The sums are provided in Olympiodorus, History: Fragment 41.1–­2, Blockley,
pp. 204–­6.
    22. For these calculations, see F. A. Poglio, Gruppi di potere nella Roma tardoantica
(350–­395 d.C.) (Turin: Celid, 2007), 283.
    23. A. Chastagnol, “Observations sur le consulat suffect et la préture au Bas-­Empire,”
Revue historique 219 (1958): 221–­53.
    24. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 14.2, PL 30.
    25.	Symmachus, Letter 2.78.1 (AD 394), Callu, 1:204.
    26.	Symmachus, Relatio 8.1, Barrow, p. 60; see Vera, Commento storico alle “Relatio­
nes” di Quinto Aurelio Simmaco, 74–­82.
    27.	Symmachus, Letter 4.8 (AD 401), Callu, 2:90–­92; A. Marcone, “L’allestimento
dei giochi annuali a Roma nel IV secolo d.C.: Aspetti economici e ideologici,” Annali


                                           560
                             notes to pages 116–118


della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, Classe di lettere e filosofia, ser. 3, no. 11 (1981):
105–­22, now in La parte migliore del genere umano: Aristocrazie, potere e ideologia
nell’Occidente tardoantico, ed. S. Roda (Turin: Scriptorium, 1994), 293–­311.
    28.	Salzman, On Roman Time, 131–­46.
    29. Hugoniot, Les spectacles, 1:628–­32; C. Machado, “The City as Stage: Aristo-
cratic Commemoration in Late Antique Rome,” in Les frontières du profane, 287–­317 at
pp. 296–­304.
    30. Hugoniot, Les spectacles, 1:658–­60.
    31.	Symmachus, Letters 6.43 (AD 401), Callu, 3:26 and 9.141 and 9.151 (AD 398),
Callu, 4:81–­82 and 88.
    32.	Symmachus, Letter 2.76.2 (AD 393), Callu, 1:203.
    33.	Symmachus, Letter 2.77 (AD 393), Callu, 1:204.
    34.	Symmachus, Letter 2.76.2, Callu, 1:203.
    35.	Symmachus, Letter 9.144 (AD 399–­400), Callu, 4:83.
    36.	S. Settis, “Per l’interpretazione di Piazza Armerina,” Mélanges de l’école française
de Rome: Antiquité 87 (1975): 873–­994 at pp. 952–­55; see the spectacular foldout illus-
tration facing p. 946.
    37.	S. Muth, “Bildkomposition und Raumstruktur der ‘Grossen Jagd’ von Piazza
Armerina in seinem raumfunktionalen Kontext,” Mitteilungen des deutschen archäolo­
gischen Instituts: Römische Abteilung 106 (1999): 189–­212.
    38.	Symmachus, Letter 2.46.1 (AD 393), Callu, 1:185.
    39.	Symmachus, Letter 2.78.3 (AD 394), Callu, 1:204.
    40.	Symmachus, Letter 2.76.2 (AD 393), Callu, 1:203.
    41.	Symmachus, Letter 6.43 (AD 401), Callu, 3:26.
    42.	Symmachus, Letter 2.46.2–­3 (AD 393), Callu, 1:185.
    43.	Symmachus, Letter 5.15 (AD 390), Callu, 2:164.
    44.	Symmachus, Letter 5.62 (AD 391–­98), Callu, 3:198.
    45.	Symmachus, Letter 2.81.2 (AD 393–­94), Callu, 2:206. See now D. Vera, “Presen-
tazione,” in Eburnea Diptycha: I dittici d’avorio tra Antichità e Medioevo, ed. M. David
(Bari: Edipuglia, 2007), 7–­9; D. Kinney, “First-­Generation Diptychs in the Discourse
of Visual Culture,” in Spätantike und byzantinische Elfenbeinbildwerke im Diskurs, ed.
G. Bühl, A. Cutler, and A. Effenberger (Wiesbaden: Reichert, 2008), 149–­66 at pp.
149–­50; and Cameron, Last Pagans, 712–­42.
    46.	I. N. Wood, “The Exchange of Gifts among the Late Antique Aristocracy,” in El
disco de Teodosio, 301–­14.
    47. Hugoniot, Les spectacles, 428–­30, 682–­87.
    48. J. H. Humphreys, Roman Circuses: Arenas for Chariot Racing (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1986), 223–­32 (Piazza Armerina) and 239–­41, with figure 121
(Gerona).
    49. J. W. Salomonson, La mosaïque aux chevaux dans l’antiquarium de Carthage (The
Hague: Imprimerie Nationale, 1965); Humphreys, Roman Circuses, 362–­76 (Mérida).
    50. Harries, “Favor populi,” 130–­34.
    51.	S. Johnson, Later Roman Britain (London: Paladin, 1982), 26.
    52.	Symmachus, Letter 4.60.3 (AD 399), Callu, 1:141.


                                            561
                              notes to pages 121–126


                                     Chapter 7
                                 Ambrose and His People

      1. Ambrose, De excessu fratris Satyri 1.32. For the life of Ambrose, I have depended
largely on McLynn, Ambrose of Milan. See now J.H.W.G. Liebeschuetz, Ambrose and
John Chrysostom: Clerics between Desert and Empire (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2011), 57–­94. The reader should know that, out of a superabundant bibliography on
every aspect of the life and thought of Ambrose, in all the languages of Europe, I have
chosen only titles that offer convenient and up-­to-­date introductions to the topics
touched on in this chapter. The numbering of the letters of Ambrose is that of the new
edition of O. Faller and M. Zelzer, Sancti Ambrosii Opera, CSEL 82:1, 2, and 3 (Vienna:
Tempsky, 1968, 1990, and 1982), followed in parentheses by the traditional number,
taken from the Maurist edition, printed in PL 16.
      2. Gibbon’s Journey from Geneva to Rome: His Journal from 20 April to 2 October
1764, ed. G. A. Bonnard (London: Nelson, 1961), 47.
      3. Augustine, Confessions 6.3.3.
      4. Liebeschuetz, Ambrose of Milan, 132n.5.
      5. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 1–­52.
      6.	S. Mazzarino, Storia sociale del Vescovo Ambrogio (Rome: Bretschneider, 1989),
51. Published posthumously, this work by a great historian of late antiquity remains a
most suggestive essay.
      7. H. Granger Taylor, “The Two Dalmatics of Saint Ambrose,” Bulletin de Liaison,
Centre International d’Études des Textiles Anciens 57–­58 (1983): 127–­73.
      8. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 69–­71.
      9. Ambrose, Letter 75 A (21A), Contra Auxentium 33, Liebeschuetz, p. 158.
     10. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 226–­29.
     11. Palladius of Ratiaria, Apologia 89, ed. and trans. R. Gryson, Scholies ariennes sur
le concile d’Aquilée, SC 267 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1980), 274.
     12. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 31–­37, 263–­75. P. Porena, “Trasformazioni istituzi-
onali e assetti sociali: I prefetti del Pretorio tra III e IV secolo,” in Le trasformazioni delle
“élites” in età tardoantica, 325–­56 at pp. 334–­46 shows that ex-­prefects were not readily
accepted into Roman noble society.
     13. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 220–­25.
     14. Ambrose, Letter 76 (20).6 and (20).7, Liebeschuetz, p. 163.
     15. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 158–­219, esp. at pp. 176–­79. Liebeschuetz, Ambrose
of Milan, 124–­36 argues for a different order of events (with a chronological table on
p. 135). Recently, the present church of San Lorenzo has been dated to around 400. It
cannot have been the scene of the conflict of 385–­6: M. Löx, “Die Kirche San Lorenzo
in Mailand: Eine Stiftung des Stilicho?” Mitteilungen des deutschen archäologischen Insti­
tuts: Römische Abteilung 114 (2008): 407–­38.
     16. Ambrose, Letter 75A (21A), Contra Auxentium 35, Liebeschuetz, p. 159; Letter
76 (20).2 and (20).19, Liebeschuetz, pp. 162 and 169. On the implications of this stance,
see B. Caseau, “A Case Study for the Transformation of Law in Late Antiquity: The Legal
Protection of Churches,” in Confrontation in Late Antiquity: Imperial Presentation and


                                              562
                              notes to pages 126–131


Regional Adaptation, ed. L. Jones Hall (Cambridge: Orchard Academic, 2003), 61–­77 at
pp. 64–­66.
     17. Ambrose, Letter 75A (21A), Contra Auxentum 29, Liebeschuetz, p. 156.
     18. Ambrose, Letter 76 (20).3, Liebeschuetz, p. 162.
     19. Ambrose, Letter 75A (21A), Contra Auxentium 33, Liebeschuetz, p. 158.
     20. Augustine, Confessions 9.7.15, 10.33.50.
     21. Ambrose, Letter 75A (21A), Contra Auxentium 34, Liebeschuetz, p. 159.
     22. J. Moorhead, Ambrose: Church and Society in the Late Roman World (London:
Longman, 1999), 142.
     23. Ambrose, Explanatio Psalm. 1.9, ed. M. Petschenig, CSEL 64 (Vienna: Temp-
sky, 1919), 7.
     24.	I will refer throughout to the outstanding introduction, edition, translation, and
commentary of I. J. Davidson, Ambrose: De officiis, 2 vols. (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2001).
     25. Ambrose, De off. 1.7.24, p. 130, with Davidson, Ambrose: De officiis, pp. 15–­16.
     26. Ambrose, De off. 1.36.185, p. 224.
     27. Ambrose, De off. 1.50.249, p. 260.
     28.	Sotinel, “Les évêques italiens dans la société de l’Antiquité tardive,” 388–­95.
     29.	See the groundbreaking study of Cracco Ruggini, Economia e società nell’ “Italia
annonaria,” 84–­111. The second edition of this book has an invaluable preface and a
fully updated bibliography.
     30. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values and Religious Change, 170–­74.
     31.	See esp. R. Lizzi, Vescovi e strutture ecclesiastiche nella città tardoantica (L’Italia
annonaria nel IV–­V secolo d.C.), Biblioteca di Athenaeum 9 (Como: New Press, 1989),
15–­57; and idem, “Ambrose’s Contemporaries and the Christianization of Northern
Italy,” Journal of Roman Studies 80 (1990): 156–­73 at pp. 164–­68.
     32. Ambrose, De off. 1.28.136, p. 196.
     33. Ambrose, De off. 2.15.70 and 28.136–­43, pp. 306 and 342–­48.
     34. Ambrose, De off. 2.29.150, p. 350.
     35. Ambrose, De off. 1.11.38, p. 138.
     36. Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 36–­44; C. Tiersch, Johannes Chrysostomus in
Konstantinopel (398–­404): Weltsicht und Wirken eines Bischofs in der Hauptstadt des Ost­
römischen Reiches, Studien und Texte zu Antike und Christentum 6 (Tübingen: Mohr
Siebeck, 2000), 229–­50.
     37. Ambrose, De off. 2.15–­16.70–­77, pp. 306–­10, with Davidson, Ambrose: De offi­
ciis, 2:744–­52.
     38. Ambrose, Letter 73 (18).16, Liebeschuetz, p. 86.
     39.	R. Syme, The Roman Revolution (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1939), 145.
     40.	Cicero, De officiis 1.17.57, ed. and trans. W. Miller, Loeb Classical Library (Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1913), 58–­60.
     41.	Cicero, De officiis 1.7.22, pp. 22–­24.
     42. A. O. Lovejoy and G. Boas, A Documentary History of Primitivism and Related
Ideas, vol. 1, Primitivism and Related Ideas in Antiquity (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, 1935); B. Gatz, Weltalter, goldene Zeit und sinnverwandte Vorstellungen,


                                             563
                            notes to pages 131–137


Spudasmata 16 (Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1967). Ambrose was preceded in Christian cir-
cles by a considerably more radical evocation of the Golden Age and its violent end in
frank class dominance by Lactantius, writing at the time of the Great Persecution: Lac-
tantius, Divine Institutes 5.5–­6, pp. 290–­94, with comments on pp. 36–­40. We cannot
assume that Ambrose had read Lactantius.
    43.	Seneca, Epistula 90.34: Lovejoy and Boas, Documentary History of Primitivism,
272–­73. See esp. P. Garnsey, Thinking about Property: From Antiquity to the Age of Revo­
lution (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 121–­30.
    44.	Cicero, De officiis 1.7.20, p. 22.
    45. Ambrose, De off. 1.28.132, p. 194.
    46. Davidson, Ambrose: De officiis, 571–­76 at p. 571.
    47. Age of Spirituality: Late Antique and Early Christian Art, Third to Seventh Cen­
tury, ed. K. Weitzmann (New York: Metropolitian Museum of Art, 1988), cat. no. 164
at pp. 185–­86.
    48. Ambrose, Exaemeron 5.26.
    49. A. Dworkin, Intercourse (New York: The Free Press, 1987), 128.
    50. Brown, Body and Society, 351–­54.
    51. Ambrose, De off. 1.28.137, p. 196.
    52. Ambrose, De off. 1.32.169–­33.170 and 3.3.19, pp. 216 and 364.
    53. Freu, Les figures du pauvre, 245.
    54. Ambrose, De Nabuthae 12.53, trans. B. Ramsey, Ambrose (New York: Routledge,
1997), 135.
    55. M. M. Bakhtin, Rabelais and His World, trans. H. Iswolsky (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1968), 278.


                                    Chapter 8
                            “Avarice, the Root of All Evil”

    1.	See esp. Cracco Ruggini, Economia e società nell’ “Italia annonaria,” 84–­111.
    2. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 222n9.
    3.	R. Newhauser, The Early History of Greed: The Sin of Avarice in Early Medieval
Thought and Literature (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 72.
    4.	O. Chadwick, A History of the Popes, 1830–­1914 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998),
307–­20.
    5.	V. R. Vasey, The Social Ideas in the Works of St. Ambrose: A Study on De Nabuthe,
Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 17 (Rome: Institutum Patristicum Augustinianum,
1982), 227.
    6.	E.g., G. Alföldy, The Social History of Rome (London: Croom Helm, 1985), 210,
who is unduly dependent on Ambrose for his dark picture of the fourth-­century West.
    7. Humphries, Communities of the Blessed, 207–­15.
    8. Zosimus, New History 2.38.1–­5; Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 22.4.3;
Anonymus de rebus bellicis 2.1–­2, Giardina, p. 12, with commentary on pp. 51–­55.
    9.	Symmachus, Relatio 3.16, Barrow, p. 45.


                                          564
                             notes to pages 137–141


    10.	Symmachus, Letter 2.7.3 (AD 384), Callu, 1:156–­57.
    11.	Sogno, Symmachus, 33.
    12. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 263–­71.
    13.	Symmachus, Letter 3.36 (around AD 397), Callu, 2:44–­45; Salzman, “Symma-
chus and the ‘Barbarian’ Generals,” 360–­63 provides a good analysis of a distinctly frosty
interchange.
    14. Ambrose, De off. 3.7.45–­51, Davidson, 1:380–­86.
    15.	See Davidson, Ambrose: De officiis, 2:840–­46 for a commentary and review of
the diverse opinions of social historians on this passage.
    16.	Symmachus, Letter 2.55.2 (AD 385–­86), Callu, 1:191.
    17. Ambrose, De Nabuthae 1.1. B. Ramsey, Ambrose, provides a vigorous translation
of the De Nabuthae.
    18. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 239.
    19. Moorhead, Ambrose, 83.
    20. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 240, citing G. Nauroy, “L’écriture dans la pastorale
d’Ambroise de Milan,” in Le monde latin antique et la Bible, ed. J. Fontaine and C. Pietri,
vol. 2, Bible de tous les temps (Paris: Beauchesne, 1985), 371–­408 at p. 404.
    21. Ambrose, De Nabuthae 11.48, Ramsey, p. 133.
    22. Ambrose, De Nabuthae 4.18, Ramsey, p. 122.
    23. Ambrose, De Nabuthae 5.20, Ramsey, pp. 122–­23.
    24. For example, the idyllic picnic after the hunt in the Cesena Dish: see Milano:
Capitale dell’impero romano, 286–­402 d.C. (Milan: Silvana Editoriale, 1991), 313, 348.
See esp. Carrié, “Pratique et idéologie chrétiennes de l’économique,” p. 21 on Ambrose’s
subversion of the topoi of the idyllic rural life.
    25. Ambrose, De Nabuthae 13.56, Ramsey, p. 136.
    26. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 147–­49; N. Man-
cassola and F. Saggioro, “La fine delle ville romane: Il territorio tra Adda e Adige,” Archeo­
logia medievale 27 (2000): 315–­31.
    27.	Christie, From Constantine to Charlemagne, 418; P. Arthur, “From Vicus to Vil-
lage: Italian Landscapes, AD 400–­1000,” in Landscapes of Change: Rural Evolutions in
Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages, ed. N. Christie (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004),
103–­33.
    28. Ambrose, Letter 36 (2).12: see Lizzi, Vescovi e strutture ecclesiastiche, 43–­45; and
Freu, Les figures du pauvre, 297–­329. The identification of the bishopric of Constantius
with Claterna is not accepted by all: s.v. “Constantius 5,” Prosopographie chrétienne du Bas-­
Empire, vol. 2, Italie, ed. C. Pietri and L. Pietri (Paris: École française de Rome 2000),
473–­74.
    29. Ambrose, De Tobia 8.29 copies Basil, Homilia in Psalmum XIV, Patrologia Graeca
29: 277B. See the careful comparison of this and similar texts in Cracco Ruggini, Eco­
nomia e società nell’ “Italia annonaria,” 14–­16. For Cappadocia as presented in the sermons
of Basil of Caesarea, see now R. Van Dam, Kingdom of Snow: Roman Rule and Greek
Culture in Cappadocia (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2002), 20–­52.
    30. H.-­I. Marrou, introduction to Clément d’Alexandrie: Le pédagogue, vol. 1, SC 70
(Paris: Le Cerf, 1960), 89.


                                            565
                             notes to pages 141–146


    31. M. Elvin, The Retreat of the Elephants: An Environmental History of China (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004), 204, 205.
    32. Freu, Les figures du pauvre, 264–­68.
    33. M. Wallraff and C. Ricci, Oratio funebris in laudem sancti lohannis Chrysostomi:
Epitaffio attribuito a Martirio di Antiochia 40 (Spoleto: Centro ltaliano di Studi sull’Alto
Medioevo, 2007), 92. See J.H.W.G. Liebeschuetz, Barbarians and Bishops: Army, Church,
and State in the Age of Arcadius and Chrysostom (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990), 217–­
23; and Tiersch, Johannes Chrysostomus in Konstantinopel, 229–­50.
    34. Ambrose, De Joseph 6.30, 6.33; see McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 196, 217; and
G. Nauroy, Exégèse et création littéraire chez Ambroise de Milan: L’exemple du De Ioseph
Patriarcha (Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 2007), 241–­350.
    35.	R. MacMullen, “The Preacher’s Audience (AD 350–­400),” Journal of Theological
Studies 40 (1989): 503–­11 argues for an audience effectively restricted to the elite. He
is countered by P. Rousseau, “The Preacher’s Audience: A More Optimistic View,” in
Ancient History in a Modern University, ed. T. W. Hillard et al. (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerd­
mans, 1998), 2:371–­408, with which I find myself in agreement.
    36. Lizzi, Vescovi e strutture ecclesiastiche, 109–­24; and idem, “Ambrose’s Contempo-
raries,” 167.
    37. Gaudentius, Tractatus Praefatio 22, ed. A. Glück, CSEL 68 (Leipzig: Teubner,
1936), 7, and PL 20:835.
    38. Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 80–­84.
    39. J. T. Gross, Revolution from Abroad: The Soviet Conquest of Poland’s Western
Ukraine and Western Belorussia (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002), 120.
    40. J. Harries, Law and Empire in Late Antiquity (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1999), 97; Kelly, Ruling the Later Roman Empire, 186–­231.
    41. Gildas, De excidio Britanniae 20.1, ed. M. Winterbottom, in The Ruin of Britain,
and Other Works (London: Phillimore, 1978), 23, 95. See esp. J.-­L. Fournet, “Entre doc­
ument et littérature: La pétition dans l’antiquité tardive,” in La Pétition à Byzance, ed.
D. Feissel and J. Gascou, Centre de Recherche d’Histoire et Civilisation Byzantine:
Monographies 14 (Paris: Amis du Centre, 2004), 61–­74. For the West, see A. Gillett,
Envoys and Political Communication in the Late Antique West, 411–­533 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003), 26–­35.
    42. Edictum Diocletiani et collegarum de pretiis rerum venalium, ed. M. Giacchero
(Genoa: Università di Genova, 1974), 1:135. S. Corcoran, The Empire of the Tetrarchs:
Imperial Pronouncements and Government, AD 284–­324 (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1996), 207–­213, see p. 208: “Greed is a motive everyone can understand.” Avaritia is
mentioned eight times in the preamble of the edict.
    43.	Sozomen, Ecclesiastical History 7.25.
    44. Ambrose, Letter 26 (54).1.
    45. Ambrose, De off. 2.21.102, p. 324.
    46. Ambrose, De obitu Valentiniani 21.
    47. Paulinus of Milan, Vita Ambrosii 41, ed. M. Pellegrino, Verba Seniorum, n.s., 1
(Rome: Studium, 1961), 110.
    48. Paulinus, Vita Ambrosii 34, p. 100.


                                           566
                               notes to pages 146–152


      49. Aurelius Victor, Caesares 39.3: see Mazzarino, Storia sociale del Vescovo Ambrogio,
86.
      50. Davidson, Ambrose: De officiis, 1:96.
      51. Ambrose, Letter 73 (18).24.


                                        Chapter 9
                                         Augustine

      1. Confessions 5.13.23. We are fortunate to have two excellent translations of the
Confessions: H. Chadwick, Saint Augustine: Confessions (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1991); and G. Wills, Saint Augustine: Confessions (London: Penguin, 2006). I have
based my translations largely on an adaptation of both. In these chapters, I will quote
the works of Augustine without author’s name, with the conventional Latin titles and
their abbreviations. From the superabundant bibliography on the life and thought of
Augustine, I will cite only works that have helped me directly in the study of the themes
that concern me. For this chapter, which depends largely on the evidence of the Confes­
sions, I would especially recommend J. J. O’Donnell, Augustine: Confessions, 3 vols. (Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press, 1992).
      2.	Ebbeler and Sogno, “Religious Identity and the Politics of Patronage,” are right
to insist that we should not read too much into Symmachus’s choice of Augustine.
      3.	Symmachus, Letter 1.20 (AD 378), Callu, 1:84–­85.
      4. Brown, Augustine of Hippo (2000) brings the reader up-­to-­date, in an extensive
epilogue, with newly discovered letters and sermons of Augustine and with other ad-
vances in the field. S. Lancel, Saint Augustin (Paris: Fayard, 1999), trans. A. Nevill, Saint
Augustine (London: SCM Press, 2002) is the work of a master of the concrete back-
ground of Augustine in Africa.
      5. Confessions 5.13.23.
      6. D. Shanzer, “Avulsa a latere meo: Augustine’s Spare Rib—­Confessions 6.15.25,”
Journal of Roman Studies 92 (2002): 157–­76 at pp. 172–­75.
      7. J. J. O’Donnell, Augustine: A New Biography (New York: Harper Collins, 2005),
10.
      8. Possidius, Vita Augustini 1.1.
      9. Lancel, Saint Augustin, 5–­7; B. D. Shaw, “The Family in Late Antiquity: The
Experience of Augustine,” Past and Present 115 (1987): 3–­51, esp. pp. 8–­9.
    10. Confessions 2.3.5; see esp. J. Doignon, “L’enseignement de l’Hortensius de Cicéron
sur les richesses devant la conscience d’Augustin jusqu’aux Confessions,” Antiquité clas­
sique 51 (1982): 193–­206 at p. 198nn30, 31.
    11. Sermon 356.13.
    12. Woolf, “Writing Poverty in Rome,” 93.
    13.	Ibid., 94.
    14. Confessions 2.3.5.
    15. Confessions 1.16.26.
    16. Confessions 8.12.30.


                                             567
                             notes to pages 153–158


     17. Contra academicos 1.1.2.
     18. A. Gabillon, “Romanianus alias Cornelius: Du nouveau sur le bienfaiteur et l’ami
de saint Augustin,” Revue des études augustiniennes 24 (1978): 58–­70.
     19. C. acad. 2.2.3.
     20.	C. Lepelley, “Spes saeculi: Le milieu social d’Augustin et ses ambitions séculières
avant sa conversion,” in Congresso internazionale su S. Agostino nel XVI centenario della
conversione, Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 24 (Rome: Institutum Pontificium Au-
gustinianum, 1987), 1:99–­117, now in Aspects de l’Afrique romaine: Les cités, la vie rurale,
le christianisme (Bari: Edipuglia, 2001), 329–­44.
     21. s.v. “Friendship,” Augustine through the Ages: An Encyclopedia, ed. A. D. Fitzger-
ald (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1999), 372–­73.
     22.	Cicero, De officiis 1.16.51.
     23. Confessions 4.8.13.
     24.	On Manichaeism in general, see P. Brown, “The Diffusion of Manichaeism in the
Roman Empire,” Journal of Roman Studies 59 (1969): 92–­103, now in Religion and Soci­
ety in the Age of Saint Augustine (London: Faber, 1972; Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock,
2007), 94–­118; S.N.C. Lieu, Manichaeism in the Later Roman Empire and Medieval
China, 2nd ed. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1992); I.M.F. Gardner and S.N.C. Lieu, “From Nar-
mouthis (Medinat Madi) to Kellis (Ismant el-­Kharab): Manichaean Documents from
Roman Egypt,” Journal of Roman Studies 86 (1996): 146–­69. The literature on Man-
ichaeism is deservedly extensive. I have limited myself to the treatments most relevant to
the career and outlook of Augustine.
     25. Brown, Body and Society, 197–­202; J. D. BeDuhn, Augustine’s Manichaean Di­
lemma, vol. 1, Conversion and Apostasy, 373–­388 C.E. (Philadelphia: University of Penn-
sylvania Press, 2010), 42–­69 is a remarkable in-­depth study of Augustine the Manichee.
     26. Contra Fortunatum 3: see BeDuhn, Augustine’s Manichaean Dilemma, 1:70–­105.
See also J. K. Coyle, “What Did Augustine Know about Manichaeism When He Wrote
His Two Treatises De moribus?” in Augustine and Manichaeism in the Latin West, ed.
J. van Oort, O. Wermelinger, and G. Wurst, Nag Hammadi and Manichaean Studies 49
(Leiden: Brill, 2001), 43–­56; J. van Oort, “The Young Augustine’s Knowledge of Man-
ichaeism: An Analysis of the Confessiones and Some Other Related Texts,” Vigiliae Christi­
anae 62 (2008): 441–­66; and J. BeDuhn, “Augustine Accused: Megalius, Manichaeism and
the Inception of the Confessions,” Journal of Early Christian Studies 17 (2009): 85–124.
     27. Confessions 5.7.13.
     28.	On the different aspects of Augustine’s anti-­Manichaean debates and writings,
see F. Decret, L’Afrique manichéenne, IVe–­Ve siècles: Étude historique et doctrinale (Paris:
Études Augustiniennes, 1978); R. Lim, Public Disputation, Power, and Social Order in
Late Antiquity, The Transformation of the Classical Heritage 23 (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1995), 70–­108; P. Frederiksen, Augustine and the Jews: A Christian De­
fense of Jews and Judaism (New York: Doubleday, 2008), 211–­32.
     29.	N. Cipriani, “La polemica antiafricana di Giuliano di Eclano: Artificio letterario
o scontro di tradizioni teologiche?” in Cristianesimo e specificità regionali nel Mediterra­
neo latino (sec. IV–­VI), Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 46 (Rome: Institutum Ponti-
ficium Augustinianum, 1994), 147–­60 provides the best introduction to a contentious


                                            568
                            notes to pages 158–162


matter. See E. A. Clark, “Vitiated Seeds and Holy Vessels: Augustine’s Manichaean Past,”
in Ascetic Piety and Women’s Faith: Essays on Late Ancient Christianity (Lewiston, NY:
Edwin Mellen Press, 1986), 291–­349. I remain unconvinced by those who wish to trace
Augustine’s doctrine of original sin directly back to his Manichaean past: P. Brown, re-
view of Emotion and Peace of Mind: From Stoic Agitation to Christian Temptation, by
Richard Sorabji, Philosophical Books 43 (2002): 185–­208 at pp. 199–­202.
    30.	O’Donnell, Augustine: A New Biography, 4.
    31. Confessions 3.4.8.
    32. M. Franzmann, Jesus in the Manichaean Writings (London: T. and T. Clark,
2003).
    33. D. Caner, Wandering, Begging Monks: Spiritual Authority and the Promotion of
Monasticism in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002), 83–­157.
    34. W.H.C. Frend, “The Gnostic-­Manichaean Tradition in Roman North Africa,”
Journal of Ecclesiastical History 4 (1953): 13–­36.
    35.	R. Lim, “Unity and Diversity among the Western Manichaeans: A Reconsidera-
tion of Mani’s sancta ecclesia,” Revue des études augustiniennes 35 (1989): 231–­50.
    36. Confessions 3.10.18, 4.1.1.
    37. De duabus animabus 11.
    38. Coptic Documentary Texts from Kellis I, ed. I. Gardner, A. Alcock, and W.-­P. Funk
(Oxford: Oxbow, 1999). Many of these have been translated in I. Gardner and S.N.C.
Lieu, Manichaean Texts from the Roman Empire (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2004).
    39. Gardner and Lieu, “From Narmouthis (Medinat Madi) to Kellis (Ismant el-­
Kharab),” 166.
    40. J. D. BeDuhn, The Manichaean Body: In Discipline and Ritual (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2000); P. Brown, “Alms and the Afterlife: A Manichaean View
of an Early Christian Practice,” in East and West: Papers in Ancient History Presented to
Glen W. Bowersock, ed. T. C. Brennan and H. I. Flower (Cambridge, MA: Department of
Classics, Harvard University, 2008), 145–­58.
    41. Papyri Kellis Coptici 25, Coptic Documentary Texts, p. 275, Gardner and Lieu,
p. 275.
    42. Confessions 6.7.12.
    43. Letter 259.2: see Brown, Augustine of Hippo, 493.
    44. Confessions 3.4.8, 5.14.25.


                                   Chapter 10
                                From Milan to Hippo

     1.	See esp. McLynn, Ambrose of Milan, 157–­70.
     2. Confessions 6.6.9.
     3. Confessions 6.15.25.
     4. Confessions 6.13.23; BeDuhn, Augustine’s Manichaean Dilemma, 1:165–­92.
     5. Confessions 6.11.19; Soliloquia 11.18. See n. 12 below.


                                          569
                              notes to pages 163–166


      6. Confessions 6.14.24; see esp. O’Donnell, Augustine: Confessions, 2:379–­81.
      7. Confessions 6.14.24; C. acad. 2.2.4.
      8. Confessions 6.12.24.
      9.	Iamblichus, On the Pythagorean Life 27.132, trans. G. Clark (Liverpool: Liver-
pool University Press, 1989), 59 with pp. xvi–­xviii.
    10. Confessions 7.9.13–­21.27; see O’Donnell, Augustine: Confessions, 2:413–­18. The
most perceptive recent study of this moment and of Augustine’s circle at the time is
R. Lane Fox, “Movers and Shakers,” in The Philosopher and Society in Late Antiquity: Es­
says in Honor of Peter Brown, ed. A. Smith (Swansea: Classical Press of Wales, 2005),
19–­50 at pp. 25–­31. From a superabundant bibliography on Augustine’s stay at Cassi-
ciacum, I have learned most, on the issues that concern me, from D. Trout, “Augustine
at Cassiciacum: Otium Honestum and the Social Dimensions of Conversion,” Vigiliae
Christianae 42 (1988): 132–­46; and C. Conybeare, The Irrational Augustine (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2006).
    11.	O’Donnell, Augustine: Confessions, 2:379–­81, 3:80–­104 rightly emphasizes the
continuity between the two schemes of withdrawal.
    12. The Dialogues are available in English translation. All three and the Soliloquia are
translated in The Writings of Saint Augustine, vol. 1 (New York: CIMA Publishing, 1948);
Contra academicos: J. J. O’Meara, St. Augustine: Against the Academics, Ancient Christian
Writers 12 (Westminster, MD: Newman Press, 1951); De ordine: S. Borruso, On Order
(South Bend, IN: St. Augustine’s Press, 2007) with a fine commentary by J. Trelenberg,
Augustins Schrift de Ordine, Beiträge zur historischen Theologie 144 (Tübingen: Mohr
Siebeck, 2009); De beata vita, trans. R. A. Brown, S. Aureli Augustini de beata vita
(Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1944); Soliloquia: K. Paffen-
roth, Saint Augustine: Soliloquies (Hyde Park, NY: New City Press, 2000).
    13. Letter 26.4, which cites the poem of Licentius: see D. Shanzer, “Arcanum Varro-
nis iter: Licentius’ Verse Epistle to Augustine,” Revue des études augustiniennes 37 (1991):
110–­43.
    14. Retractationes 1.1.1; Brown, Augustine of Hippo, 108–­9.
    15.	Symmachus, Letter 1.47.2 (before AD 385), Callu, 1:110; Naucellius, Poem 5,
Epigrammata Bobiensia, ed. F. Munari (Rome: Edizioni di storia e letteratura, 1955). See
esp. S. Roda, “Fuga nel privato e nostalgia del potere nel IV secolo d.C.: Nuovi accenti
di un’antica ideologia,” in Le trasformazioni della cultura nella tarda antichità (Rome:
Bretschneider, 1985), 1:95–­108.
    16. C. acad. 1.1.4.
    17. De ordine 1.11.31, 2.17.45; De beata vita 2.10.
    18. De beata vita 1.6.
    19. C. acad. 3.19.
    20. De beata vita 4.35; see esp. N. Cipriani, “Le fonti cristiane della dottrina trinitaria
nei primi Dialoghi di S. Agostino,” Augustinianum 34 (1994): 253–­313.
    21.	Conybeare, The Irrational Augustine, 63–­92.
    22. C. acad. 3.6.13.
    23. C. acad. 2.2.6.



                                             570
                              notes to pages 166–172


     24. C. acad. 2.3.9.
     25. Confessions 9.10.23–­26: on the Vision of Ostia, see O’Donnell, Augustine: Con­
fessions, 3:122–­37.
     26. The peculiarity of this “duet” is clearly seen by F. Troncarelli, Il ricordo della sof­
ferenza: Le Confessioni di sant’Agostino e la psicoanalisi (Naples: Edizioni scientifiche ita­
liane, 1993), 181.
     27. Lancel, Saint Augustin, 121–­44 provides the best account of these years.
     28. Letter 10.2; see G. Folliet, “Deificari in otio: Augustin, Epistula X,2,” Recherches
augustiniennes 2 (1962): 225–­36.
     29. From a vast bibliography on this issue, I have found the most reliable guides to be
Mandouze, Saint Augustin, 165–­242; G. Lawless, Augustine of Hippo and His Monastic
Rule (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987); and L. Verheijen, Nouvelle approche de la Règle de
Saint Augustin, Vie Monastique 8 (Bégrolle-­en-­Mauge: Abbaye de la Bellefontaine, 1980),
1:75–­84. See in general, A. de Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du mouvement monastique. Pre­
mière partie: Le monachisme latin (Paris: Le Cerf, 1993), 2:109–­61. E. Plumer, Augus­
tine’s Commentary on Galatians (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003) offers a view
from an unexpected angle on the growth of Augustine’s sense of community in these
years and on his own role as a spiritual guide.
     30. John Chrysostom, Homilies on Acts 11.3, Patrologia Graeca 60:96–­97. See esp.
P. C. Bori, Chiesa primitiva: L’imaggine della communità delle origini—­Atti 2, 42–­47; 4,
32–­37—­nella storia della chiesa antica (Brescia: Paideia, 1974), 234–­41; for Augustine,
see pp. 260–­77.
     31. Letter 157.4.39.
     32.	O’Donnell, Augustine: A New Biography, 24, 349n51.
     33.	See the case of Gregory Nazianzen: R. Van Dam, “Self-­Representation in the Will
of Gregory Nazianzus,” Journal of Theological Studies 46 (1995): 118–­48; and J. Beau-
camp, “Le testament de Grégoire de Nazianze,” in Fontes Minores 10, ed. L. Burgmann,
Forschungen zur byzantinischen Rechtsgeschichte (Frankfurt: Löwenklau, 1998).
     34. De beata vita 3.22 (citing Cicero, Hortensius); De diversis quaestionibus 40.
     35. Letter 28.1.
     36.	O. Wermelinger, s.v. “Alypius,” Augustinus-­Lexikon, ed. C. Mayer (Basel: Schwabe,
1986), 1:246–­67.
     37. Possidius, Vita Augustini 3.2.
     38. Letter 18.1.
     39. Letter 15.1.
     40. Lancel, Saint Augustin, 194.
     41. De moribus ecclesiae catholicae 1.1, 32.69.
     42. Possidius, Vita Augustini 3.3–­4.3; Sermo 355.2.
     43. Letter 21.2: see esp. O’Donnell, Augustine: A New Biography, 24–­25.
     44.	See Lancel, Saint Augustin, 221–­34 for Augustine’s monasteries at Hippo.
     45. Praeceptum 2, ed. and trans. Lawless, Augustine of Hippo, p. 80. See esp. T. J. van
Bavel, “‘Ante omnia’ et ‘in Deum’ dans la ‘Regula Sancti Augustini,’” Vigiliae Christianae
12 (1958): 157–­65.



                                             571
                            notes to pages 173–180


                                Chapter 11
        “The Life in Common of a Kind of Divine and Heavenly Republic”

     1. Lawless, Augustine of Hippo, 148–­52.
     2. Sermon 355.2.
     3. Possidius, Life of Augustine 2.5, 2.7.
     4. Sermon 356.14.
     5. Possidius, Life of Augustine 11.3.
     6. Letter 211; Lawless, Augustine of Hippo, 152–­54.
     7. Sermon 356.3.
     8. Lawless, Augustine of Hippo, 48–­56 on the fluidity of monastic terminology;
H. Dey, “Building Worlds Apart: Walls and the Construction of Communal Monasti-
cism from Augustine through Benedict,” Antiquité tardive 12 (2004): 357–­71, at pp.
360–­61.
     9. Praeceptum 4.4, Lawless, p. 89.
    10.	Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du mouvement monastique, 3:152.
    11.	Ibid., 2:150.
    12. Praeceptum 1.6, Lawless, p. 83.
    13.	See esp. Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du mouvement monastique, 3:172–­204; and
Lawless, Augustine of Hippo, 121–­61.
    14. Praeceptum 5.1.230, Lawless, p. 94: see Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du mouvement
monastique, 3:192.
    15. Praeceptum 5.2.247, Lawless, p. 94.
    16. De bono coniugali 18.21.
    17. M. Testard, Saint Augustin et Cicéron (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1958), 1:2–­
176.
    18. M. Schofield, “Cicero’s Definition of res publica,” in Cicero the Philosopher, ed.
J.G.F. Powell (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995), 63–­83.
    19. De diversis quaestionibus 79.1 on magic as a “private” power.
    20. De Genesi ad litteram 11.15.19. See esp. R. A. Markus, “De civitate Dei: Pride and
the Common Good,” in Augustine: “Second Founder of the Faith,” ed. J. C. Schnaubelt
and F. Van Fleteren, Collectanea Augustiniana (New York: Peter Lang, 1990), 245–­59,
now in Markus, Sacred and Secular (Aldershot: Variorum, 1994), no. III.
    21.	Cicero, De officiis 2.21.73.
    22.	Cicero, De officiis 1.31.110.
    23. De civitate Dei 5.18, trans. H. Bettenson, Augustine: Concerning the City of God
against the Pagans (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1972), 210–­11.
    24. De opere monachorum 25.32.
    25. H. Hagendahl, Augustine and the Latin Classics, Studia Graeca et Latina Gotho-
burgensia 20 (Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1967), 1:35–­169.
    26. Tractatus in evangelium Iohannis 6.25–­26; see now R. W. Dyson, The Pilgrim
City: Social and Political Ideas in the Writings of St. Augustine of Hippo (Woodbridge:
Boydell, 2001), 105–­30.



                                          572
                            notes to pages 181–188


    27. A. H. Armstrong in Plotinus, Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1988), 6:271, 274.
    28. Plotinus, Ennead 6.4.14, Armstrong, Plotinus, 6:317.
    29.	See esp. E. R. Dodds, Pagan and Christian in an Age of Anxiety: Some Aspects of
Religious Experience from Marcus Aurelius to Constantine (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1965), 24–­26.
    30. Letter 140.24.61.
    31. Letter 243.2: see A. Gabillon, “Pour une datation de la lettre 243 d’Augustin à
Laetus,” Revue des études augustiniennes 40 (1994): 127–­42.
    32. Soliloquia 1.22.33.
    33. Enarratio in Psalmos 33.2.6.
    34. G. Madec, “Le communisme spirituel,” in Homo Spiritalis: Festgabe für Luc Ver­
heijen, ed. C. Mayer (Würzburg: Augustinus, 1987), 225–­39, now in Petites Études Au­
gustiniennes (Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 1994), 215–­31.
    35. Letter 140.26.63.
    36. Tractatus in ev. Iohannis 35.9.
    37. Letter 32: see D. Trout, Paulinus of Nola: Life, Letters, and Poems (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1999), 202–­5.
    38. Letter 31.5.


                                      Chapter 12
                                   Ista vero saecularia

     1. Ambrose, Letter 27 (58).3.
     2. Ausone et Paulin de Nole: Correspondance, ed. D. Amherdt, Sapheneia 9 (Bern:
Peter Lang, 2004).
     3.	N. Chadwick, Poetry and Letters in Early Christian Gaul (London: Bowes and
Bowes, 1955), 66.
     4. H. Waddell, The Wandering Scholars (London: Constable, 1929), 2, 3.
     5. H. Heinen, Trier und das Trevererland in römischer Zeit (Trier: Spee, 1985),
211–­365; E. M. Wightman, Roman Trier and the Treveri (London: Hart-­Davis, 1970),
58–­123.
     6. D. R. Khoury, State and Provincial Society in the Ottoman Empire: Mosul, 1540–­
1834 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 49.
     7. Bowes and Kulikowski, introduction to Hispania in Late Antiquity, 25.
     8.	See esp. Matthews, Western Aristocracies and Imperial Court, 32–­33; G. W. Bow-
ersock, “Symmachus and Ausonius,” in Colloque genèvois sur Symmaque, 1–­15, now in
Selected Papers on Late Antiquity (Bari: Edipuglia, 2000), 69–­80; and Sogno, Symma­
chus, 5–­21.
     9. A. Coşkun, Die gens Ausoniana an der Macht: Untersuchungen zu Decimius Mag­
nus Ausonius und seiner Familie, Prosopographica et Genealogica 8 (Oxford: Linacre
College, 2002), 6–­11, 52–­62.



                                           573
                               notes to pages 188–193


     10. H. Sivan, Ausonius of Bordeaux: Genesis of a Gallic Aristocracy (London: Rout-
ledge, 1993), 49–­73.
     11.	See esp. M. G. Fulford, “Economic Hotspots and Provincial Backwaters: Mod-
elling the Late Roman Economy,” in Coin Finds and Coin Use in the Roman World, ed.
C. E. King and D. G. Wigg, Studien zu Fundmünzen der Antike 10 (Berlin: Mann, 1996),
153–­77.
     12. Ausonius, Parentalia 7.2 and 18.8, Green, pp. 30 and 36, Ausonius 1:68 and 82.
In providing page numbers, I cite first from R.P.H. Green, The Works of Ausonius (Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press, 1991) and second from the translation of H. G. Evelyn-­White,
Ausonius, 2 vols., Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1951). As this edition has a different numbering of the works of Ausonius from that of
Green, I have avoided inextricable complexity by citing the Evelyn-­White text and trans-
lation by the volume and page numbers only, as Ausonius.
     13. Ausonius, Gratiarum actio 4 and 11, Green, pp. 148–­49 and 154, Ausonius 2:228
and 249; and Proptrepticus ad nepotem 86, Green, p. 24, Ausonius 2:80.
     14. Ausonius, Gratiarum actio 16, Green, pp. 157–­58, Ausonius 2:206.
     15. Poignantly evoked by Bowersock, “Symmachus and Ausonius,” 12.
     16. Ausonius, Letter 4.32, Green, p. 196, Ausonius 2:18. See the outstanding study of
J. Fontaine, “Valeurs antiques et valeurs chrétiennes dans la spiritualité des grands pro-
priétaires terriens à la fin du IVe siècle Occidental,” in Epektasis: Mélanges patristiques
offerts au cardinal Jean Daniélou, ed. J. Fontaine and C. Kannengiesser (Paris: Beauchesne,
1972), 571–­95 at p. 576, now in Études sur la poésie latine tardive d’Ausone à Prudence
(Paris: Belles Lettres, 1980), 241–­65 at p. 246.
     17. Ausonius, De herediolo 21–­28, Green, p. 19, Ausonius 1:34. See esp. R. Étienne,
“Ausone, propriétaire terrien et le problème du latifundium au IVe siècle ap. J. C.,” in In­
stitutions, société et vie politique de l’empire romain au IVe siècle ap. J. C., ed. M. Christol et
al., Collection de l’École française de Rome 159 (Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1992), 305–­11.
This estimate is based on the calculations first made by Cracco Ruggini, Economia e soci­
età nell’ “Italia Annonaria,” 416–­17. The reader should be warned that this provides only
the most approximate order of magnitude.
     18. Ausonius, De herediolo 19, Green, p. 19, Ausonius 1:34.
     19. Ausonius, De herediolo 1, Green, p. 19, Ausonius 1:32.
     20. Ausonius, De herediolo 1–­10, Green, p. 19, Ausonius 1:32.
     21.	Sivan, Ausonius of Bordeaux, 66–­69.
     22. Balmelle, Les demeures aristocratiques d’Aquitaine; Chavarría Arnau, El final de
las villae en Hispania.
     23. Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa, The Leopard, trans. A. Colquhoun (New York:
Pantheon, 1960), 43.
     24. K.M.D. Dunbabin, Mosaics of the Greek and Roman World (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1999), 69 (on the late Roman villa at Desenzano, Lake Garda,
Italy) and 88 (on the mosaics of Aquitaine). Compare Christie, From Constantine to
Charlemagne, 432: the villa at Piazza Armerina “oozes with . . . polychrome mosaics.”
     25.	See the spectacular marble wall discovered at Porta Marina, Ostia: Aurea Roma,
frontispiece, 251–­62.


                                               574
                             notes to pages 193–197


     26.	Ellis, “Power, Architecture and Décor”; Smith, Roman Villas, 178.
     27. For similar outlay in urban palaces, see Y. Thébert, “Private Life and Domestic
Architecture in Roman Africa,” in A History of Private Life, ed. P. Ariès and G. Duby,
vol. 1, From Pagan Rome to Byzantium, ed. P. Veyne, trans. A. Goldhammer (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1987), 313–­409 at p. 405. The best recent survey of
urban domestic architecture is Baldini Lippolis, La domus tardoantica. See now F. Ghe-
dini and S. Bullo, “Late Antique Domus of Africa Proconsularis: Structural and Deco-
rative Aspects,” in Housing in Late Antiquity: From Palaces to Shops, ed. L. Lavan, L. Öz-
genel, and A. Sarantis, Late Antique Archaeology 3.2 (Leiden: Brill, 2007), 337–­66;
and J. Arce, A. Chavarría, and G. Ripoll, “The Urban Domus in Late Antique His-
pania: Examples from Emerita, Barcino and Complutum,” in Housing in Late Antiquity,
305–­36.
     28. Bowes, Houses and Society, 54–­60.
     29.	Ibid., 95. For a set of same-­scale plans of Spanish villas, see Chavarría Arnau, El
final de las villae en Hispania, 96–­99. Similar plans are available in Balmelle, Les demeures
aristocratiques de l’Aquitaine; and Baldini Lippolis, La domus tardoantica.
     30. K.M.D. Dunbabin, The Roman Banquet: Images of Conviviality (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003), 141–­74.
     31. L. Schneider, Die Domäne als Weltbild: Wirkungsstrukturen der spätantiken
Bildersprache (Wiesbaden: F. Steiner, 1983), 68–­87. This is an exceptionally acute analy-
sis, despite dogmatic Marxist adhesion to the view of the late Roman estate as an autono-
mous latifundium. For a correction, see W. Raeck, “Publica non despiciens: Ergänzungen
zur Interpretation des Dominus-­Julius-­Mosaiks aus Karthago,” Mitteilungen des deutschen
Archäologischen Instituts: Römische Abteilung 94 (1987): 295–­308.
     32.	S. Djurić, “Mosaic of Philosophers in an Early Byzantine Villa at Nerodimlje,” in
VI Coloquio internacional sobre mosaico antiguo, 123–­34.
     33. The Age of Spirituality, no. 73, pp. 84–­85.
     34.	C. Jullian, Histoire de la Gaule (Paris: Hachette, 1993), 2:832n73.
     35.	Ibid., 2:464, 832n73, 468.
     36. Bowes, Houses and Society, 90–­95, esp. the map, figure 21 on p. 92. For villas in
the Balkans, see now Ćurčić, Architecture in the Balkans, 32–­40, 63–­66.
     37. D. Mattingly, “Being Roman: Expressing Identity in a Provincial Setting,” Jour­
nal of Roman Archaeology 17 (2004): 5–­25.
     38.	Scott, Art and Society in Fourth-­Century Britain, 78–­81.
     39.	Ibid., 118–­19; M. Henig and G. Soffe, “The Thruxton Roman Villa and Its Mo-
saic Pavement,” Journal of the British Archaeological Association 146 (1993): 1–­28.
     40. Dunbabin, Mosaics of the Greek and Roman World, 99–­100.
     41. K. Bowes and A. Gutteridge, “Rethinking the Later Roman Landscape,” Journal
of Roman Archaeology 18 (2005): 405–­13 is the most recent contribution to a lively de-
bate. See also Wickham, Framing the Early Middle Ages, 473–­81; and Chavarría Arnau,
El final de las villae en Hispania, 125–­41.
     42. Dunbabin, The Roman Banquet, 169–­74.
     43. K.M.D. Dunbabin, “Convivial Spaces: Dining and Entertainment in the Roman
Villa,” Journal of Roman Archaeology 9 (1996): 66–­80. A spectacular new stibadium has


                                            575
                             notes to pages 197–200


been discovered at Faragola in Apulia. It was designed for an intimate gathering of seven
guests: see G. Volpe, G. De Felice, and M. Turchiano, “La villa tardoantica di Faragola
(Ascoli Satriano) in Apulia,” in Villas Tardoantiguas en el Mediterráneo Occidental, ed.
A. Chavarría, J. Arce, and G. P. Brogiolo, Anejos de Archivo Español de Arqueología 39
(Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 2006), 221–­51 at pp. 229–­30
and figure 30, p. 240. See also L. Bek, “Quaestiones conviviales: The Idea of the Triclinium
and the Staging of Convivial Ceremony from Rome to Byzantium,” Analecta Romana
Instituti Danici 12 (1983): 81–­107; and B. Polci, “Some Aspects of the Transformation
of the Roman Domus between Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages,” in Theory and
Practice in Late Antique Archaeology, ed. L. Lavan and W. Bowden, Late Antique Archae-
ology 1 (Leiden: Brill, 2003), 79–­109 at pp. 80–­88.
    44.	Schneider, Die Domäne als Weltbild, 61.
    45. Thébert, “Private Life and Domestic Architecture,” 365.
    46. Balmelle, Les demeures aristocratiques d’Aquitaine, 60.
    47. Ausonius, Letter 1, Green, p. 193, Ausonius 2:62.
    48. P. Veyne, “Les cadeaux des colons à leur propriétaire: La neuvième Bucolique et
le mausolée d’Igel,” Revue archéologique (1981): 245–­52.
    49. G.M.A. Hanfmann, The Season Sarcophagus in Dumbarton Oaks (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1951), 1:142–­209.
    50. P. Kranz, Jahreszeiten-­Sarkophage: Entwicklung und Ikonographie des Motivs
der vier Jahreszeiten auf kaiserzeitlichen Sarkophagen und Sarkophagdeckeln, Deutsches
Archäologisches Institut: Die antiken Sarkophagreliefs, vol. 5, part 4 (Berlin: Mann,
1984), 169–­77.
    51. M. G. Maioli, “Il complesso archeologico di Via d’Azeglio a Ravenna: Gli edifici
di epoca tardoimperiale e bizantina,” Corso di cultura sull’arte ravennate e bizantina 41
(1994): 45–­61, figure 4 on p. 52; Archeologia urbana a Ravenna: La Domus dei tapetti
di pietro, il complesso archeologico di via d’Azeglio, ed. G. Montevecchi (Ravenna: Longo,
2004), 104–­9.
    52. Hanfmann, The Season Sarcophagus, 2:154, no. 192a.
    53. Brown, Body and Society, 26–­28.
    54. Firmicus Maternus, Mathesis 3.13.13, ed. W. Kroll and F. Skutsch (Stuttgart:
Teubner, 1968), 1:191.
    55. A. Leone, Changing Townscapes in North Africa from Late Antiquity to the Arab
Conquest, Munera 28 (Bari: Edipuglia, 2007), 59, 86–­87.
    56. A. Ennabli, “Les thermes du Thiase Marin de Sidi Ghrib (Tunisie),” Monuments
et mémoires publiés par l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres 68 (1986): 1–­59 at
p. 49; see now J. J. Rossiter, “Domus and Villa: Late Antique Housing in Carthage and Its
Territory,” in Housing in Late Antiquity, 367–­92 at pp. 386–­87.
    57.	Ennabli, “Les thermes du Thiase Marin,” 56–­57.
    58.	Y. Thébert, Thermes romains d’Afrique du Nord et leur contexte méditerranéen:
Études d’histoire et d’archéologie, Bibliothèque de l’École française d’Athènes et de Rome
315 (Rome: École française de Rome, 2003), 477–­78.
    59.	Vindicianus, Letter to the Emperor Valentinian 1.7, ed. M. Niedermann, De me­
dicamentis/Über Heilmittel, Corpus Medicorum Latinorum 5 (Berlin: Akademie, 1968),


                                           576
                             notes to pages 200–205


1:50. Exposure to the balance of heat, cold, and moisture in the bath is treated as an inte-
gral part of healing for acute indigestion.
    60. A. C. Dionisotti, “From Ausonius’ Schooldays? A Schoolbook and Its Relatives,”
Journal of Roman Studies 72 (1982): 83–­125 at p. 103.
    61. P. Brown, Authority and the Sacred: Aspects of the Christianisation of the Roman
World (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 8–­10.
    62. Augustine, Enarratio 1 in Psalm 34.7.
    63.	Coşkun, Die gens Ausoniana an der Macht, 216–­37 is a clear review of opinions.
    64.	R.P.H. Green, “Still Waters Run Deep: A New Study of the Professores of Bor-
deaux,” Classical Quarterly, n.s., 35 (1985): 491–­506.
    65.	See esp. Ausonius, Ephemeris 1 and 2, Green, pp. 7–­10, Ausonius 1:14–­22: Auso-
nius’s morning prayer. M. Skeb, Christo vivere: Studien zum literarischen Christusbild des
Paulinus von Nola, Hereditas 11 (Bonn: Borengässer, 1997), 23–­60 is a fair and percep-
tive interpretation of the religion of Ausonius.
    66. Ausonius, Gratiarum actio 18, Green, p. 159, Ausonius 2:266. Close to God, the
emperor was above fate: P. Monat, “Astrologie et pouvoir: Les subtilités de Firmicus Ma-
ternus,” in Pouvoir, divination, et prédestination dans le monde antique, ed. E. Smajda and
E. Geny (Besançon: Presses Universitaires Franc-­Comtoises, 1999), 133–­39.
    67. As suggested by Edwards, “The Beginnings of Christianization,” 141–­42. For a
different view, see now Cameron, Last Pagans, 174.
    68. Firmicus Maternus, Mathesis 1.2.1, Kroll and Skutsch, 1:6. The Mathesis has been
translated into English by J. R. Bram, Ancient Astrology: Theory and Practice (Park Ridge,
NJ: Noyes Press, 1975). There is also a French edition and translation by P. Monat, Fir­
micus Maternus: Mathesis, 3 vols. (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1992, 1994, 1997).
    69.	E.g., Firmicus Maternus, Mathesis 1.7.5 and 3.15.19, Kroll and Skutsch, 1:20 and
133.
    70. Ausonius, Parentalia 4.16, Green, p. 28, Ausonius 1:64.
    71. Augustine, Confessions 4.3.5; see also Augustine, Letter 138.1.3, where Vindicia-
nus’s ability to diagnose and to prescribe treatments for his patients is viewed as stem-
ming from an almost occult divinatory power.
    72. H. Brandenburg, “Christussymbole in frühchristlichen Bodenmosaiken,” Rö­
mische Quartalschrift 64 (1969): 74–­138.
    73. The Sevso Treasure, Bonham’s Private Exhibition (London: Bonham, 2006), 1–­12;
Dunbabin, The Roman Banquet, 141–­44.
    74. Leader-­Newby, Silver and Society in Late Antiquity, 139–­53.
    75. W. Raeck, Modernisierte Mythen: Zum Umgang der Spätantike mit klassischen
Bildthemen (Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 1992), 98–­121. See also the careful and perceptive study
of S. Muth, Erleben von Raum—­Leben im Raum: Zur Funktion mythologischer Mosaik­
bilder in der römisch-­kaiserzeitlichen Wohnarchitektur, Archäologie und Geschichte 10
(Heidelberg: Archäologie und Geschichte, 1998).
    76. P. Zanker and B. C. Ewald, Mit Mythen leben: Die Bildwerk der römischen Sar­
kophage (Munich: Hirmer, 2004), 266.
    77. A. Cameron, Greek Mythography in the Roman World (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2004).


                                           577
                            notes to pages 205–210


    78. Muth, Erleben von Raum—­Leben im Raum, 328.
    79. K. J. Shelton, The Esquiline Treasure (London: British Museum, 1981), esp. pp.
30–­33 and plate 11.
    80. H. Brandenburg, “Bellerophon christianus? Zur Deutung des Mosaiks von Hin-
ton St. Mary und zum Problem der Mythendarstellungen in der kaiserzeitlichen dekora-
tiven Kunst,” Römische Quartalschrift 63 (1968): 49–­86.
    81. J. M. Blázquez, Mosaicos romanos de Córdoba, Jaén y Málaga, Corpus de mosa-
icos de España 3 (Madrid: CSIC, 1981), plate 61A and pp. 77–­78.
    82. J. M. Arnaud and C. V. Fernandes, Construindo a memória: As colecções do Museu
Arqueológico do Carmo (Lisbon: Museu Arqueológico do Carmo, 2005), 239.
    83.	Stirling, The Learned Collector; N. Hannestad, Tradition in Late Antique Sculp­
ture: Conservation, Modernization, Production, Acta Jutlandica 69:2 (Aarhus, Denmark:
Aarhus University Press, 1994), 127–­44; M. Bergmann, Chiragan, Aphrodisias, Konstan­
tinopel: Zur mythologischen Skulptur der Spätantike, Deutsches Archäologisches Institut,
Rom: Palilia 7 (Wiesbaden: Reichert, 1999).
    84. H. Wrede, Die spätantike Hermengalerie von Welschbillig, Römische-­germanische
Forschungen 32 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1972), 46–­89.
    85. Paulinus, Letter 32.23.
    86. Paulinus, Poem 10.307–­14, in Green, p. 716, Ausonius 2:146.


                                    Chapter 13
                                Ex opulentissimo divite

      1. Balmelle, Les demeures aristocratiques d’Aquitaine, 146.
      2. Muth, Erleben von Raum—­Leben im Raum, 420–­21 and plate 33.4.
      3.	Trout, Paulinus of Nola, 53–­103; S. Mratschek, Der Briefwechsel des Paulinus
von Nola: Kommunikation und soziale Kontakte zwischen christlichen Intellektuellen,
Hypomnemata 134 (Göttingen: Vandenhoek and Ruprecht, 2002), 78–­103, 190–­243;
Coşkun, Die gens Ausoniana an der Macht, 99–­111. It is important to note that the chro-
nology of these years (and hence the pace of Paulinus’s evolution) is not certain. Coşkun
prefers a tighter schedule and a faster pace, clearly determined by a rapid succession of
“existential threats”—­execution of his brother in 390, baptism at Easter 391, subsequent
retreat to Spain. By making him retire to Spain in 389, the other authors give Paulinus
more time to make up his mind and remain more uncertain than is Coşkun as to the
exact sequence of events that may have contributed to Paulinus’s renunciation.
      4. Ausonius, Letter 23.35–­38, Green, p. 226, Ausonius, 2:108.
      5. For an analogy to the position of Ausonius, see S. Kettering, Patrons, Brokers,
and Clients in Seventeenth-­Century France (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986).
H. Sivan, “The Last Gallic Prose Panegyric: Paulinus of Nola on Theodosius I,” in Studies
in Latin Literature and Roman History, ed. C. Deroux, Collection Latomus 227 (Brus-
sels: Latomus, 1994), 7:577–­94 posits active alienation from Theodosius I on the part of
Paulinus. This may well be the case.



                                          578
                             notes to pages 211–216


      6. Paulinus, Poem 21.416–­20, ed. W. von Hartel, Sancti Pontii Meropii Paulini
­ olani Carmina, CSEL 30 (Vienna: Tempsky, 1894), 171–­72; trans. P. G. Walsh, The
N
Poems of St. Paulinus of Nola, Ancient Christian Writers 40 (New York: Newman Press,
1975), 186. See esp. H. Sivan, “The Death of Paulinus’ Brother,” Rheinisches Museum für
Philologie 139 (1996): 170–­79; and Coşkun, Die gens Ausoniana an der Macht, 102–­4.
      7.	Symmachus, Letter 2.30.4, Callu, 1:174; Sogno, Symmachus, 67–­76.
      8. H. E. Chadwick, Priscillian of Avila: The Occult and the Charismatic in the Early
Church (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976) remains the most learned and reliable guide;
see now M. Conti, Priscillian of Avila: The Complete Works (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2010); with V. Burrus, The Making of a Heretic: Gender, Authority and the Priscil­
lianist Controversy (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995); and M. B. Simões,
Prisciliano e as tensões religiosas do século IV (Lisbon: Universidade Lusíada, 2002).
      9.	Escribano, “Heresy and Orthodoxy in Fourth-­Century Hispania.”
     10. K. Bowes, “‘Une coterie espagnole pieuse’: Christian Archaeology and Chris-
tian Communities in Theodosian Hispania,” in Hispania in Late Antiquity, 189–­258; see
also Bowes, “Building Sacred Landscapes: Villas and Cult,” in Villas Tardoantiguas en el
Mediterráneo Occidental, 73–­95.
     11. Codex Theodosianus 1.16.12 (AD 369).
     12. Council of Saragossa (AD 380), canons 2, 4, and 7, Concilios visigóticos e hispano-­
romanos, ed. J. Vives (Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 1963),
16–­18.
     13. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values and Religious Change, 142–­46.
     14.	Rutilius Namatianus, De reditu suo 1:440–­46, ed. C. H. Keene, trans. G. F. Savage-­
Armstrong, Rutilii Claudii Namatiani De reditu suo libri duo/ The Home-­Coming of Ru­
tilius Claudius Namatianus from Rome to Gaul in the Year 416 A.D. (London: George
Bell and Sons, 1907), 144–­45.
     15. Julian, Oratio 7, 224B, trans. W. C. Wright, Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1949), 2:122.
     16. Augustine, Letter 262.5.
     17.	Sulpicius Severus, Chronica 2.46.2, ed. G. de Senneville-­Grave, Sulpice Sévère:
Chroniques, SC 441 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1999), 334–36.
     18. The best introductions to Sulpicius Severus and his worldview remain J. Fon-
taine, Sulpice Sévère: Vie de Saint Martin, SC 133 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1967), 1:56, 99; and
C. Stancliffe, St. Martin and His Hagiographer: History and Miracle in Sulpicius Severus
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983); Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du mouvement monastique,
2:93–­156.
     19. Paulinus, Letter 27.3, ed. W. Hartel, in Sancti Pontii Meropii Paulini Nolani
Epistulae, CSEL 29 (Vienna: Tempsky, 1894), 239–­40; trans. P. G. Walsh, Letters of St.
Paulinus of Nola, Ancient Christian Writers 36 (New York: Newman Press, 1967), 2:91.
     20.	Sulpicius Severus, Life of Martin 10.6 and 10.21; Dialogues 2[3].10; Vogüé, Hi­
stoire littéraire du mouvement monastique, 2:48.
     21. The reactions of contemporaries to the renunciation of Paulinus are discussed by
Trout, Paulinus of Nola, 1–­15. Mratschek, Der Briefwechsel, 80–­81, esp. p. 16, shows the



                                            579
                             notes to pages 216–220


active role Paulinus played in circulating this image of himself. At pp. 608–­13, Mratschek
collects all contemporary and later references to Paulinus’s renunciation. Paulinus’s own
statements about himself are collected at pp. 605–­8.
     22.	Sulpicius Severus, Life of Saint Martin 24.4–­5.
     23. Ambrose, Letter 27 (58).3.
     24.	Trout, Paulinus of Nola, 2.
     25. Augustine, City of God 1.10.
     26. Paulinus, Letter 5.22, Hartel, p. 39, Walsh, 1:69. For readers of German, I would
particularly commend the edition with introduction and translation of M. Skeb, Pauli­
nus von Nola: Briefe/Epistulae, Fontes Christianae 25/1–­3 (Freiburg: Herder, 1998).
     27. John of Ephesus, Lives of the Eastern Saints 21, ed. and trans. E. W. Brooks, Pa-
trologia Orientalis 17 (Paris: Firmin-­Didot, 1923), 1:228.
     28.	See now M. Roberts, The Humblest Sparrow: The Poetry of Venantius Fortunatus
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2009), 71–­82; s.v. “Leontius 4,” Prosopogra­
phy of the Later Roman Empire 3B, ed. J. R. Martindale (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1992), 774; see K. Stroheker, Der senatorische Adel im spätantiken Gallien
(Tübingen: Alma Mater, 1948), 188; M. Heinzelmann, “Gallische Prosopographie, 260–­
527,” Francia 10 (1982): 531–­718; and C. Settipani, “Ruricius Ier évêque de Limoges
et ses relations familiales,” Prosopographica X, Francia 18 (1991): 195–­222. The reader
should know that such links remain conjectural.
     29. Codex Theodosianus 9.42–­47 (AD 369).
     30.	S. Mratschek, “Multis enim notissima est sanctitas loci: Paulinus and the Gradual
Rise of Nola as a Center of Christian Hospitality,” Journal of Early Christian Studies 9
(2001): 511–­53; J. A. Gutilla, “Dalla Capua di Ausonio (Roma altera quondam) alla
Nola di Paolino (post urbem titulos sortitus secundos),” Journal of Early Christian Stud­
ies 12 (2004): 523–­36; Savino, Campania tardoantica, 282.
     31.	Trout, Paulinus of Nola, 47–­49.
     32. Paulinus, Letter 32.17, Hartel, p. 291, Walsh, 2:149. See Trout, Paulinus of Nola,
46–­148.
     33.	Trout, Paulinus of Nola, 145–­59.
     34.	C. Kelly, review of God and Gold in Late Antiquity by D. Janes, Journal of Roman
Studies 89 (1999): 253.
     35. Ausonius, Professors 10.51, Green, p. 50, Ausonius, 1:116.
     36.	See esp. Trout, Paulinus of Nola, 121–­32; and Mratschek, Der Briefwechsel,
550–­52.
     37. Paulinus, Letter 28.1, Hartel, p. 241; see esp. M.-­Y. Perrin, “Ad implendum carita­
tis officium: La place des courriers dans la correspondance de Paulin de Nole,” Mélanges de
l’École française de Rome: Antiquité 104 (1992): 1025–­68.
     38. Paulinus, Letter 22.2, Hartel, p. 55, Walsh, 1:198; cf. Cyprian, Letter 76.2.4 on
Christians in prison during the Decian persecution: see Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du
mouve­ment monastique, 1:9.
     39. Paulinus, Letter 5.21, Hartel, p. 39, Walsh, 1:69; and Letter 23.6, Hartel, p. 163,
Walsh, 2:7.
     40. Paulinus, Letter 22.2, Hartel, p. 155, Walsh, 1:197.


                                            580
                            notes to pages 220–225


    41. Paulinus, Poem 21.529–­30, Hartel, p. 175, Walsh, p. 190. See G. Luongo, Lo spec­
chio dell’agiografo: San Felice nei carmi XV e XVI di Paolino di Nola (Naples: Tempi Mo­
derni, 1992).
    42. The best treatment of this theme is in Skeb, Christo vivere, 215–­60; see also
L. Padovese, “Considerazioni sulla dottrina cristologica e soteriologica di Paolino di
Nola,” in Anchora vitae: Atti del II Convegno Paoliniano nel XVI Centenario del Ritiro di
Paolino a Nola, ed. G. Luongo (Naples: Redenzione, 1998), 209–­24.
    43. Paulinus, Letter 24.17, Hartel, p. 217, Walsh, 2:67.
     44.	E. Dassmann, Die Frömmigkeit des Kirchenvaters Ambrosius von Mailand (Münster-­
in-­Westfalen: Aschendorff, 1965), 116–­22; K. Baus, Das Gebet zu Christus beim hl. Am­
brosius, ed. E. Dassmann (Berlin: Philo, 2000).
    45. Ambrose, Hymn 4, cited by Faustus of Riez, Letter 7, ed. A. Engelbrecht, in Fausti
Reiensis praeter sermones pseudo-­eusebianos opera, CSEL 21 (Vienna: Tempsky, 1891),
203; Dassmann, Die Frömmigkeit des Kirchenvaters Ambrosius, 118.
    46. Matthias Skeb, the excellent German translator of the letters of Paulinus, fre-
quently translates “humble” and “humility” as bedeutungslos and Bedeutungslosigkeit.
    47. B. C. Ewald, Der Philosoph als Leitbild: Ikonographische Untersuchungen in rö­
mischen Sarkophagreliefs (Mainz: Zabern, 1999).
    48.	To take one example: in the scene of the judgment of Christ on the Traditio Legis
sarcophagus in the Musée de l’Arles antique, Pilate is shown wearing quasi-­imperial dress
faced by a Christ in an utterly simple robe: see D’un monde à l’autre: Naissance d’une
Chrétienté en Provence, IVe–­VIe siècle, ed. J. Guyon and M. Heijmans (Arles: Musée
de l’Arles antique, 2002), 66, now in Picturing the Bible: The Earliest Christian Art,
ed. J. Spier (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press with Kimbell Art Museum, 2007),
no. 64, on pp. 242–­43.
    49.	See esp. S. Pricoco, “Paolino di Nola e il monachesimo del suo tempo,” in Anchora
vitae, 59–­92.
    50. Paulinus, Letter 5.7, Hartel, p. 28, Walsh, 1:59.


                                  Chapter 14
                                Commercium spiritale

     1. Waddell, The Wandering Scholars, 2.
     2.	Ibid., 12.
     3.	Trout, Paulinus of Nola; Mratschek, Der Briefwechsel; C. Conybeare, Paulinus
Noster: Self and Symbol in the Letters of Paulinus of Nola (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2000).
     4.	Siricius, Letter 1.10, PL 13:1143; Trout, Paulinus of Nola, 94–­95.
     5. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 154.
     6. Brown, Body and Society, 370–­73.
     7. Augustine, De cura gerenda pro mortuis 19.
     8.	T. Lehmann, “Zu Alarichs Beutezug in Campanien: Ein neu entdecktes Gedicht
des Paulinus Nolanus,” Römische Quartalschrift 93 (1998): 181–­99.


                                          581
                             notes to pages 226–230


      9. Uranius, De obitu Paulini 9, trans. Trout, Paulinus of Nola, 296.
     10. Poem 21.419, Hartel, p. 172, Walsh, p. 186.
     11. G. Otranto, “Paolino di Nola e il Cristianesimo dell’Italia Meridionale,” in An­
chora vitae, 35–­58 at p. 48.
     12. Paulinus, Poem 20.312–­87, Hartel, pp. 153–­56, Walsh, pp. 167–­70.
     13. Paulinus, Poem 20.67–­209, Hartel, pp. 145–­50, Walsh, pp. 159–­64; D. Trout,
“Christianizing the Nolan Countryside: Animal Sacrifice at the Tomb of St. Felix,” Jour­
nal of Early Christian Studies 3 (1995): 281–­98.
     14. A. Ferrua, “Graffiti di pellegrini alla tomba di San Felice,” Palladio, n.s., 13
(1963): 17–­19.
     15.	C. Ebanista, Et manet in mediis quasi gemma intersita tectis: La basilica di S. Fe­
lice a Cimitile. Storia degli scavi, fasi edilizie, reperti, Memorie dell’Accademia di archeo-
logia, lettere e belle arti in Napoli 15 (Naples: Arte Tipografica, 2003); T. Lehmann,
Paulinus Nolanus und die Basilica Nova in Cimitile/Nola: Studien zu einem zentralen
Denkmal der spätantik-­frühchristlichen Architektur (Wiesbaden: P. Reichert, 2004).
     16. Lehmann, Paulinus Nolanus und die Basilica Nova, 62, 104.
     17. P. Pensabene, “Marmi e reimpiego nel santuario di S. Felice a Cimitile,” in Cimi­
tile e Paolino di Nola. La tomba di S. Felice e il centro di pellegrinaggio: Trent’anni di ri­
cerche, ed. H. Brandenburg and L. Ermini Pani (Città del Vaticano: Pontificio Istituto di
Archeologia Cristiana, 2003), 129–­207.
     18.	Sidonius Apollinaris, Poem 22.158–­203; see esp. M. M. Kiely, “The Interior
Courtyard: The Heart of Cimitile/Nola,” Journal of Early Christian Studies 12 (2004):
443–­97 at p. 452n35; and J. Elsner, Imperial Rome and Christian Triumph: The Art of the
Roman Empire, AD 100–­450 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 255–­59.
     19. A. van den Hoek and J. J. Herrmann, “Paulinus of Nola, Courtyards, and Can-
thari,” Harvard Theological Review 93 (2000): 173–­219.
     20.	S. Ellis, “Shedding Light on Late Roman Housing,” in Housing in Late Antiquity,
283–­302 at pp. 292–­99.
     21. Bowes, “‘Une coterie espagnole pieuse,’” 255.
     22.	Symmachus, Letter 2.60.2, Callu, 1:195.
     23.	R. Kaster, Emotion, Restraint, and Community in Ancient Rome (London: Ox-
ford University Press, 2005), 13–­27. See Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 16.8.8–­9,
where it is precisely the splendor and the near-­imperial ceremony associated with the life
of a great villa owner that “destroyed noble houses” in Spain by arousing the suspicion of
the emperor.
     24. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 155–­56. For the
novelty of such images in a Christian context, see T. Lehmann, “Martinus und Paulinus
in Primuliacum (Gallien): Zu den frühesten nachweisbaren Mönchsbildnissen (um 400)
in einem Kirchenkomplex,” in Vom Kloster zum Klosterverband: Das Werkzeug der Schrift­
lichkeit, ed. H. Keller and F. Neiske (Munich: W. Fink, 1997), 56–­67. For a translation
and commentary of Paulinus’s letters to Sulpicius Severus on these matters, see R. C. Gold­
schmidt, Paulinus’ Churches at Nola: Translation and Commentary (Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1940). This study precedes the recent archaeological investigations, which have



                                            582
                              notes to pages 230–234


largely confirmed Paulinus’s descriptions of his own buildings at Cimitile. Alas, Primulia-
cum has not survived.
    25. Kiely, “The Interior Courtyard”; G. Herbert de la Portbarré-­Viard, Descriptions
monumentales et discours sur l’édification chez Paulin de Nole: Le regard et la lumière (epist.
32 et carm. 27 et 28), Supplements to Vigiliae Christianae 79 (Leiden: Brill, 2006).
    26.	Trout, Paulinus of Nola, 170–­72.
    27. Paulinus, Poem 27.351–­52, Hartel, p. 277, Walsh, p. 283.
    28. The best appreciation of Paulinus’s use of paradox as a way of dissolving apparent
antitheses is Conybeare, Paulinus Noster, 40, 120–­21.
    29.	Romanos Melodos, Kontakion on Joseph I, Strophe 1, trans. M. Carpenter, Konta­
kia of Romanos, Byzantine Melodist II (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1973), 83.
    30. Proclus, Commentary on the Republic of Plato, Diss. 6, 77.24, trans. A. J. Fes-
tugière, Proclus: Commentaire sur la République (Paris: Vrin, 1970), 1:95.
    31. Paulinus, Letter 32.22, Hartel, p. 296, Walsh, 2:154.
    32. W. Wordsworth, The Prelude 2.383–­87.
    33. D. Janes, God and Gold in Late Antiquity (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998), 84–­93.
    34. Paulinus, Letter 32.21, Hartel, p. 296, Walsh, 2:153–­54.
    35.	C. E. Newlands, Statius’ Silvae and the Poetics of Empire (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2002), 145n44. For a more “cosmic” use of commercium/commercia,
as the joining of heaven and earth, in the work of the astrologer Manilius, see K. Volk,
“Heavenly Steps: Manilius 4.119–­121 and Its Background,” in Heavenly Realms and
Earthly Realities in Late Antique Religions, ed. R. S. Boustan and A. Y. Reed (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2004), 34–­46 at p. 45.
    36. Paulinus, Poem 10.53–­56, Hartel, p. 26, Walsh, p. 59.
    37.	Conybeare, Paulinus Noster, 127.
    38. Paulinus, Poem 21.431–­35, Hartel, p. 172, Walsh, p. 187.
    39.	On Pammachius, see Mratschek, Der Briefwechsel, 347–­48; and Prosopographie
chrétienne du Bas-­Empire, 2:1576–­81.
    40.	See M. Schmidt, “Ambrosii carmen de obitu Probi: Ein Gedicht des Mailänder
Bischofs in epigraphischer Überlieferung,” Hermes 127 (1999): 99–­116 at pp. 101–­3 (I
do not accept the author’s ascription of the poem to Ambrose); J. F. Matthews, “Four
Funerals and a Wedding: This World and the Next in Fourth-­Century Rome,” in Trans­
formations of Late Antiquity: Essays for Peter Brown, ed. P. Rousseau and M. Papoutsakis
(Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2009), 129–­46 at pp. 134–­38.
    41.	Symmachus, Letter 3.88.1, Callu, 2:79.
    42. Paulinus, Letter 13.14, Hartel, pp. 95–­96, Walsh, 1:130. The implications of
Christian refrigerium practice have been exceptionally well studied by Diefenbach, Rö­
mische Erinnerungsräume, 38–­80. On a significant detail, see now D. Shanzer, “Jerome,
Tobit, Alms, and the Vita Aeterna,” in Jerome of Stridon: His Life, Writings and Legacy,
ed. A. Cain and J. Lössl (Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2009), 87–­103 at pp. 98–­102.
    43. Paulinus, Letter 13.14, Hartel, p. 96, Walsh, 1:130. The role of the angels in carry-
ing Pammachius’s alms to Christ echoes the offertory prayer of the Eucharist as described



                                             583
                             notes to pages 234–239


in Ambrose, De sacramentis 4.27: see esp. Magnani, “Du don aux églises au don pour le
salut de l’âme,” 1029n24.
     44. Paulinus, Letter 13.11, Hartel, p. 93, Walsh, 1:127.
     45. Paulinus, Letter 13.15, Hartel, p. 96, Walsh, 1:131.
     46.	See most recently L. Grig, “Throwing Parties for the Poor: Poverty and Splen-
dour in the Late Antique Church,” in Poverty in the Roman World, 145–­61. The terms
munus and munerarius had been used by other Christian writers—­Cyprian, De opere et
elemosynis 21 and Jerome, Letter 66.5—­but Paulinus’s is the most consequential exploita-
tion of the comparison.
     47. Horden and Purcell, The Corrupting Sea, 447; Brown, Poverty and Leadership,
50–­51.
     48.	See esp. Arthur, Romans in Northern Campania, 89–­94. The Ager Campanus
may have been more prosperous than northern Campania: Savino, Campania Tardoan­
tica, 207–­18, but it has not been surveyed in the same way.
     49. Uranius, De obitu Paulini 3, Trout, p. 294.
     50. Paulinus, Poem 21.386–­94, Hartel, p. 171, Walsh, p. 185.
     51. Paulinus, Letter 13.19, Hartel, p. 100, Walsh, 1:135.
     52. Paulinus, Letter 13.17, Hartel, p. 98, Walsh, 1:132; Poem 31.466, Hartel, p. 323,
Walsh, p. 323. See, in general, J. Desmulliez, “Paulin de Nole et la paupertas,” in Les Pères
de l’Église et la voix des pauvres, 245–­63.
     53. Babylonian Talmud: Baba Bathra 10a, trans. M. Simon (London: Soncino, 1935),
45.
     54. A. Ferrua, “Cancelli di Cimitile con scritte bibliche,” Römische Quartalschrift 68
(1973): 50–­68.
     55. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 2472.
     56.	Trout, Paulinus of Nola, 133–­59; see also Mratschek, Der Briefwechsel, 120–­35.
     57. Paulinus, Letter 16.1, Hartel, p. 115, Walsh, 1:151; see Mratschek, Der Briefwech­
sel, 139–­40, 628. Paulinus also wrote Poem 22 to Jovius, effectively summarizing the
contents of his letter.
     58. Paulinus, Letter 16.2, Hartel, p. 115, Walsh, 1:152–­53.
     59.	E.g., D. Vaquerizo Gil and J. R. Carillo Díaz-­Pinés, “The Roman Villa of El Ruedo
(Almedinilla, Córdoba),” Journal of Roman Archaeology 8 (1995): 121–­54 at p. 144.
     60. Paulinus, Letter 16.9, Hartel, p. 122, Walsh, 1:160.
     61. G. Bonamente, “Chiesa e impero nel IV secolo: Constanzo II fra il 357 e il 361,”
in La comunità cristiana di Roma: La sua vita e la sua cultura dalle origini all’alto medio­
evo, ed. L. Pani Ermini and P. Siniscalco (Vatican City: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia
Cristiana, 2000), 113–­38; Brown, Authority and the Sacred, 16–­22; G. W. Bowersock,
“From Emperor to Bishop: The Self-­Conscious Transformation of Political Power in the
Fourth Century A.D.,” Classical Philology 81 (1986): 298–­307 at pp. 303–­6, now in Se­
lected Papers on Late Antiquity.
     62. H. Behlmer, Schenute von Atripe: De Iudicio (Torino, Museo Egizio: Catalogo
63000 Cod. IV) (Turin: Museo Egizio, 1996), 267.
     63.	Schneider, Die Domäne als Weltbild, 100–­123.



                                            584
                              notes to pages 239–243


    64. P. Baumann, Spätantike Stifter im Heiligen Land: Darstellungen und Inschriften
auf Bodenmosaik in Kirchen, Synagogen und Privathäusern (Wiesbaden: Reichert, 1999),
195–­267.
    65.	Conybeare, Paulinus Noster, 16, 161–­65.


                                    Chapter 15
                          Propter magnificentiam urbis Romae

      1. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 16.10.13–­17 on Constantius II first entering
Rome. I wish that the reader had available an imagined walk through Rome in the fourth
century, such as Diane Favro has provided for the Rome of Augustus: D. Favro, The
Urban Image of Augustan Rome (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 255–­
79. The best introduction remains R. Krautheimer, Rome: Profile of a City, 312–­1408
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980).
      2.	Strabo, Geography 3.5.8.
      3. J. Hillner, “Domus, Family, and Inheritance: The Senatorial Family House in Late
Antique Rome,” Journal of Roman Studies 93 (2003): 129–­45.
      4. L. Spera, Il paesaggio suburbano di Roma dall’antichità al medioevo: Il comprenso­
rio tra le vie Latina e Ardeatina dalle Mura Aureliane al III miglio (Rome: Bretschneider,
1999), 439–­42.
      5.	See esp. E. Champlin, “The Suburbium of Rome,” American Journal of Ancient
History 7 (1982): 97–­117; N. Purcell, “Tomb and Suburb,” in Römische Gräberstrasse:
Selbstdarstellung, Status, Standard, ed. H. von Hesberg and P. Zanker, Bayerische Aka­
demie der Wissenschaften: Philologisch-­historische Klasse/Abhandlungen, NF 96 (Mu-
nich: Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1987), 25–­41; Suburbium: Il suburbio di
Roma dalla crisi del sistema delle ville a Gregorio Magno, ed. P. Pergola, R. Santangeli
Valenzani, and R. Volpe, Collection de l’École française de Rome 311 (Rome: École fran-
çaise de Rome, 2003).
      6. W. Scheidel, “Germs for Rome,” in Rome the Cosmopolis, ed. C. Edwards and
G. Woolf (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 159–­76 at p. 159.
      7. Jerome, Letter 43.3, ed. I. Hilberg, CSEL 54.1 (Vienna: Österreichische Akade-
mie der Wissenschaften, 1996), 320. All citations from the letters of Jerome in this and
the next two chapters will refer to the respective volumes and pages of this edition.
      8.	Curran, Pagan City and Christian Capital, 116–­36; Lizzi Testa, Senatori, popolo,
papi, 105–­25.
      9.	C. Pietri, Roma Christiana: Recherches sur l’Église de Rome, son organisation, sa
politique, son idéologie de Miltiade à Sixte III (311–­440), Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises
de d’Athènes et de Rome 224 (Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1976), 3–­17, 77–­82; R. Krautheimer,
Rome, 3–­31; and idem, Three Christian Capitals: Topography and Politics (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1983), 7–­40.
     10.	Curran, Pagan City and Christian Capital, 90–­114; E. D. Hunt, “Imperial Build-
ing at Rome: The Role of Constantine,” in Bread and Circuses, 57–­76. See now R. R.



                                             585
                             notes to pages 243–248


Holloway, Constantine and Rome (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004), 105–­
24; and Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values and Religious Change, 85–­87.
    11.	See now the critical study of G. W. Bowersock, “Peter and Constantine,” in
St. Peter’s in the Vatican, ed. W. Tronzo (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005),
5–­15. But see P. Liverani, “Saint Peter’s, Leo the Great and the Leprosy of Constantine,”
Papers of the British School at Rome 76 (2008): 155–­72 at p. 161.
    12. Holloway, Constantine and Rome, 100–­101; M. J. Johnson, The Roman Imperial
Mausoleum in Late Antiquity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 139–­56.
D. J. Stanley, “Santa Costanza: History, Archaeology, Function, Patronage and Dating,”
Arte medievale, n.s., 3 (2004): 119–­40 argues for a later dating.
    13. J. Guyon, Le cimetière aux deux lauriers: Recherches sur les catacombes romaines,
Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises d’Athènes et de Rome 264 (Rome: École française de
Rome, 1987); Holloway, Constantine and Rome, 86–104; Diefenbach, Römische Erin­
nerungsräume, 153–­212; Johnson, The Roman Imperial Mausoleum, 110–­18.
    14. Liber Pontificalis 34: Silvester, now ed. H. Geertman, in Atti del colloquio inter­
nazionale Il Liber Pontificalis e la storia materiale, Medelingen van het Nederlands Insti-
tuut te Rome: Antiquity 60–­61 (Assen: Van Gorcum, 2003), 289, 319–­20, trans. Davis,
The Book of the Pontiffs, 14.
    15. Liber Pontificalis 42: Innocentius, Geertman, pp. 319–­20, Davis, pp. 31–­32.
    16. A clear map of the tituli and of the basilicas of Rome is provided in Bowes, Pri­
vate Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, figure 10, p. 67 and figure 11, p. 73.
    17. Inscriptiones Christianae Urbis Romae, vol. 2, part 1, ed. G. B. de Rossi (Rome:
P. Cuggiani, 1888), 150. I accept this person as the Pammachius of Paulinus’s letter: see
Pietri, Roma Christiana, 488.
    18. Pietri, Roma Christiana, 571–­73; idem, “Recherches sur les domus ecclesiae,”
Revue des études augustiniennes 24 (1978): 3–­21; and idem, “Donateurs et pieux établisse-
ments d’après le légendier romain (Ve–­VIIe s.),” in Hagiographie, cultures et sociétés, IVe–­
XIIe siècles (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1981), 434–­53, now in Christiana respublica:
Éléments d’une enquête sur le christianisme antique, Collection de l’École française de
Rome 234 (Rome: École française de Rome, 1997), 1:127–­45, 2:1187–­1205.
    19. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 71.
    20.	See, for example, P.A.B. Llewellyn, “The Roman Church during the Laurentian
Schism: Priests and Senators,” Church History 45 (1976): 417–­27; and the many sugges-
tive perspectives in Religion, Dynasty and Patronage in Early Christian Rome, 300–­900,
ed. K. Cooper and J. Hillner (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007).
    21. J. Hillner, “Families, Patronage and the Titular Churches of Rome, c. 300–­
c. 600,” in Religion, Dynasty and Patronage, 225–­61.
    22. Pietri, Roma Christiana, 461–­573.
    23.	Ibid., 573; with Pietri, “Évergétisme et richesses ecclésiastiques dans l’Italie du
IVe à la fin du Ve siècle: L’exemple romain,” Ktèma 3 (1978): 317–­37, now in Christiana
respublica, 2:813–­33.
    24. Pietri, Roma Christiana, 723.
    25. For an overview, see Salzman, The Making of a Christian Aristocracy, 69–­137.



                                            586
                             notes to pages 249–252


     26.	S. Orlandi, Epigrafia anfiteatrale dell’occidente romano, vol 6, Roma, Vetera 15
(Rome: Quasar, 2004), 554; F. Guidobaldi, “Le domus tardoantiche di Roma come ‘sen-
sori’ delle trasformazioni culturali e sociali,” in The Transformations of Vrbs Roma, 53–­68
at pp. 62–­63.
     27.	See esp. Guidobaldi, “Le domus tardoantiche di Roma”; Christie, From Constan­
tine to Charlemagne, 240.
     28. Guidobaldi, “Le domus tardoantiche di Roma,” 62, 66; Guidobaldi, “La fondazi-
one delle basiliche titolari di Roma nel IV e V secolo: Assenze e presenze nel Liber Pon­
tificalis,” in Atti del colloquio internazionale Il Liber Pontificalis, 5–­12.
     29. A. Wallace-­Hadrill, Rome’s Cultural Revolution (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2008), 354.
     30. J. Hillner, “Clerics, Property and Patronage: The Case of the Roman Titular
Churches,” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 59–­68 at p. 60.
     31. Wallace-­Hadrill, Rome’s Cultural Revolution, 370.
     32. Dresken-­Weiland, Sarkophagbestattungen, 31–­33.
     33. L. Spera, “Un cubicolo monumentale nella catacomba di Pretestato,” Rivista di
archeologia cristiana 68 (1992): 279–­307.
     34. Die Katakombe “Commodilla”: Repertorium der Malereien, ed. J. G. Deckers,
G. Mietke, and A. Weiland, Roma Sotteranea Cristiana 10 (Vatican: Pontificio Istituto
di Archeologia Cristiana, 1994), 1:89–­104 and color plates nos. 19–­31. See also P. Per-
gola, “Mensores frumentarii Christiani et annone à la fin de l’Antiquité (Relecture d’un
cycle de peintures),” Rivista di archeologia cristiana 66 (1990): 167–­84.
     35. A. Piganiol, L’empire chrétien (325–­395), Histoire romaine 4:2 (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1947), 226–­27.
     36.	See Liber Pontificalis 39, Davis, p. 30. See esp. Pietri, Roma Christiana, 461–­64;
and Curran, Pagan City and Christian Capital, 144–­45.
     37. Lizzi Testa, Senatori, popolo, papi, 129–­70, 195; but see Diefenbach, Römische
Erinnerungsräume, 224–­42, esp. 237; M. Raimondi, “Elezione iudicio Dei e turpe convi­
cium: Damaso e Ursino tra storia ecclesiastica e amministrazione romana,” Aevum 83
(2009): 169–­208. An unknown clarissima femina Anastasia did contribute to the baptis-
tery built by Damasus in Saint Peter’s: H. Brandenburg, “Das Baptisterium und der
Brunnen des Atriums von Alt-­St.Peter in Rom,” Boreas 26 (2003): 55–­71 at pp. 64–­65.
     38. This is seen clearly by C. Pietri, “Damase, évêque de Rome,” in Saecularia Dama­
siana, Studi di Antichità Cristiana 39 (Vatican: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cris-
tiana, 1986), 31–­58, now in Christiana respublica, 1:49–­76. Diefenbach, Römische Erin­
nerungsräume, 289–329 is an outstanding characterization of the inscriptions of
Damasus. See now U. Reutter, Damasus, Bischof von Rom (366–­384), Studien und Texte
zu Antike und Christentum 55 (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2009), 57–­153.
     39. Diefenbach, Römische Erinnerungsräume, 302, 316n355.
     40. J. Guyon, “Damase et l’illustration des martyrs: Les accents de la dévotion et
l’enjeu d’une pastorale,” in Martyrium in Multidisciplinary Perspective: Memorial Louis
Reekmans, ed. M. Lamberigts and P. van Deun (Louvain: Peeters, 1995), 157–­77 at
p. 176.



                                           587
                             notes to pages 252–257


    41. s.v. “Florus 1,” Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire, 1:367–­68.
    42. J. Fontaine, “Damase, poète théodosien: L’imaginaire poétique des Epigram­
mata,” in Saecularia Damasiana, 115–­45.
    43. J. Guyon, “L’oeuvre de Damase dans le cimetière ‘Aux deux lauriers’ sur la Via
Labicana,” in Saecularia Damasiana, 227–­58 at pp. 253–­55. Given their siting we should
not exaggerate the contemporary impact of these inscriptions: see N. McLynn, “Seeing
and Believing: Aspects of Conversion from Antoninus Pius to Louis the Pious,” in Con­
version in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages: Seeing and Believing, ed. K. Mills
and A. Grafton (Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press, 2003), 224–­70 at pp.
229–­31.
    44. Pietri, “Damase, évêque de Rome,” 55–­57.
    45.	C. Pietri, “Le serment du soldat chrétien: Les épisodes de la militia Christi sur les
sarcophages,” Mélanges d’Archéologie et d’Histoire 74 (1962): 649–­64, now in Christiana
respublica, 2: 1134–64; M. Dulaey, “La scène dite de l’arrestation de Pierre: Nouvelle
proposition de lecture,” Rivista di Archeologia Cristiana 84 (2008): 299–­346.
    46. J. G. Deckers, “Vom Denker zum Diener: Bemerkungen zu den Folgen der kon-
stantinischen Wende im Spiegel der Sarkophagplastik,” in Innovation in der Spätantike,
ed. B. Brenk (Wiesbaden: Reichert, 1996), 137–­72.
    47. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 27.3.14, Rolfe, 3:20, Hamilton, p. 336.
    48. Jerome, Contra Iohannem Hierosolymitanum 8, PL 23:361C; see M. Kahlos,
“Vettius Agorius Praetextatus and the Rivalry between the Bishops in Rome in 366–­367,”
Arctos 31 (1997): 41–­54.
    49. Gesta inter Liberium et Felicem 10, Collectio Avellana, ed. O. Günther, CSEL 35
(Vienna: Tempsky, 1895), 1:4; see esp. J. Fontaine, “Un sobriquet perfide de Damase: Ma­
tronarum auriscalpius,” in Hommages à Henri le Bonnec: Res sacrae, ed. D. Porte and J.-­P.
Néraudau, Collection Latomus 201 (Brussels: Latomus, 1988), 177–­92 at pp. 180–­81.
    50.	S. Lunn-­Rockliffe, Ambrosiaster’s Political Theology (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2007), 33–­86. See also D. G. Hunter, “The Significance of Ambrosiaster,” Journal
of Early Christian Studies 17 (2009): 1–­26. Parts of Ambrosiaster’s commentaries have
been translated: G. L. Bray, Ambrosiaster: Commentaries on Romans and 1–­2 Corinthians
(Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2009).
    51. Lunn-­Rockliffe, Ambrosiaster’s Political Theology, 130–­45.
    52. Ambrosiaster, Comm. in 1 Cor. 11.7, ed. H. J. Vogels, CSEL 81:2 (Vienna: Temp-
sky, 1968), 102.
    53. Ambrosiaster, Quaestio 35, ed. A. Souter, CSEL 50 (Vienna: Tempsky, 1908), 63.
    54. Ambrosiaster, Quaestio 115.59, p. 338.
    55. Ambrosiaster, Quaestio 4.2, p. 25.
    56. Ambrosiaster, Comm. in 1 Cor. 12.3, p. 131.56; Augustine, Confessions 6.10.6.
    57. Ambrosiaster, Quaestio 101.4, p. 195.
    58.	Ibid.
    59. Ambrosiaster, Comm. in 1 Tim. 2.4, 1, CSEL 81:3, p. 260.
    60. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 94A.
    61.	S. Lunn-­Rockliffe, “A Pragmatic Approach to Poverty and Riches: Ambrosia-
ster’s Quaestio 124,” in Poverty in the Roman World, 115–­29.


                                            588
                             notes to pages 257–261


     62. Pietri, Roma Christiana, 648 on Inscriptiones Christianae Urbis Romae, n.s., 2, ed.
A. Silvagni (Rome: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 1935), no. 4815; com-
pare Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, nos. 609, 698.
     63. Jerome, Letter 66.5, CSEL 54:1, pp. 652–­53; Letter 77.6.3, CSEL 55:43.
     64. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 1233.
     65. Codex Theodosianus 13.3.8 (370). See Albana, “Archiatri . . . honeste obsequi
tenuiores malint”; Schmidt-­Hofner, Reagieren und Gestalten, 327–­30; and Corbo, Pau­
pertas, 138–­56.
     66. Inscriptiones Christianae Urbis Romae, n.s., 4, ed. A. Ferrua (Vatican: Pontificio
Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 1964), no. 10228.
     67. Inscriptiones Christianae Urbis Romae, n.s., 6, ed. A. Ferrua (Vatican: Pontificio
Istituto di Archaeologia Cristiana, 1975), no. 15839.


                                    Chapter 16
                      “To Sing the Lord’s Song in a Strange Land”

      1. A. Cameron, “Filocalus and Melania,” Classical Quarterly 87 (1992): 140–­44 at
p. 142.
      2.	Salzman, On Roman Time, 201–­2.
      3.	Ibid., 196–­204.
      4. Jerome, prologue, Origen on the Song of Songs, PL 23:1118A.
      5.	See S. Rebenich, Hieronymus und sein Kreis: Prosopographische und sozialge­
schichtliche Untersuchungen, Historia Einzelschriften 72 (Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 1992),
21–­51; and M. H. Williams, The Monk and the Book: Jerome and the Making of Christian
Scholarship (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006), 268–­76. I would urge the
reader to consult these two books for this and all subsequent periods of Jerome’s life.
      6. The chronology of the life of Melania the Elder is ambiguous, and a correct solu-
tion is important for an understanding of the pace of her conversion and the aims of her
eventual departure for Alexandria and the Holy Land: see Prosopographie chrétienne du
Bas-­Empire, 2:1480–­83.
      7. Palladius, Lausiac History 46.1–­4; see N. Lenski, “Valens and the Monks: Cud-
geling and Conscription as a Means of Social Control,” Dumbarton Oaks Papers 58
(2004): 93–­117. On the relations between Melania the Elder and Palladius that can be
deduced from the Syriac version of the original edition of Palladius’s Lausiac History, see
S. P. Brock, “Saints in Syriac: A Little-­Tapped Resource,” Journal of Early Christian Stud­
ies 16 (2008): 181–­96 at pp. 192–­94.
      8.	Rebenich, Hieronymus und sein Kreis, 88–­89.
      9. Williams, The Monk and the Book, 31.
     10.	Ibid., 50–­52; A. Cain, The Letters of Jerome: Asceticism, Biblical Exegesis, and the
Construction of Christian Authority in Late Antiquity (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2009), 43–­67. Despite much justified skepticism, Jerome did not entirely invent his inti-
macy with Damasus: see Y.-­M. Duval, “Sur trois lettres méconnues de Jérôme concernant
son séjour à Rome,” in Jerome of Stridon, 29–­40, esp. pp. 31–­33.


                                            589
                               notes to pages 261–266


     11. Prologue to The Translation of Didymus the Blind, PL 23:103.
     12. Jerome, Letter 27.2, 54.1, p. 225; Cain, The Letters of Jerome, 51–­61.
     13. P. Nautin, “L’excommunication de saint Jérôme,” Annuaire de l’École Pratique des
Hautes Études, Ve section: Sciences religieuses 80–­81 (1972–­73): 7–­37.
     14. Jerome, Letter 45.6.2, 54.1:327.
     15. Jerome, Letter 45.2.2, 54.1:324.
     16.	Cain, The Letters of Jerome, 86.
     17. Jerome, Letter 45.2.2, 54.1:324.
     18.	Cain, The Letters of Jerome, 90.
     19.	N. Adkin, Jerome on Virginity: A Commentary on the Libellus de virginitate ser-
vanda (Letter 22), ARCA 42 (Liverpool: Francis Cairns, 2003) provides a comprehensive
commentary on Letter 22, which reveals with withering precision the extent to which
Jerome placed himself on show in this letter by pillaging the works of others.
     20. Brown, Body and Society, 376. On the medical background to this advice, see
A. Rousselle, Porneia: De la maîtrise du corps à la privation sensorielle, IIe–­IVe siècles de
l’ère chrétienne (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1983); and T. M. Shaw, The Bur­
den of the Flesh: Fasting and Sexuality in Early Christianity (Minneapolis: Fortress Press,
1998).
     21. Jerome, Letter 22.11.1, 54.1:158: Adkin, Jerome on Virginity, 90–­91.
     22. Jerome, Letter 22.8.2, 54.1:154: Adkin, Jerome on Virginity, 72.
     23. Muth, Erlebnis von Raum—­Leben in Raum, 266–­70.
     24. Brown, Body and Society, 172–­73, 367.
     25. Jerome, Letter 22.25.1, 54.1:178.
     26. Adkin, Jerome on Virginity, 230.
     27. P. Brown, The Cult of the Saints: Its Rise and Function in Latin Christianity (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), 41–­46; Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values
and Religious Change, 84–­96; B. Brenk, Die Christianisierung der spätrömischen Welt:
Stadt, Land, Haus, Kirche und Kloster in frühchristlicher Zeit (Wiesbaden: Reichert,
2003), 98–­105.
     28. These range in time over the last decades from E. A. Clark, Jerome, Chrysostom
and Friends: Essays and Translations (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1979) to
P. Laurence, Jérôme et le nouveau modèle feminine: La conversion à la “vie parfaite” (Paris:
Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 1997); K. Cooper, The Virgin and the Bride: Idealized
Womanhood in Late Antiquity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996) seeks
a new way around this scholarly obsession.
     29.	S. Brock, The Syriac Fathers on Prayer and the Spiritual Life, Cistercian Studies
101 (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Studies, 1987), xxxi–­xxxii. See also A. Persic, “La Chiesa
di Siria e i ‘gradi’ della vita cristiana,” in Per foramen acus: Il cristianesimo antico di fronte
alla pericope evangelica del “giovane ricco” (Milan: Vita e Pensiero, 1986), 208–­63.
     30.	Sozomen, Ecclesiastical History 6.33.
     31. Jerome, Vita Pauli 6, PL 23:21B.
     32. D. Krueger, Symeon the Holy Fool: Leontius’ Life and the Late Antique City (Berke-
ley: University of California Press, 1996), 72–­107. The influence goes deep: J. Clackson,
“A Greek Papyrus in Armenian Script,” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 129


                                              590
                              notes to pages 266–269


(2000): 223–­58 at lines 20–­24 on pp. 240–­41 contains sayings of Diogenes in a sixth-­
century textbook of Greek conversation for Armenians.
     33. Jerome, Letter 14.1.3, 54:45.
     34.	Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du mouvement monastique, 1:179.
     35. Jerome, Vita Pauli 17, 28C.
     36. Jerome, Letter 22.21.1, 54:171, with Adkin, Jerome on Virginity, 179–­81; Letter
49.21.4, 54:387.
    37. Jerome, Letter 22.32.1, 54.1:193, with Adkin, Jerome on Virginity, 307–­9. On
this patronage, which seems to have produced highly individual manuscripts, see esp.
J. Lowden, “The Beginnings of Biblical Illustration,” in Imaging the Early Medieval Bible,
ed. J. Williams (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1999), 9–­55 at
pp. 40–­43. (I owe this reference to Professor E. Moodey.)
    38. D. Wiesen, St. Jerome as a Satirist: A Study in Christian Latin Thought and Let­
ters (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1964).
    39. Woolf, “Writing Poverty in Rome,” 98.
    40.	Rufinus, Apologia contra Hieronymum 2.5, ed. M. Simonetti, CCSL 20 (Turn-
hout: Brepols, 1961).
    41. Jerome, Letter 22.32.2, 54:193–­94.
    42. Jerome, Letter 22.28.4–­6, 54:186.
    43. Ambrosiaster, Comm. in Rom. 8.20.40, p. 285.
    44. Paulinus, Letter 13.15.
    45. Jerome, Letter 46.11.2, 54:341—­written by Paula and Eustochium.
    46.	On this extensive theme the most reliable studies are G. Jenal, Italia ascetica atque
monastica: Das Asketen-­und Mönchtum in Italien von den Anfängen bis zur Zeit der Lan­
gobarden (ca. 150/250–­604), 2 vols. (Stuttgart: A. Hiersemann, 1995), 1:36–­65; G. Dis-
selkamp, “Christiani Senatus Lumina”: Zum Anteil römischer Frauen der Oberschicht im
4. und 5. Jahrhundert an der Christianisierung der römischen Senatsaristokratie, Theo-
phaneia 34 (Bodenheim: Philo, 1997); and the eminently sensible treatment of F. E.
Consolino, “Tradizionalismo e trasgressione nell’élite senatoria romana: Ritratti di si-
gnore fra la fine del IV e l’inizio del V secolo,” in Le trasformazioni delle “élites,” 65–­139.
For reliable biographical sketches of these women, see Prosopographie chrétienne du Bas-­
Empire, s.v. “Melania 1,” 2:1480–­83; s.v. “Marcella,” 2:1357–­62; and s.v. “Paula 1,” 2:
1617–­26.
    47. Jerome, Letter 108.3.1 and 33, 55:308 and 350; see C. Habicht, “Spätantikes Epi-
gram aus Demetrias,” in Demetrias, ed. V. Milojčič and D. Theocharis (Bonn: R. Habelt,
1976), 199–­203; C. P. Jones, New Heroes in Antiquity: From Achilles to Antinoos (Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010), 80.
    48. Jerome, prologue to Comm. in ep. ad Titum, PL 26:556A.
    49. Jerome, Letter 108.3.1 and 33, 55:308 and 350.
    50. Jerome, Letter 127.2.1, 56:146. See esp. H. Sivan, “On Hymens and Holiness in
Late Antiquity: Opposition to Aristocratic Female Asceticism in Rome,” Jahrbuch für
Antike und Christentum 36 (1993): 81–­93 at p. 86—­an article of salutary precision. See
now B. Enjuto Sánchez, “I ‘Neratii’: Legami tra Roma e le città di Sannio nel IV secolo
d.C.,” in Les cités de l’Italie tardo-­antique, 113–­21.


                                             591
                             notes to pages 270–276


    51. A. Aarjava, Women and Law in Late Antiquity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996),
43–­75.
    52. Jerome, Letter 22.16.1, 54.1:163; see Adkin, Jerome on Virginity, 130.
    53. Jerome, Letter 54.2.2, 54:467.
    54. Aarjava, Women and Law in Late Antiquity, 108–­9.
    55. Jerome, Letter 24.2, 54:215.
    56.	Sivan, “On Hymens and Holiness,” 82–­83; see R. Lizzi Testa, “Vergini di Dio
—­Vergini di Vesta: Il sesso negato e la sacralità,” in L’Eros difficile: Amore e sessualità
nell’antico cristianesimo, ed. S. Pricoco (Catanzaro: Rubettino, 1998), 89–­132.
    57. Jerome, Letter 127.4.3, 56.1:149.
    58. Codex Theodosianus 16.2.27 (390).
    59. Jenal, Italia ascetica, 2:474–­507. R. Lizzi, “Una società esortata all’ascetismo: Mi-
sure legislative e motivazioni economiche nel IV–­V secolo d.C.,” Studi Storici 30 (1989):
129–­53 at p. 149n89 collects all the passages from the letters of Jerome that indicate, in
equal proportions, either that Paula had renounced all her wealth or that she had retained
much of it for substantial building in her monastery.
    60. J. Curran, “Jerome and the Sham Christians of Rome,” Journal of Ecclesiastical
History 48 (1997): 213–­29 at p. 227. See esp. J. Harries, “‘Treasure in Heaven’: Property
and Inheritance among Senators of Late Rome,” in Marriage and Property, ed. E. M.
Craik (Aberdeen: University of Aberdeen Press, 1984), 54–­70.


                                   Chapter 17
                             Between Rome and Jerusalem

     1. Porphyry, Life of Plotinus 9.
     2. H. Wrede, Senatorische Sarkophage Roms: Der Beitrag des Senatorenstandes zur
römischen Kunst der höhen und späten Kaiserzeit, Monumenta Artis Romanae 29 (Mainz:
P. Zabern, 2001), 101; N. Denzey, The Bone Gatherers: The Lost Worlds of Early Christian
Women (Boston: Beacon Press, 2007), 85–­88.
     3. Jerome, Letter 36.11.1, 54:277.
     4. Brown, Body and Society, 172–­73, 178–­79.
     5. Palladius, Lausiac History 55.3.
     6. Gerontius, Vita Melaniae Latina 33.1, ed. P. Laurence, Gérontius: La vie latine de
sainte Mélanie ( Jerusalem: Franciscan Printing Press, 2002), 212.
     7.	Ewald, Der Philosoph als Leitbild, 102, 213–­14.
     8. Williams, The Monk and the Book, 133–­66.
     9. A. Grafton and M. Williams, Christianity and the Transformation of the Book:
Origen, Eusebius, and the Library of Caesarea (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
2006), 131. See now Cameron, Last Pagans, 469–­75 on the high standards of textual
emendation in Christian circles.
    10. Willams, The Monk and the Book, 187.
    11. s.v. “Tyrannius Rufinus,” Prosopographie chrétienne du Bas-­Empire, 2:1925–­40.
    12. Jenal, Italia ascetica, 2:387–­417.


                                            592
                             notes to pages 276–284


     13.	Rufinus, Apologia contra Hieronymum 1.11, p. 44.
     14.	E. Wipszycka, “Les aspects économiques de la vie de la communauté des Kellia,”
in Études sur le christianisme dans l’Égypte de l’antiquité tardive, Studia Ephemeridis Au-
gustinianum 52 (Rome: Institutum Patristicum Augustinianum, 1996), 337–­62.
     15. Jerome, Letter 125.18.2, 56:137.
     16.	Rufinus, Apologia contra Hieronymum 2.11, p. 89.
     17. Palladius, Lausiac History 54.4–­6.
     18. Jenal, Italia ascetica, 2:603–­8; see now Williams, The Monk and the Book, 102 on
the sharp differences between Rufinus and Jerome.
     19. Jenal, Italia ascetica, 2:536–­57.
     20.	C. P. Hammond, “The Last Ten Years of Rufinus’s Life and the Date of His Move
South from Aquileia,” Journal of Theological Studies, n.s., 28 (1977): 372–­429.
     21.	Rufinus, Prologus in Omelias Origenis in Numeros, ed. M. Simonetti, Opera,
CCSL 20 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1961), 285.
     22. Williams, The Monk and the Book, 101.
     23.	Ibid., 155–­66.
     24.	Ibid., 181–­200.
     25. Jerome, Contra Rufinum 1.1, PL 23:397A.
     26. P. Brown, “The Patrons of Pelagius: The Roman Aristocracy between East and
West,” Journal of Theological Studies, n.s., 21 (1970): 56–­72, also in Religion and Society
in the Age of Saint Augustine, 208–­26; E. A. Clark, The Origenist Controversy: The Cul­
tural Construction of an Early Christian Debate (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1992), 11–­42.
     27. Pietri, Roma Christiana, 435.
     28. Codex The0dosianus 16.2.20 (370).
     29. Lizzi Testa, Senatori, popolo, papi, 109 is to be preferred to Pietri, Roma Christi­
ana, 570n3.
     30. Jerome, Letter 45.2.2, 54:324.
     31. The best treatment of the issues involved is D. G. Hunter, “Vigilantius of Calagur-
ris and Victricius of Rouen: Ascetics, Relics, and Clerics in Late Roman Gaul,” Journal of
Early Christian Studies 7 (1999): 401–­30.
     32. Jerome, Contra Vigilantium 4, PL 23:342C, ed. J.-­L. Feiertag, S. Hieronymi pres­
byteri opera, CCSL 79C (Turnhout: Brepols, 2005).
     33. Jerome, Contra Vigilantium 13, Feiertag, p. 26.
     34. Jerome, Contra Vigilantium 13, Feiertag, p. 25.
     35. Jerome, Contra Vigilantium 14, Feiertag, pp. 26–­27.
     36. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 316.
     37. Inscriptiones Christianae Urbis Romae, n.s., 5:13355.
     38. A. Bertolino, “‘In area Callisti’: Contributo alla topografia di Roma tardoantica,”
Rivista di archeoloigia cristiana 70 (1994): 181–­90.
     39.	Notably the best treatment is D. G. Hunter, “Resistance to the Virginal Ideal in
Late-­Fourth-­Century Rome: The Case of Jovinian,” Theological Studies 48 (1987): 45–­
64; and idem, “Rereading the Jovinianist Controversy: Asceticism and Clerical Author-
ity in Late Ancient Christianity,” in The Cultural Turn in Late Ancient Studies: Gender,


                                            593
                            notes to pages 284–293


Asceticism, and Historiography, ed. D. B. Martin and P. C. Miller (Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2005), 119–­35, now in Hunter, Marriage, Celibacy, and Heresy in An­
cient Christianity: The Jovinianist Controversy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
    40. Jerome, Adversus Jovinianum 1.5, PL 23:217C.
    41. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 972.6–­7; see Augustine, City of God
5.26.
    42.	Socrates, Ecclesiastical History 5.14.
    43. Matthews, “Four Funerals and a Wedding,” 134–­37. See now Cameron, Last Pa­
gans, 179–­81 on earlier Anicii as Christians.
    44.	C. Machado, “Roman Aristocrats and the Christianization of Rome,” in Pagans
and Christians in the Roman Empire (IVth–­VIth Century A.D.): The Breaking of a Dia­
logue, ed. P. Brown and R. Lizzi Testa (Münster: Lit, 2011), 493–­513.
    45.	Ibid., 513, referring to Eventius 1, Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire,
2:413—­a typical career from lawyer to provincial governor.
    46.	N. B. McLynn, “The Transformation of Imperial Churchgoing in the Fourth
Century,” in Approaching Late Antiquity: The Transformation from Early to Late Empire,
ed. S. Swain and M. Edwards (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 235–­70, esp. pp.
236–­42 on Constantine.
    47. Hoek, “Peter, Paul and a Consul,” figure 1a on p. 231.
    48. The relationship between Rufinus and Pelagius is even closer if we accept the
view that the mysterious “Rufinus the Syrian” was, in fact, Rufinus of Aquileia himself:
W. Dunphy, “Rufinus the Syrian: Myth and Reality,” Augustiniana 59 (2009): 79–­157.
    49. Augustine, Letter 186.1.


                                  Chapter 18
                “The Eye of a Needle” and “The Treasure of the Soul”

     1. Gerontius, Life of Melania, Latin version (henceforth VL = Vita Latina), 16.2–­3,
ed. and trans. Laurence, Gérontius: La vie latine de sainte Mélanie, 186; Greek version
(henceforth VG = Vita Graeca), 16, ed. and trans. Gorce, Vie de sainte Mélanie, 160,
with translation and appended essays as commentary by Clark, The Life of Melania the
Younger, 39.
     2. Laurence, Gérontius, 109–­41; Gorce, Vie de sainte Mélanie, 54–­77; Clark, Life of
Melania the Younger, 115–­52.
     3. VL 18.2–­4, pp. 188–­90; VG 18, p. 162; Clark, p. 40.
     4. VL 17.2, p. 186; VG 17, p. 170; Clark, p. 39.
     5. VL 8.5–­9, pp. 168–­70; VG 8, p. 142; Clark, pp. 31–­32.
     6. VL 31.3, p. 210; VG 31, p. 186; Clark, p. 48.
     7. John Rufus, Life of Peter the Iberian, 39, ed. and trans. C. B. Horn and R. R.
Phenix, John Rufus: The Lives of Peter the Iberian, Theodosius of Jerusalem and the Monk
Romanus (Atlanta, GA: Society for Biblical Literature, 2008), 54–­55. It is not entirely
certain that Peter actually saw Pinianus: he may have heard of him and his dress. See
P. Devos, “Quand Pierre l’Ibère vint-­il à Jérusalem?” Analaecta Bollandiana 86 (1968):


                                           594
                             notes to pages 293–298


337–­50. See now C. B. Horn, Asceticism and Christological Controversy in Fifth-­Century
Palestine: The Career of Peter the Iberian (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 138–­41.
      8.	See esp. Jenal, Italia ascetica, 1:96–­97, 2:492.
      9. Paulinus, Letter 32.17.
     10. Paulinus, Letter 13.15.
     11. P. Heather, The Fall of the Roman Empire: A New History of Rome and the Bar­
barians (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 145–­232 provides a vivid account of
these years.
     12. Zosimus, Historia nova 5.41.4, Mendelssohn, p. 270, Ridley, p. 121.
     13. P. Veyne, “La prise de Rome en 410 et les Grandes Invasions,” L’empire gréco-­romain,
713–­47 at pp. 726–­29. P. Courcelle, Histoire littéraire des grandes invasions germaniques,
3rd ed. (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1964), 31–­77 remains the best evaluation of the
literary evidence of destruction; see also B. Brenk, “L’anno 410 e il suo effetto sull’arte
chiesastica a Roma,” in Ecclesiae urbis, ed. F. Guidobaldi and A. G. Guidobaldi, Studi di
Antichità Cristiana 59 (Rome: Pontificio Istituto di Antichità Cristiana, 2002), 2:1001–­18.
     14.	Olympiodorus, Fragment 24, p. 187.
     15. VL 3.1 and 5.1–­6.3, pp. 160, 162–­64; VG 3 and 5–­6, pp. 132–­36; Clark, pp. 29–­
30. On Pinianus and Melania as “Modell-­und Sonderfall”—­both model and exception—­
see Jenal, Italia ascetica, 1:81–­86, 2:484–­87. See now R. Alciati and M. Giorda, “Posses-
sions and Asceticism: Melania the Younger and Her Slow Way to Jerusalem,” Zeitschrift
für Antikes Christentum 14 (2010): 425–­44.
     16. VL 15.1, p. 184, ascribes this fortune to Melania; VG 15, p. 156, 157n4 to Pini-
anus; Clark, p. 38. We must resign ourselves to orders of magnitude that may be conven-
tional exaggerations.
     17. B. Brenk, “La cristianizzazione della Domus dei Valerii sul Celio,” in The Trans­
formations of Vrbs Roma, 69–­84.
     18.	Symmachus, Letter 7.116, Callu, 3:105.
     19. VL 10.1, p. 172; VG 10, pp. 144–­46, 145n6; Clark, p. 33; Palladius, Lausiac His­
tory 61.5 gives the overall number of slaves that had been manumitted. Palladius had
visited the couple in the suburbium in 404–­5. See esp. K. Cooper, “Poverty, Obligation,
and Inheritance: Roman Heiresses and the Varieties of Senatorial Christianity in Fifth-­
Century Rome,” in Religion, Dynasty, and Patronage, 165–­89 at pp. 165–­66.
     20. Zosimus, Historia nova 5.42.3, Mendelssohn, p. 272, Ridley, p. 122.
    21. A. Giardina, “Carità eversiva: Le donazioni di Melania la Giovane e gli equi-
libri della società tardoromana,” Studi storici 29 (1988): 127–­42 at pp. 139–­40. See now
B. Pottier, “Entre les villes et les campagnes: Le banditisme en Italie du IVe au VIe siècle,”
in Les cités de l’Italie tardo-­antique, 251–­66.
     22. VL 11.1–­7, p. 174; VG 11, pp. 146–­48; Clark, pp. 34–­35; Curran, Pagan City
and Christian Capital, 299–­300; G. D. Dunn, “The Care of the Poor in Rome and Alaric’s
Sieges,” in Prayer and Spirituality in the Early Church, vol. 5, Poverty and Riches, ed. Dunn,
D. Luckensmeyer, and L. Cross (Sydney: St. Paul’s, 2009), 319–­33.
     23. VL 12.9, p. 180; VG 12, p. 152; Clark, p. 37.
     24. VL 13.2, p. 182; VG 13, p. 154; Clark, p. 37.
     25. Heather, The Fall of the Roman Empire, 216–­27.


                                            595
                             notes to pages 298–302


    26. Zosimus, Historia nova 5.38.3–­4, Mendelssohn, p. 266, Ridley, p. 119.
    27. Zosimus, Historia nova 6.11.2, Mendelssohn, p. 292, Ridley, p. 130.
    28. Zosimus, Historia nova 6.7.4, Mendelssohn, p. 288, Ridley, p. 129.
    29.	It has been suggested that Pinianus and Melania were punished as actual parti-
sans of Stilicho: A. Demandt and G. Brummer, “Der Prozess gegen Serena im Jahre 408
n. Chr.,” Historia 26 (1977): 479–­502. I am less certain, but I do not doubt the impor-
tance of political factors in the last stages of the couple’s residence in Rome.
    30. VL 34.1–­3, p. 214; VG 19, p. 166; Clark, p. 42.
    31. Palladius, Lausiac History 54.1 on Melania the Elder.
    32. VL 34.1, p. 214; VG 19, p. 166; Clark, p. 42.
    33. VL 15.6 and 19.2, pp. 186 and 190; VG 15 and 19, pp. 158 and 164; Clark, pp. 38
and 41. See Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 138–­40.
    34. VL 19.2, p. 190; VG 19, p. 168; Clark, pp. 42–­43 and 137–­38.
    35. VL 19.4, p. 190 and 21.3, p. 194 (in Africa); VG 19 and 21, pp. 164 and 172;
Clark, pp. 41 and 44.
    36. This is how I would interpret VL 35.3, p. 222; VG 35, p. 194; Clark, p. 51.
    37. VL 38, p. 228; VG 37–­38, pp. 196–­98; Clark, pp. 52–­53.
    38. Melania continued to build constantly at the Mount of Olives. Most notable was a
shrine of the Apostles in which both Pinianus and Melania’s mother, Albina, were buried:
VL 49.2, p. 250; VG 49, p. 220; Clark, p. 61: see the plan in Laurence, Gérontius, p. 340.
    39. The development of the African reaction to the ideas of Pelagius and his follow-
ers has been studied with great finesse by É. Rebillard, “Sociologie de la déviance et or-
thodoxie: Le cas de la controverse pélagienne sur la grâce,” in Orthodoxie, christianisme,
histoire, ed. S. Elm, Rebillard, and A. Romano, Collection de l’École française de Rome
270 (Rome: École française de Rome, 2000), 221–­40. Among abundant recent studies
of high quality on Pelagius, I owe most to O. Wermelinger, Rom und Pelagius: Die theolo­
gische Position der römischen Bischöfe im pelagianischen Streit in den Jahren 411–­432,
Päpste und Papsttum 7 (Stuttgart: A. Hiersemann, 1975); and to S. Thier, Kirche bei Pe­
lagius, Patristische Texte und Studien 50 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1999). English readers have
reason to be particularly grateful to the translations of B. R. Rees, The Letters of Pelagius
and His Followers (Woodbridge, UK: Boydell, 1991); see also his summary, Pelagius: A
Reluctant Heretic (Woodbridge, UK: Boydell, 1998).
    40. Brown, “The Patrons of Pelagius,” in Religion and Society, 210–­11; Hammond,
“The Last Ten Years of Rufinus’ Life,” 400n3.
    41. P. Laurence, “Proba, Juliana et Démétrias: Le christianisme des femmes de la gens
Anicia dans la première moitié du Ve siècle,” Revue des études augustiniennes 48 (2002):
131–­63. See now A. Kurdock, “Demetrias ancilla Dei: Anicia Demetrias and the Prob-
lem of the Missing Patron,” in Religion, Dynasty and Patronage, 190–­224; G. D. Dunn,
“The Christian Networks of the Aniciae: The Example of the Letter of Innocent I to
Anicia Iuliana,” Revue des études augustiniennes et patristiques 55 (2009): 53–­72.
    42. Pelagius, cited in Augustine, De natura et gratia 82.
    43. Pelagius, De divina lege 9.3, PL 30:119 (Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846), Rees, p. 102.
See P. Brown, “Pelagius and His Supporters: Aims and Environment,” Journal of Theo­
logical Studies, n.s., 19 (1968): 93–­114, now in Religion and Society, 183–­207. My view


                                            596
                              notes to pages 302–308


has been modified by Thier, Kirche bei Pelagius, esp. p. 9. Thier rightly distinguishes more
clearly than I did in 1968 between Pelagius himself and the more sectarian groups that
followed him. Recent literature has redrawn the portrait of Pelagius largely through ad-
vances in understanding his Commentaries on the Epistles of Saint Paul: see H. J. Frede,
Ein neuer Paulustext und Kommentar, 2 vols. (Freiburg: Herder, 1973–­74); T. De Bruyn,
Pelagius’ Commentary on St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1993); and J. Tauer, “Neue Orientierungen zur Paulusexegese des Pelagius,” Augustinia­
 num 34 (1994): 313–­58.
    44. The most nuanced treatment of this occasion is Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du
­mouvement monastique, 5:291–­340.
    45. Augustine, Letter 150.
    46. Procopius, History of the Wars 3.2.27, ed. and trans. H. B. Dewing, Procopius,
Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1916), 2:18.
    47. Jerome, Letter 127.13.1.
    48. Jerome, Letter 130.7.7. See T. Kotula, “Le fond africain de la révolte d’Héraclien
en 413,” Antiquités africaines 11 (1977): 257–­66.
    49. Jerome, Letter 130.5.4.
    50. Jerome, Letter 130 6.6–­7.
    51. Jerome, Letter 130.6.1.
    52. This is clearly seen by N. Cipriani, “La morale pelagiana e la retorica,” Augustini­
anum 31 (1991): 309–­27.
    53.	Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du mouvement monastique, 5:298–­313.
    54. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 2.1, PL 30:16D, Rees, p. 36.
    55. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 2.2, 17A, Rees, p. 37.
    56. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 4.2, 19B, Rees, p. 40.
    57. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 6.3, 22A, Rees, p. 43.
    58. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 3.3, 18B, Rees, p. 39.
    59. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 8.3, 23C, Rees, p. 44.
    60. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 11.1, 26D, Rees, p. 48.
    61. Augustine, Letter 188.2.5.
    62. Augustine, Letter 188.1.3.
    63. J.-­M. Salamito, Les virtuoses et la multitude: Aspects sociaux de la controverse entre
Augustin et les pélagiens (Grenoble: Éditions Jérôme Millon, 2005), 29–­35.
    64. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 22.2, 38B, Rees, p. 60.
    65.	Salamito, Les virtuoses et la multitude, p. 30.
    66. Inscriptiones Christianae Urbis Romae, n.s., 6, no. 15764. See now Bowes, Private
Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 94–­96.

                                       Chapter 19
                                        Tolle divitem

    1. The best survey of this theme is A. Kessler, Reichtumskritik und Pelagianismus:
Die pelagianische Diatribe De divitiis. Situierung, Lesetext, Übertsetzung, Kommentar,
Paradosis 43 (Freiburg, Switzerland: Universitätsverlag, 1999), 36–­55.


                                             597
                               notes to pages 309–314


      2. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 8.3, 23BC, Rees, p. 44. See Brown, “Pelagius and
His Supporters,” in Religion and Society, 195–­200; and Thier, Kirche bei Pelagius, 75.
      3. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 8.2, 23B, Rees, p. 44.
      4. Pelagius, Letter to Demetrias 1.1, 15D, Rees, p. 36.
      5. J. Morris, “Pelagian Literature,” Journal of Theological Studies, n.s., 16 (1965): 26–­
60. This perspective continues to be accepted by historians of post-­Roman Britain: see
K. R. Dark, Civitas to Kingdom: British Political Continuity, 300–­800 (Leicester: Leices-
ter University Press, 1994); and idem, “The Late Antique Landscape of Britain, AD 300–­
700,” in Landscapes of Change, 279–­99 at pp. 286–­91. Dark explains the observed flatten-
ing out of post-­Roman British material culture by a violent revolution and a widespread
abandonment of luxury, inspired by a Christian ideology of Pelagian inspiration.
      6. Kessler, Reichtumskritik und Pelagianismus, 104–­35.
      7. Morris, “Pelagian Literature,” 50–­51.
      8. G. de Plinval, Pélage: Ses écrits, sa vie et sa réforme: Étude d’histoire littéraire et
religieuse (Lausanne: Payot, 1943), 208.
      9.	Salamito, Les virtuoses et la multitude, 128.
    10.	S. Toscano, Tolle divitem: Etica, società e potere nel De divitiis, Testi e Studi di Storia
Antica 19 (Catania: Edizioni del Prisma, 2006). See now P. Garnsey, “The Originality and
Origins of Anonymous, De divitiis,” in From Rome to Constantinople: Studies in Honour of
Averil Cameron, ed. H. Amirav and B. ter Haar Romeny (Louvain: Peeters, 2007), 29–­45.
    11. De divitiis [henceforth De div.] 4.1, ed. and trans. Kessler, Reichtumskritik und
Pelagianismus, p. 246, Rees, p. 176. The original edition is C. P. Caspari, Briefe, Abhand­
lungen und Predigten aus der zwei letzten Jahrhunderten des kirchlichen Altertums und
dem Anfang des Mittelalters (Christiania/Oslo: Malling, 1890; reprint, Brussels: Culture
et Civilisation, 1964).
    12. De div. 1.3, Kessler, p. 244, Rees, p. 175.
    13. De div. 3, Kessler, p. 246, Rees, p. 176.
    14.	See esp. Garnsey, Thinking about Property, 121–­28.
    15.	Sulpicius Severus, Chronica 1.4.3, p. 98.
    16. Paulinus, Poem 6.263.
    17. Paulinus, Poem 25.102: see J. Lössl, Julian von Aeclanum: Studien zu seinem
Leben, seinem Werk, seiner Lehre und ihrer Überlieferung, Supplements to Vigiliae Chris-
tianae 60 (Leiden: Brill, 2001), 56–­73.
    18. Proba, Cento 301–­2, ed. and trans. E. A. Clark and D. F. Hatch, The Golden
Bough, the Oaken Cross: The Vergilian Cento of Faltonia Betitia Proba, American Acad-
emy of Religion: Texts and Translations 5 (Chico, CA: Scholars Press, 1981), 48.
    19. Proba, Cento 524, Clark and Hatch, p. 72.
    20. De div. 7.4, Kessler, p. 260, Rees, p. 182.
    21. M. Colish, Ambrose’s Patriarchs: Ethics for the Common Man (Notre Dame, IN:
University of Notre Dame Press, 2005) is excellent on Ambrose’s image of Abraham as
the model for the good rich.
    22. De div. 9.1, Kessler, p. 266, Rees, p. 184.
    23. B. Ramsey, s.v. “Wealth,” in Augustine through the Ages, 876–­81 at p. 880. The
only parallel known to me is the Syrian ascetic treatise (possibly Messalian) that declares


                                              598
                              notes to pages 314–323


that war does not happen according to the will of God (whether to punish or to give vic-
tory) but is only the result of human actions: Liber Graduum 9.6, trans. R. A. Kitchen
and M.F.G. Parmentier, The Book of Steps: The Syriac Liber Graduum, Cistercian Studies
196 (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Studies, 2004), 92–­93.
     24. De div. 9.2, Kessler, p. 266, Rees, p. 184.
     25. De div. 7.3, Kessler, p. 260, Rees, p. 182.
     26.	Ibid.
      27. Jerome, Letter 120.1.7. The topic was also debated in Neo-­Platonic circles: Eunapius,
Lives of the Sophists, ed. W. C. Wright, in Philostratus and Enapius: The Lives of the Soph­
ists, Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1952), 372–­74.
     28. De div. 5.1, Kessler, p. 250, Rees, p. 177.
     29. De div. 8.1, Kessler, p. 262, Rees, p. 182.
     30. Kessler, Reichtumskritik und Pelagianismus, 351.
     31. De div. 12.2, Kessler, p. 292, Rees, p. 194. See Newhauser, The Early History of
Greed, 90.
     32. M. Rostovtzeff, The Social and Economic History of the Hellenistic World (Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press, 1941), 2:1130.
     33. Kessler, Reichtumskritik und Pelagianismus, 220–­37 provides an admirable anal-
ysis of the rhetorical strategies of the author.
     34. De div. 8.1, Kessler, p. 262, Rees, p. 182.
     35. De vita christiana 3.3, PL 50:387A, Rees, p. 110.
     36. Prosopographie chrétienne du Bas-­Empire 2, s.v. “Caelestius,” 1:357–­75 (auditori­
alis scholasticus) and “Constantius 11,” 1:475.
     37. Pietri, Roma Christiana, 579.
     38. Jerome, Commentaria in Ezechielem prophetam 6.8, PL 25:175.
     39. De vita christiana 11.1 and 12, 396A and 397A, Rees, pp. 119 and 120.
     40. De div. 6.3 and 6.4, Kessler, p. 256, Rees, p. 180.
     41. Kessler, Reichtumskritik und Pelagianismus, 166. The dust cover of Toscano, Tolle
divitem most appositely shows Christ before Pilate as illustrated in the sixth-­century Ros-
sano Gospel Book.
     42. Jerome, Letter 125.5.1.
     43. De div. 6.2, Kessler, p. 254, Rees, p. 179.
     44. De div. 18.1, Kessler, p. 306, Rees, pp. 200–­201.
     45. Augustine, Letter 156; see Kessler, Reichtumskritik und Pelagianismus, 85–­100.


                                      Chapter 20
                                     Augustine’s Africa

     1.	Claudian, De bello Gildonico 1.2, ed. and trans. Platnauer, 1:98.
     2. Gerontius, VL 21.4, Laurence, p. 194. For a Roman view of such estates, see
Frontinus, De controversiis agrorum 2. On the family estates of the Valerii and others, see
S. Panciera, “Ancora sulla famiglia senatoria ‘africana’ degli Aradii,” Africa Romana 2
(1986): 547–­72.


                                             599
                             notes to pages 323–329


      3. Gerontius VG 21, Gorce, p. 172, Clark, p. 44; VL 20.3, p. 194.
      4. Letter 126.1. (For the sake of economy, all citations without the name of an au-
thor in this and the subsequent three chapters are from the works of Augustine.)
      5. Letter 125.2.
      6. Letter 126.1. On the size of the excavated basilica at Hippo that is thought to be
that of Augustine, see Lancel, Saint Augustine (2002), 240–­44.
      7. Letter 126.5.
      8. Letter 126.7.
      9. H. Jaïdi, “Remarques sur la constitution des biens des églises africaines à l’époque
romaine tardive,” in Splendidissima civitas: Études d’histoire romaine en hommage à Fran­
çois Jacques, ed. A. Chastagnol, S. Demougin, and C. Lepelley (Paris: Publications de la
Sorbonne, 1996), 169–­91; C. Buenacasa Pérez, “La creación del patrimonio ecclesiastico
de las iglesias norteafricanas en época romana (siglos II–­V): Renovación de la visión
tradicional,” in Sacralidad y Arqueología: Homenaje al Prof. Thilo Ulbert, Antigüedad y
Cristianismo 21 (Murcia: Universidad de Murcia, 2004), 493–­509.
    10. Hippone, ed. X. Delestre (Aix-­en-­Provence: Édisud, 2005), 19–­36, 183–­215. See
also Brown, Augustine of Hippo, 183–­97; Lancel, Saint Augustin, 211–­16.
    11.	O. Perler, Les voyages de Saint Augustin (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1969),
25–­56, 423.
    12. Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine, 1:46–­49.
    13.	Ibid.
    14. L. Dossey, Peasant and Empire in Christian North Africa (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2010), 101–­24.
    15. B. Shaw, “Rural Markets in North Africa and the Political Economy of the
Roman Empire,” Antiquités africaines 17 (1981): 37–­83, now in Rulers, Nomads and
Christians in Roman North Africa (Aldershot: Variorum, 1995).
    16. A. Berthier, La Numidie: Rome et le Maghreb (Paris: Picard, 1981), 150–­52.
    17.	Optatus of Milevis, De schismate donatistarum 3.4, trans. M. Edwards, Optatus:
Against the Donatists (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1997), 68–­69; Augustine,
Letter 185.4.15—­but without mention of Fasir and Axido.
    18. B. Shaw, “Who Were the Circumcellions?” in Vandals, Romans and Berbers: New
Perspectives on Late Antique North Africa, ed. A. H. Merrills (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004),
227–­58; idem, “Bad Boys: Circumcellions and Fictive Violence,” in Violence in Late An­
tiquity: Perceptions and Practices, ed. H. A. Drake (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2006), 179–­96;
Dossey, Peasant and Empire in Christian North Africa, 173–­89.
    19. W.H.C. Frend, The Donatist Church: A Movement of Protest in Roman North
Africa (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952). Though this book is open to criticism, it re-
mains the starting point for the study of Augustine’s activity in Africa. See Brown, Augus­
tine of Hippo, 207–­39, with updates on pp. 460–­62, 482–­84, and 486.
    20. B. Shaw, Sacred Violence: African Christians and Sectarian Hatred in the Age of
Augustine (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011). I deeply appreciate the kind-
ness of the author in letting me see the manuscript of this important work. Idem, “Af­
rican Christianity: Disputes, Definitions and ‘Donatists,’” in Orthodoxy and Heresy in
Religious Movements: Discipline and Dissent, ed. M. R. Greenshields and T. Robinson


                                            600
                              notes to pages 327–336


(Lampeter: Edwin Mellen Press, 1992), 5–34, now in Rulers, Nomads and Christians.
O’Donnell, Augustine, 209–­19 sees clearly the temerity of Augustine’s claim to represent
the only “Catholic” Christianity in Africa.
    21.	C. Lepelley, “Le lieu des valeurs communes: La cité terrain neutre entre païens et
chrétiens dans l’Afrique de l’Antiquité tardive,” in Idéologies et valeurs civiques, 271–­85;
and idem, “De la réaction païenne à la sécularisation,” Cristianesimo e storia 30 (2009):
423–­39.
    22. Letters 34 and 35.
    23.	S. Lancel, Actes de la Conférence de Carthage en 411, SC 373 (Paris: Le Cerf,
1991), 4:1293–­1536.
    24. P. Brown, “Religious Coercion in the Later Roman Empire: The Case of North
Africa,” History 48 (1963): 283–­305, now in Religion and Society, 301–­30.
    25. B. Kriegbaum, Kirche der Traditoren oder Kirche der Märtyrer? Die Vorgeschichte
des Donatismus (Innsbruck: Tyrolia, 1986) is the best survey of the ecclesiological as-
sumptions of African Christianity. Now see the trenchant study of C. García Mac Gaw,
Le problème du baptême dans le schisme donatiste, Ausonius: Scripta Antiqua 21 (Bor-
deaux: Ausonius, 2008), 175–­238. Dossey, Peasant and Empire in Christian North Africa,
147–­94 is outstanding.
    26.	Cyprian, De unitate ecclesiae 25; Y. Duval, Les chrétientés d’Occident et leur
évêque au IIIe siècle: Plebs in ecclesia constituta (Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes,
2005), 29.
    27.	Optatus of Milevis, Against the Donatists 3.3, Edwards, p. 62: see G. A. Cecconi,
“Elemosina e propaganda: Un’analisi della ‘Macariana persecutio,’” Revue des études au­
gustiniennes 31 (1990): 42–­66.
    28. Daniel 5:17 in Optatus of Milevis, Against the Donatists, Edwards, p. 67.
    29.	Optatus of Milevis, Against the Donatists 3.4, Edwards, p. 70.
    30.	See esp. A. Leone, “Clero, proprietà, cristianizzazione delle campagne nel Nord
Africa tardoantica: Status quaestionis,” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 95–­104 at pp. 103–­4.
    31. Collatio Carthaginensis 1.189, ed. and trans. S. Lancel, Actes de la Conférence de
Carthage, SC 195 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1972), 2:840.
    32. A. Berthier, Les vestiges du christianisme antique dans la Numidie centrale (Al-
giers: Maison-­Carrée, 1942).
    33. J. Christern, Das frühchristliche Pilgerheiligtum von Tebessa: Architektur und Or­
namentik einer spätantiken Bauhütte in Nordafrika (Wiesbaden: F. Steiner, 1976), 292.
This remarkable building complex is well illustrated in C. Briand-­Ponsart and C. Hugo-
niot, L’Afrique romaine de l’Atlantique à la Tripolitaine, 146 av. J.-­C.–­533 ap. J.-­C. (Paris:
Armand Colin, 2005), 528–­29.
    34. Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine, 2:186–­88.
    35.	Ibid., 2:452–­55, 471–­74.
    36. Contra epistulam Parmeniani 3.6.29.
    37.	I. Gui, N. Duval, and J.-­P. Caillet, Basiliques chrétiennes d’Afrique du Nord: Inven­
taire d’Algérie (Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 1992), vol. 1: text, pp. 224–­25
and vol. 2: illustrations, CIX, no. 84, p. 109. See now A. Michel, “Aspects du culte dans
les églises de Numidie au temps d’Augustin: Un état de question,” in Saint Augustin, la


                                              601
                             notes to pages 336–339


Numidie et la société de son temps, ed. S. Lancel (Bordeaux: Ausonia; Paris: Boccard,
2005), 67–­108 at pp. 88–­91, with a map of sites dated to the time of Augustine on p. 70.
     38.	S. Gsell, Atlas archéologique de l’Algérie (Algiers: A. Jourdain, 1911), fasc. 27,
no. 278, also in Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 1859.
     39. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 1825; Février, Approches du Maghreb
romain, 2:39–­41; J. Christern, “Basilika und Memorie der heiligen Salsa in Tipasa: Ein
Beitrag zum Verhältnis von Märtyrergrab und Zömeterialbasilika,” Bulletin d’archéologie
algérienne 3 (1968): 193–­250; Gui, Duval, and Caillet, Basiliques chrétiennes d’Afrique du
Nord, vol. 2: illustrations XXVII–­XXVII, pp. 26–­27; Y. Duval, Loca sanctorum Africae:
Le culte des martyrs en Afrique du IVe au VIIe siècle, Collection de l’École française de
Rome 58 (Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1982), 1:258–­366.
     40. Dossey, Peasant and Empire in Christian North Africa, 125–­44.
     41. Letter 247 with New Letter 1*.2–­3, pp. 46–­48, 421–­22, Eno, Letters, p. 12, on a
minor bishop who excommunicated the entire household of an official who had dragged
a man out of sanctuary in his church.
     42. Passio Marculi 4, ed. and trans. J.-­L. Maier, Le dossier du donatisme, vol. 1, Des
origines à la mort de Constance II (303–­361), Texte und Untersuchungen 79 (Berlin:
Akademie Verlag, 1987), 280, trans. M. A. Tilley, Donatist Martyr Stories: The Church in
Conflict in Roman North Africa (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1996), 80. It was
considered shocking that a delegation of Donatist bishops should be flogged by an impe-
rial commissioner.
     43. New Letter 20*.11 and 29–­31, pp. 311 and 336–­40, Eno, Letters, pp. 139–­40,
147–­49.
     44. New Letter 20*, pp. 292–­342 with commentary, pp. 516–­20, Eno, Letters, pp.
133–­49: see Brown, Augustine of Hippo, 468–­69. See now A. Gutsfeld, “Kirche und civi­
tas in der Spätantike: Augustin und die Einheit von Stadt und Land in Hippo Regius,” in
Die spätantike Stadt und ihre Christianisierung, ed. G. Brands and H.-­G. Severin (Wies-
baden: Reichert, 2003), 135–­44 at pp. 139–­42; and N. B. McLynn, “Augustine’s Black
Sheep: The Case of Antoninus of Fussala,” in Istituzioni, carismi ed esercizio del potere,
305–­21.
     45. New Letter 20*.20, p. 324, Eno, Letters, p. 143.
     46. New Letter 20*.27, pp. 332–­34, Eno, Letters, pp. 146–­47 with Letter 209.5.
     47. s.v. “Fabiola 1” and “2,” Prosopographie du Bas-­Empire, 2:734–­36.


                                    Chapter 21
                              “Dialogues with the Crowd”

     1. F. Dolbeau, “‘Seminator verborum’: Réfléxions d’un éditeur des sermons
d’Augustin,” in Augustin prédicateur (395–­411), ed. G. Madec (Paris: Institut d’Études
Augustiniennes, 1998), 95–­111.
     2. Mandouze, Saint Augustin, 595–­615.
     3. F. Dolbeau, “Nouveaux sermons de Saint Augustin pour la conversion des païens
et des donatistes (IV),” Revue des études augustiniennes 38 (1992): 69–­141 at p. 51. On


                                           602
                             notes to pages 339–344


these discoveries, see Brown, Augustine of Hippo (2000), 443–­45. A small group of ser-
mons similar to those discovered by Dolbeau have been found at Erfurt: Schiller, Weber,
and Weidmann, “Sechs neue Augustinuspredigten: Teil 2.” I am grateful to the kindness
of the authors for having allowed me to see this article before its publication.
      4. Mandouze, Saint Augustin, 615–­27.
      5.	Ibid., chapter 11 (pp. 591–­663) was entitled “Dialogues avec la Foule.”
      6. Dolbeau Sermon 2 [359B], Dolbeau, 316–­44, Hill, 343–­53. Each of the Dolbeau
Sermons has been placed within the conventional order of Augustine’s sermons, to which
Hill adheres. I give this number in square brackets.
      7. Dolbeau Sermon 2.3 and 20, pp. 329 and 342, Hill, pp. 332–­33 and 349.
      8. Dolbeau Sermon 2.23, p. 344, Hill, p. 351.
      9.	See esp. J. C. Magalhães de Oliveira, “Vt maiores pagani non sint! Pouvoir, icono-
clasme et action populaire à Carthage au début du Ve siècle,” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006):
245–­62.
    10. Finn, Almsgiving, 147–­50; idem, “Portraying the Poor: Descriptions of Poverty in
Christian Texts from the Late Roman Empire,” in Poverty in the Roman World, 130–­44.
    11. Letter 126.8. See Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 63–­65.
    12. Enarrationes in Psalmos 83.7.
    13. De haeresibus 87 (on the Abelonii); Letter 10*.2.34, p. 168, Eno, p. 77 (on the sale
of children).
    14. Letter 122 (at Hippo); Dolbeau Sermon 16 [72A].9, p. 126, Hill, p. 70 (at
Carthage).
    15. Leone, Changing Townscapes in North Africa, 59, 66–­82.
    16. Registri Ecclesiae Carthaginensis Excerpta 61, in Concilia Africae a. 345–­a. 525,
p. 197—­on Christian members of the associations obliged to be present at civic festivals;
Confessions 6.9.14 and Expositio totius mundi et gentium 61, p. 202—­on the street of the
silversmiths.
    17. A. Wilson, “Urban Production in the Roman World: The View from North Af-
rica,” Papers of the British School at Rome 70 (2002): 231–­73 at pp. 237–­50—­for Timgad
and Sabratha. One can assume similar industry at Carthage and Hippo.
    18.	Veyne, L’empire gréco-­romain, 117–­62 vividly characterizes this essential feature
of Roman society. The best analysis of the social composition of the congregations ad-
dressed by Augustine is in Dossey, Peasant and Empire in Christian North Africa, 149–­59.
    19.	See Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 46–­48.
    20.	Rapp, Holy Bishops, 173.
    21. Sermon 302.13 and 302.16, with J. C. Magalhães de Oliveira, “Le ‘pouvoir
du peuple’: Une émeute à Hippone au début du Ve siècle connue par le sermon 302 de
Saint Augustin pour la fête de Saint Laurent,” Antiquité tardive 12 (2004): 309–­24 at
pp. 313–­14.
    22. New Letter 15*.2, pp. 264–­66, Eno, p. 115; R. Delmaire and C. Lepelley, “Du
nouveau sur Carthage: Le témoignage des Lettres de Saint Augustin découvertes par Jo-
hannes Divjak,” Opus 2 (1983): 473–­87 at pp. 477–­82.
    23. Codex Theodosianus 11.7.20 (412); Quodvultdeus, De gloria sanctorum 15, ed.
R. Braun, CCSL 60 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1976), 220.


                                           603
                              notes to pages 344–358


    24.	See esp. Magalhães de Oliveira, “Vt maiores pagani non sint!” 255–­60.
    25. Sermon 345.1.
    26. J. P. Gutton, La société et les pauvres: L’exemple de la généralité de Lyon, 1534–­1789
(Paris: Belles Lettres, 1971), 8–­11.
    27. Ammianus Marcellinus, Res gestae 28.4.10.
    28. Enarrationes in Psalmos 39.28.
    29. Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 2:737–­63; Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique ro­
maine, 1:243–­92.
    30. Krause, Spätantike Patronatsformen.
    31. Sermon 130.5.
    32. Sermon 14.8.
    33. Sermon 107. 8–­9.
    34. Sermon 6.2.2.
    35. Letter 126.1.
    36. Dolbeau Sermon 2.5, p. 330, Hill, p. 334.
    37. Letter 247.1.
    38. Enarrationes in Psalmos 64.3.
    39. Brown, Augustine of Hippo, 312–­29; see now M. Ruokanen, Theology of Social
Life in Augustine’s De civitate Dei, Forschungen zur Kirchen-­und Dogmengeschichte 53
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1993).
    40. Magalhães de Oliveira, “Vt maiores pagani non sint!” 247.
    41. Enarrationes in Psalmos 132.4.
    42. De div. 12.2.
    43. Sermon 37.4.
    44.	Newhauser, The Early History of Greed, 93–­99.
    45.	T.F.X. Noble, “Secular Sanctity: Forging an Ethos for the Carolingian Nobility,”
in Lay Intellectuals in the Carolingian World, ed. P. Wormald and J. L. Nelson (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 8–­36, esp. pp. 16–­18. See also M. M. Gor-
man, “The Oldest Annotations on Augustine’s De civitate Dei,” Augustinianum 46 (2006):
457–­79 at p. 461.
    46. Dolbeau Sermon 5 [114B].9, pp. 441–­42, Hill, p. 108.
    47. Dolbeau Sermon 5.11, p. 443, Hill, p. 109.
    48. Dolbeau Sermon 5.12, p. 444, Hill, p. 110.
    49. H. Savon, Saint Ambroise devant l’exégèse de Philon le Juif (Paris: Études Augusti-
niennes, 1977), 1:249–­62.
    50. Sermon 61.11.12.
    51. Dolbeau Sermon 5.12–­13, p. 445, Hill, p. 111.
    52. The series of sermons was identified by A.-­M. La Bonnardière, “Les ‘Enarrationes
in Psalmos’ prêchées par Saint Augustin à Carthage en décembre 409,” Recherches augus­
tiniennes 11 (1976): 52–­90. The discovery of Dolbeau Sermons that are connected to this
series and datable to 403–­4 has led to a redating of the series as a whole from 409 to 403:
see Dolbeau, Vingt-­six sermons, p. 374, confirmed by P.-­M. Hombert, Nouvelles recherches
de chronologie augustinienne (Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 2000), 563–­88.
    53. This is the occasion proposed by Hugoniot, Les spectacles, 772–­73.


                                             604
                             notes to pages 353–361


    54. Enarrationes in Psalmos 147.3 and 147.12; 103, sermon 1.13; 81.1 and 81.23;
102.12–­13 now with Dolbeau Sermon 5.14, p. 446, Hill, p. 112; and 26.1–­2, pp. 366–­68,
Hill, pp. 180–­81.
    55. Lepelley, Les cités de l’Afrique romaine, 1:110–­11, 310–­14, 2:44–­47.
    56. Enarrationes in Psalmos 147.7.
    57. Dolbeau Sermon 11 [90A].11, p. 65, Hill, pp. 82–­83.
    58. Enarrationes in Psalmos 149.10.
    59. Letter 138.2.14.
    60. L. Ennabli, Carthage: Une métropole chrétienne du IVe à la fin du VIIe siècle (Paris:
Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, 1997), 29–­31.
    61. Enarrationes in Psalmos, sermon 3.9–­10.
   62. Erfurt Sermon 2.1 and 3.3.1, ed. Schiller, Weber, and Weidmann, pp. 9–­10
and 18.
    63. Sermon 107A, PL Supplementum 2:777.
    64.	C. Lambot, “Nouveaux sermons de saint Augustin,” Revue bénédictine 49 (1937):
233–­78 at p. 270.
    65. Concilium in Causa Apiarii can. 15, in Concilia Africae, p. 105.
    66. Enarrationes in Psalmos 147.7.
    67. New Letters 1A and 2*.2 and 12–­13, pp. 54–­58, 62, and 88–­92, Eno, pp. 14–­16,
19–­20, and 28–­30; see Brown, Augustine of Hippo, 471–­73. New Letter 1A had already
been discovered: see C. Lambot, “Lettre inédite de S. Augustin relative au ‘De civitate
Dei,’” Revue bénédictine 51 (1939): 109–­21.
    68. Hugoniot, Les spectacles, pp. 316–­17.
    69.	R. MacMullen, Roman Social Relations, 50 B.C. to A.D. 284 (New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 1974), 61.


                                    Chapter 22
                               Dimitte nobis debita nostra

     1.	N. B. McLynn, “Augustine’s Roman Empire,” Augustinian Studies 30 (1999):
29–­44 at p. 34.
     2. P. Brown, “Aspects of the Christianization of the Roman Aristocracy,” Journal
of Roman Studies 51 (1961): 1–­11, now in Religion and Society, 161–­82.
     3. Letter 135.2.
     4. Brown, Augustine of Hippo, 297–­302.
     5.	R. Hanoune, “Le paganisme philosophique de l’aristocratie municipale,” in
L’Afrique dans l’Occident romain (Ier siècle av. J.-­C.–­IVe siècle ap. J.-­C.), Collection de
l’École française de Rome 134 (Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1990), 63–­75 at p. 71.
     6.	Rebillard, “Sociologie de la déviance et orthodoxie,” 225–­32.
     7. Wermelinger, Rom und Pelagius, 172–­76.
     8. Augustine, Sermon 348 = Dolbeau Sermon 30.13.200, ed. F. Dolbeau, “Le ser-
mon 384A de saint Augustin contre Pélage: Édition du texte intégral,” Recherches augus­
tiniennes 28 (1995): 37–­63 at p. 61, Hill, p. 316.


                                            605
                             notes to pages 361–367


      9. A.-­M. La Bonnardière, “Les commentaires simultanés de Mat. 6,12 et de 1 Jo.
1,18 dans l’oeuvre de saint Augustin,” Revue des études augustiniennes 1 (1955): 129–­47.
    10. Letter 156. See Kessler, Reichtumskritik und Pelagianismus, 85–­100.
    11. É. Rebillard, In hora mortis: Évolution de la pastorale chrétienne de la mort aux
IVe et Ve siècles dans l’Occident latin, Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises d’Athènes et de
Rome 283 (Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1994), 148–­67.
    12. Enarrationes in Psalmos 103, sermon 3.18.
    13. La Bonnardière, “Les commentaires simultanés,” 129–­31; idem, “Pénitence et
réconciliation de pénitents d’après saint Augustin,” Revue des études augustiniennes 13
(1967): 31–­53 at pp. 47–­53.
    14. Enarrationes in Psalmos 140.18.
    15.	See, for example, O. Plassmann, Die Almosen bei Johannes Chrysostomus (Mün-
ster: Aschendorff, 1961); and Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 95.
    16. De civitate Dei 21.27.
    17. Paulinus, Letter 35. Augustine’s view of the eternity and absence of remission
in the final fires of Hell after the Last Judgment was by no means as widespread as it later
became: see P. Brown, “The Decline of the Empire of God: Amnesty, Penance and the
Afterlife from Late Antiquity to the Middle Ages,” in Last Things: Death and the Apoca­
lypse in the Middle Ages, ed. C. W. Bynum and P. Freedman (Philadephia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2000), 41–­59 at pp. 42–­50; Skeb, Christo vivere, 88–­106—­Paulinus
showed “astonishing optimism” on this issue.
    18. Sermon 58.9.10.
    19. Sermon 56.7.11 and 58.9.10.
    20. Sermon 9.19.
    21. Duval, Loca sanctorum Africae, vol. 1, no. 167, pp. 351–­53; Inscriptiones Latinae
Christianae Veteres, no. 1822. See now A. Blackhurst, “The House of Nubel: Rebels or
Players?” in Vandals, Romans and Berbers, 59–­76, at pp. 65–­66.
    22. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 1915.
    23. Duval, Loca sanctorum Africae, vol. 1, no. 173, p. 366.
    24. Carmina Latina Epigraphica 119, ed. E. Engström (Leipzig: Teubner, 1912), 35.
    25.	Compare the tendency of Hindu and Buddhist givers to expiate their sins by gifts
to distant shrines: Parry, “The Gift, the Indian Gift and the ‘Indian Gift,’” 463.
    26. Gerontius, VG, Gorce, p. 170, Clark, p. 43. See now C. Lepelley, “Facing Wealth
and Poverty: Defining Augustine’s Social Doctrine,” Augustinian Studies 38 (2007): 1–­18.
    27. P. Leveau, P. Sillières, and J.-­P. Valat, Campagnes de la Méditerranée romaine: Oc­
cident (Paris: Hachette, 1993), 181–­88 brings welcome precision on the exact size and
placing of estates in the widely differing regions of Africa.
    28. D. Vera, “Enfiteusi, colonato e trasformazioni agrarie nell’Africa romana procon-
sulare del tardo impero,” Africa Romana 4 (1987): 267–­93, esp. 284–­89; and idem, “Terra
e lavoro nell’Africa romana,” Studi Storici 4 (1988): 967–­92, esp. at pp. 979–­82.
    29. J. Peyras, “Le fundus Aufidianus: Étude d’un grand domaine romain de la région
de Mateur (Tunisie du Nord),” Antiquités Africaines 9 (1975): 181–­222; A. Leone and
D. Mattingly, “Vandal, Byzantine and Arab Rural Landscapes in North Africa,” in Land­
scapes of Change, 135–­62 at p. 154.


                                           606
                              notes to pages 367–375


    30. Letter 66.1.
    31. Gui, Duval, and Caillet, Basiliques chrétiennes d’Afrique du Nord, vol. 2, no. LX-
VIII, p. 68. The reader should know that the date of this basilica remains contested; I
think that an early fifth-­century date is more likely than a later one, by reason of the titles
of the donors. This is also the view of J.-­P. Caillet, “La réalité de l’implantation monu-
mentale chrétienne au temps d’Augustin: L’exemple de quelques cités de Numidie,” in
Lancel, Saint Augustin, 55–­66 at p. 60.


                                        Chapter 23
                                       “Out of Africa”

      1. Pliny the Elder, Natural History 8.17.42.
      2. Wermelinger, Rom und Pelagius, 46–­87.
      3. Brown, Augustine of Hippo (2000), 354–­66. The reader should know that, given
the superabundant literature on Augustine and the Pelagian Controversy, I have cited
only the books and articles I have found to be reliable and relevant to the themes raised
in this chapter.
      4. Sermon 348 = Dolbeau Sermon 30.5.81, Dolbeau, p. 51, Hill, p. 312.
      5. Wermelinger, Rom und Pelagius, 88–­218.
      6. Opus imperfectum contra Iulianum 1.42.
      7.	Rees, The Letters of Pelagius and His Followers, 11–­12.
      8.	Olympiodorus, Fragment 25, Blockley, 2:189; Brown, “Pelagius and His Sup-
porters,” in Religion and Society, esp. at pp. 186–­92.
      9. A. Gillett, “Rome, Ravenna and the Last Western Emperors,” Papers of the British
School at Rome 69 (2001): 131–­67 effectively demolishes this persistent misconception.
    10. Well seen by V. Zangara, “Una predicazione alla presenza dei principi: La chiesa
di Ravenna nella prima metà del sec. V,” Antiquité tardive 8 (2000): 265–­304 at p. 267.
    11. Edict of Honorius, in Collectio Quesnelliana XIV, PL 56:490–­92 (Paris: J.-­P. Migne,
1846).
    12. L’Année épigraphique 1928, no. 80, p. 22.
    13. Zosimus, Historia nova 5.41.5: see Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire,
2:822–­24.
    14. Edict of Honorius, in Collectio Quesnelliana, 491B.
    15. Letter 192 (to Celestine) and 191.2 (to Sixtus).
    16. Letter 191.1.
    17. The best recent study is Lössl, Julian von Aeclanum.
    18. Paulinus, Poem 25; see Lössl, Julian von Aeclanum, 73.
    19.	Sotinel, “Les évêques italiens,” 385–­86 is to be preferred to the speculations on
Julian’s high birth collected in Lössl, Julian von Aeclanum, 72n200.
    20. Gennadius, De viris illustribus 46: see Lössl, Julian von Aeclanum, 42.
    21.	I plead guilty to having succumbed to the temptation to see Julian in terms of this
old-­world background in Augustine of Hippo, 382–­84. Lössl, Julian von Aeclanum has
provided an ample corrective to this view.


                                             607
                             notes to pages 375–381


     22. Julian in Augustine, Contra II epistulas pelagianorum 4.33, now in Iuliani Ae­
clanenensis fragmenta 27, ed. L. de Coninck, CCSL 88 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1977), 340.
     23.	Cipriani, “La polemica antiafricana di Giuliano di Eclano.”
     24. J. Lössl, “Julian of Aeclanum on Pain,” Journal of Early Christian Studies 10
(2002): 203–­43; and idem, Julian von Aeclanum, 127–­35; P. Brown, “Sexuality and So-
ciety in the Fifth Century A.D.: Augustine and Julian of Eclanum,” in Tria corda: Scritti
in onore di Arnaldo Momigliano, ed. E. Gabba, Biblioteca di Athenaeum 1 (Como: New
Press, 1983), 49–­70.
     25. Opus imperfectum 4.46; Brown, Augustine of Hippo, 383–­99.
     26. Lössl, Julian von Aeclanum, 320–­29.
     27.	R. Mathisen, “A New Fragment of Augustine’s De nuptiis et concupiscentia from
the Codex Sangallensis 190,” Zeitschrift für Antikes Christentum 3 (1999): 165–­83.
     28. Julian in Augustine, Opus imperfectum 2.88.
     29. For corrections of the caricatures of Augustine’s views on sex and marriage by
Julian and by modern scholars, see Brown, Body and Society, 396–­427; and idem, review
of Sorabji, Emotion and Peace of Mind, 192–­208; J. Cavadini, “Feeling Right: Augustine
on the Passions and Sexual Desire,” Augustinian Studies 36 (2005): 195–­217.
     30. Letter 189.5–­6.
     31. H.-­I. Marrou, “Un lieu dit ‘Cité de Dieu,’” in Augustinus magister (Paris: Études
Augustiniennes, 1955), 1:101–­10; S. Connolly, “Fortifying the City of God: Dardanus’
Inscription Revisited,” Classical Journal 102 (2007): 145–­54.
     32. Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire, 2:346–­47.
     33. Letter 187.12.37.
     34. The reflection of this situation in fifth-­century treatises of spiritual advice is
clearly perceived by Cooper, The Fall of the Roman Household, 93–­107.
     35. Contra II epistulas pelagianorum 3.5.14.
     36.	Salvian, De gubernatione Dei 7.3.14, ed. and trans. G. Lagarrigue, Salvien de Mar­
seille: Oeuvres, vol. 2, Du gouvernement de Dieu, SC 220 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1975), citing
Paulinus, Letter 32.3.
     37. Leo, Sermon 24 (De collectis 5).1, ed. and trans. R. Dolle, Léon le Grand: Sermons,
SC 22 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1947), 1:56; and Sermon 79 (De ieiuniis 7).3, Sermons, SC 200
(Paris: Le Cerf, 1973), 4:134.
     38. First published by Johannes Divjak, CSEL 88 (Vienna: Tempsky, 1981) and then
with a translation and commentaries in Oeuvres de saint Augustin 46B: Lettres 1*–­29*,
translated by Eno, St. Augustine: Letters 1*–­29*. I will cite from Oeuvres de saint Augustin
46B. M.-­F. Berrouard, “Un tournant dans la vie de l’église d’Afrique: Les deux missions
d’Alypius en Italie à la lumière des Lettres 10*, 15*, 16*, 22* et 23A,” Revue des études au­
gustiniennes 31 (1985): 46–­70 remains the fundamental treatment of this new evidence
for the relation of the bishops of Africa to the imperial court.
     39. Letter 22*.2.40, p. 348.
     40. Letter 22*.2.32, p. 348.
     41. Letter 22*.4.58, pp. 350–­52; see F. Jacques, “Le défenseur de cité d’après la Lettre
22* de saint Augustin,” Revue des études augustiniennes 32 (1986): 56–­73.
     42. Letter 24*, pp. 382–­86.


                                            608
                             notes to pages 381–388


    43. Letter 10*.3.64, pp. 170–­72.
    44. Letter 10*.5.112, p. 176.
    45. This was clearly seen in the first discussion of the Divjak Letters by P.-­A. Février,
“Discours d’Église et réalité historique dans les nouvelles Lettres d’Augustin,” in Les
Lettres de Saint Augustin découvertes par Johannes Divjak (Paris: Études Augustiniennes,
1983), 101–­15 at p. 109.
    46. Zangara, “Una predicazione alla presenza dei principi,” 275–­98. See now D. M.
Deliyannis, Ravenna in Late Antiquity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010),
63–­70.
    47. A. Laniado, “Le christianisme et l’évolution des institutions municipales du
Bas‑Empire: L’exemple du defensor civitatis,” in Die Stadt in der Spätantike—­Niedergang
oder Wandel? ed. J.-­U. Krause and C. Witschel, Historia Einzelschriften 190 (Stuttgart:
F. Steiner, 2006), 319–­34. This corrects Liebeschuetz, The Decline and Fall of the Roman
City, 149.
    48. Quodvultdeus, De tempore barbarico 2.5, cited by Heather, The Fall of the
Roman Empire, 288; see pp. 262–91 on the course of the Vandal invasion of Africa.


                                     Chapter 24
                     “Still at That Time a More Affluent Empire”

     1. Expositio totius mundi et gentium 58, p. 196.
     2. For battles in the civil wars as the true “killing fields” of Roman professional
armies and the consequent increase in the use of barbarian troops, see esp. B. Shaw, “War
and Violence,” in Late Antiquity: A Guide to the Post-­Classical World, 130–­69 at pp. 148–­
52; and A. D. Lee, War in Late Antiquity: A Social History (Oxford: Blackwell, 2007),
51–­73.
     3.	Sulpicius Severus, Chronica 2.3.2, p. 228. On Sulpicius Severus, see esp. H. Ingle-
bert, Les romains chrétiens face à l’histoire de Rome: Histoire, christianisme et romanités en
Occident dans l’Antiquité tardive (IIIe–­Ve siècles) (Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes,
1996), 365–­85.
     4. The best recent analysis of this confederation is by W. Goffart, Barbarian Tides:
The Migration Age and the Later Roman Empire (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylva-
nia Press, 2006), 73–­107. Heather, The Fall of the Roman Empire, 205–­50 tells the story
with vigor. See now P. Heather, “Why Did the Barbarians Cross the Rhine?” Journal of
Late Antiquity 2 (2009): 3–­29.
     5. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos 235, ed. and trans. H. G. Evelyn White, Ausonius,
Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1949), 2:322.
     6.	See esp. M. Kulikowski, “Barbarians in Gaul, Usurpers in Britain,” Britannia 31
(2000): 325–­45.
     7. Kulikowski, Late Roman Spain and Its Cities, 151–­75; and J. Arce, Bárbaros y
romanos en Hispania (400–­507 A.D.) (Madrid: Marcial Pons, 2005), 31–­149.
     8. Augustine, Letter 11*.2.49, Divjak, p. 188.
     9. Halsall, Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 339.


                                            609
                             notes to pages 389–391


     10. M. Kulikowski, “The Visigothic Settlement in Aquitania: The Imperial Perspec-
tive,” in Society and Culture in Late Antique Gaul: Revisiting the Sources, ed. R. Mathisen
and D. Shanzer (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001), 26–­38. The grant of shares of tax revenue
(and not of land) as the basis of such settlements was suggested by W. Goffart, Barbar­
ians and Romans, A.D. 418–­584: The Techniques of Accommodation (Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press, 1980) and is now defended with spirit in Barbarian Tides, 119–­86.
It is a solution of inspired simplicity. It awakens doubt for just that reason. The debate
continues: W. Goffart, “The Technique of Barbarian Settlement in the Fifth Century:
A Personal, Streamlined Account with Ten Additional Comments,” and G. Halsall, “The
Technique of Barbarian Settlement in the Fifth Century: A Reply to Walter Goffart,”
Journal of Late Antiquity 3 (2010): 65–­98, 99–­112.
     11. Heather, The Fall of the Roman Empire, 266–­99.
     12. Wickham, Framing the Early Middle Ages, 711.
     13. J. Harries, Sidonius Apollinaris and the Fall of Rome, AD 407–­485 (Oxford: Clar-
endon Press, 1994), 246.
     14. Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum 6:1783, ed. and trans. in C. W. Hedrick, His­
tory and Silence: Purge and Rehabilitation of Memory in Late Antiquity (Austin: Univer-
sity of Texas Press, 2000), 1–­5.
     15. Chronicle of 452 55 (406), ed. T. Mommsen, Chronica Minora, MGH: Auctores
Antiquissimi 9: 1 (Berlin: Weidmann, 1892), 652. See S. Muhlberger, The Fifth-­Century
Chroniclers: Prosper, Hydatius, and the Gallic Chronicler of 452 (Liverpool: F. Cairns,
1990), 136–­92; and idem, “Looking Back from Mid-­Century: The Gallic Chronicler
of 452 and the Crisis of Honorius’ Reign,” in Fifth-­Century Gaul: A Crisis of Identity? ed.
J. Drinkwater and H. Elton (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), 28–­37.
Extracts from the Gallic chronicles and much other material have been translated by
A. C. Murray, From Roman to Merovingian Gaul: A Reader (Peterborough, Ontario:
Broadview Press, 2000). On the literature of barbarian “invasion,” see Courcelle, Histoire
littéraire des grandes invasions germaniques; and M. Roberts, “Barbarians in Gaul: The
Response of the Poets,” in Fifth-­Century Gaul, 97–­106.
     16. As has been done most recently by Ward-­Perkins, The Fall of Rome, 28–­31. But
now see the reserves on this use of the evidence by N. B. McLynn, “Poetic Creativity and
Political Crisis in Early Fifth-­Century Gaul,” Journal of Late Antiquity 2 (2009): 60–­74.
Ward-­Perkins has accepted these criticisms: “407 and All That: Retrospective,” Journal of
Late Antiquity 2 (2009): 75–­78 at p. 78. See in general W. Pohl, “Rome and the Barbar-
ians in the Fifth Century,” Antiquité tardive 16 (2008): 93–­101.
     17.	Translated by Evelyn White in the Loeb Classical Library as an appendix to the
works of Ausonius (see note 5). See also C. Moussy, Paulin de Pella: Poème d’action de
grâces et Prière, SC 209 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1974). The best commentary is provided by N. B.
McLynn, “Paulinus the Impenitent: A Study of the Eucharisticos,” Journal of Early Chris­
tian Studies 2 (1995): 461–­86; see most recently A. Coşkun, “The Eucharisticos of Pauli-
nus Pellaeus: Towards a Reappraisal of the Worldly Convert’s Life and Autobiography,”
Vigiliae Christianae 60 (2006): 283–­315; and A. Marcone, “Il mondo di Paolino di Pella,”
in Di tarda antichità: Scritti scelti (Milan: Mondadori, 2008), 87–­96.
     18. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos 228, Evelyn White, p. 322.


                                           610
                             notes to pages 391–396


     19. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos 159–­66, Evelyn White, p. 318.
     20. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos 204–­15, Evelyn White, pp. 320–­22.
     21. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos 291–­310, Evelyn White, pp. 326–­28; McLynn,
“Paulinus the Impenitent,” 471.
     22. McLynn, “Paulinus the Impenitent,” 469.
     23. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos 520–­38, Evelyn White, p. 344.
     24. Codex Theodosianus 15.14.14 (416).
     25. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos 500–­502, Evelyn White, p. 342.
     26. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos 514, Evelyn White, p. 342.
     27. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos 307, Evelyn White, p. 328.
     28.	On the “kingdom” of Aegidius and Syagrius in northern Gaul, see P. MacGeorge,
Late Roman Warlords (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 69–­164; on Britain, see
C. A. Snyder, An Age of Tyrants: Britain and the Britons, A.D. 400–­600 (University Park:
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1998); and S. Laycock, Britannia the Failed State:
Tribal Conflicts and the End of Roman Britain (Stroud: The History Press, 2008), 109–­68.
     29. Halsall, Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 19.
     30. Heather, The Fall of Rome, 432–­43.
     31. F. Braudel, The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip
II, trans. Siân Reynolds (London: Collins, 1973), 2:865–­91.
     32. Gregory of Tours, The Glory of the Martyrs 12, ed. Bruno Krusch, in MGH:
Scriptores rerum Merovingicarum 1 (Hannover: Hahn, 1885), 46.
     33. Council of Angers 453, ed. C. Munier, Concilia Galliae, a. 314–­a. 506, CCSL 148
(Turnhout: Brepols, 1963), 138; see R. W. Mathisen, Roman Aristocrats in Barbarian
Gaul: Strategies for Survival in an Age of Transition (Austin: University of Texas Press,
1993), 77–­85 at p. 79.
     34.	R. Samson, “Slavery, the Roman Legacy,” in Fifth-­Century Gaul, 218–­27; N. Len-
ski, “Captivity, Slavery, and Cultural Exchange between Rome and the Germans from
the First to the Seventh Century C.E.,” in Invisible Citizens: Captives and Their Conse­
quences, ed. C. M. Cameron (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 2008), 80–­109 at
pp. 95–­103.
     35. W. Klingshirn, “Charity and Power: Caesarius of Arles and the Ransoming of
Captives in Sub-­Roman Gaul,” Journal of Roman Studies 75 (1985): 183–­203.
     36. Patricius, Letter to Coroticus 14, ed. and trans. A.B.E. Hood, St. Patrick: His
Writings and Muirchu’s Life (Chichester: Phillimore, 1978), 37, 57.
     37. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 179.
     38.	On this hotly debated issue, see esp. N. Duval, “La notion de ‘sarcophage’ et son
rôle dans l’antiquité tardive,” and C. Balmelle, “Le répertoire végétal des mosaïstes du Sud-­
Ouest de la Gaule et des sculpteurs des sarcophages dits d’Aquitaine,” Antiquité tardive 1
(1993): 29–­35, 101–­7, along with the other contributions in that volume. Despite the ma-
jority opinion of the contributors, I find myself in agreement with Yves Christe (at pp. 21
and 79), who sees a rupture with fourth-­century styles rather than a smooth continuity.
See now J.-­L. Boudartchouk, “Production et diffusion des sarcophages romains tardifs
et mérovingiens dans la région de Lourdes (Hautes Pyrénées),” Gallia 59 (2002): 53–­60.
     39. Halsall, Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 347.


                                            611
                             notes to pages 397–402


    40. L. K. Bailey, “Building Urban Christian Communities: Sermons on Local Saints
in the Eusebius Gallicanus Collection,” Early Medieval Europe 12 (2003): 1–­24; and idem,
Christianity’s Quiet Success: The Eusebius Gallicanus Sermon Collection and the Power of
the Church in Late Antique Gaul (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press,
2010), 1–­38.
    41.	Valerianus of Cimiez, Homily 6.3, PL 52:710D.
    42. Fredegar, Chronicae 3.7, ed. B. Krusch, in MGH: Scriptores rerum Merovingi-
carum 2 (Hannover: Hahn, 1888), 94.
    43. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos 416–­19, Evelyn White, p. 336.
    44.	Eucherius of Lyon, De contemptu mundi 273–­88, ed. and trans. S. Pricoco, Eu­
cherio di Lione: Il rifiuto del mondo (Florence: Nardini, 1990), 74.
    45. Wickham, Framing the Early Middle Ages, 169–­173.
    46. Almeida and Carvalho, “Villa romana da Quinta das Longas.” I owe knowledge
of this article and that in note 54 to my student Damian Fernández. See now Reynolds,
Hispania and the Roman Mediterranean, 60–­63 and map 8 on p. 166.
    47. For a lively debate on this issue, see T. Lewit, “‘Vanishing Villas’: What Hap-
pened to Élite Rural Habitation in the West in the 5th–­6th C.?” Journal of Roman Ar­
chaeology 16 (2003): 260–­74; and Bowes and Gutteridge, “Rethinking the Later Roman
Landscape,” 412–­13. In general, see P. Heather, “Elite Militarisation and the Post-­Roman
West,” in Istituzioni, carismi ed esercizio del potere, 245–­65.
    48. Wickham, Framing the Early Middle Ages, 473–­81.
    49. Halsall, Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 342–­44, 350–­51, 364.
    50. The abrupt disappearance of Roman denotators of wealth is most clear in post-­
imperial Britain (see Cleary, The Ending of Roman Britain), but it is a Europe-­wide
phenomenon.
    51.	S. Mauné, Les campagnes de la cité de Béziers dans l’Antiquité: Partie nord-­orientale
(IIe s. av. J.-­C.–­VIe s. ap. J.-­C.) (Montagnac: Mergoil, 1998), 119–­22.
    52. Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae, no. 1279.
    53.	Connolly, “Fortifying the City of God.” Dardanus may have placed his mauso-
leum chapel in this valley. See F. Benoit, “La crypte en triconque de Théopolis,” Rivista
di archeologia cristiana 27 (1951): 69–­89. For fortification in southern Gaul, see now
L. Bourgeois, “Les résidences des élites et les fortifications du Haut Moyen Âge en France
et en Belgique dans leur cadre européen: Aperçu historiographique (1955–­2005),” Ca­
hiers de civilisation médiévale 49(2006): 113–­142 at p. 118.
    54. A. Vigil-­Escalero Guirado, “Granjas y aldeas altomedievales al Norte de Toledo
(450–­800 D.C.),” Archivo Español de Arqueología 80 (2007): 239–­84.
    55.	Y. Modéran, “L’établissment térritorial des Vandales en Afrique,” Antiquité tar­
dive 10 (2002): 87–­122.
    56.	Y. Modéran, “Une guerre de religion: Les deux Églises d’Afrique à l’époque van-
dale,” Antiquité tardive 11 (2003): 21–­44 at p. 44.
    57. A. Merrills and R. Miles, The Vandals (Chichester, UK: Wiley-­Blackwell, 2010),
141–­76 at p. 176.
    58.	Y. Hen, Roman Barbarians: The Royal Court and Culture in the Early Medieval
West (Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave MacMillan, 2007), 59–­93; R. Miles, “The Anthologia


                                            612
                             notes to pages 402–405


Latina and the Creation of Secular Space in Vandal Carthage,” Antiquité tardive 13
(2005): 305–­20; C. Balmelle et al., “Vitalité de l’architecture domestique à Carthage au
Ve siècle: L’exemple de la maison dite de la Rotonde, sur la colline de l’Odeon,” Antiquité
tardive 11 (2003): 151–­66. See also G. Chalon et al., “Memorabile factum: Une célébra-
tion de l’évergétisme des rois vandales dans l’Anthologie Latine,” Antiquités africaines 21
(1985): 207–­62; and G. Hays, “Romuleis Libicisque litteris: Fulgentius and the ‘Vandal
Renaissance,’” in Vandals, Romans and Berbers, 101–­32.
    59.	Salvian, De gubernatione Dei 5.8.37.
    60.	Compare E. A. Thompson, “Peasant Revolts in Late Roman Gaul and Spain,”
Past and Present 2 (1952): 11–­23—­a brilliant Marxist synthesis—­with R. Van Dam,
Leadership and Community in Late Antique Gaul (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1985), 41–­48—­a daring reversal of this perspective, in terms of self-­defense by
local elites. The reader should know that I lean toward the views of J. F. Drinkwater, “The
Bacaudae of Fifth-­Century Gaul,” in Fifth-­Century Gaul, 208–­17. I accept his rejection
of the tendency to identify with the “Bacaudic” movement every mention of conflict, of
social unrest, and of regional power vacuums in fifth-­century Gaul and Spain, unless they
are explicitly connected with Bacaudae. A passage in the comedy known as the Querolus
(scene II.30) has attracted particularly exuberant learned fantasies: see C. Jacquemard-­Le
Saos, Querolus (Aulularia). Comédie latine anonyme: Le Grincheux (Paris: Belles Lettres,
2003), xii–­xlii. It may have nothing whatsoever to do with the Bacaudae.
    61.	See J. C. Sánchez León, Les sources de l’histoire des Bagaudes (Paris: Belles Lettres,
1996). Outside Hydatius and the Chronicle of 452 we are left with only Zosimus, Historia
Nova 6.2.5; and Salvian, De gubernatione dei 5.5.22 and 5.6.24–­26. For the use of the
term referring to events of the late third century, see Sánchez León, Les sources, 119–­46.
The Chronicle of 452 uses the singular, “in a Bacauda,” on two occasions (117 and 133, for
443 and 448). The fact that a doctor, Eudoxus, was implicated in one Bacauda (Chronicle
of 452 113—­for 448) and that Bacaudae killed a bishop and a garrison in a north Spanish
mining town, Tarazona (Turiasso) (Hydatius, Chronicle 133—­for 449), may indicate an
urban setting for some “Bacaudic” events.
    62. Hydatius, Chronicle 120 (443), ed. and trans. R. W. Burgess, The Chronicle of
Hydatius and the Consularia Constantinopolitana (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993), 96.
The work and worldview of Hydatius is brilliantly characterized by Muhlberger, The
Fifth-­Century Chroniclers, 193–­266, esp. at pp. 260–­64.
    63. Chronicle of 452 117 (435) and 119 (437), Mommsen, p. 660.
    64. This is the view of Salvian, De gubernatione Dei 5.6.24; see Drinkwater, “The
Bacaudae,” 217.
    65.	Carrié and Rousselle, L’empire romain en mutation, 732.
    66. Matthews, Western Aristocracies and Imperial Court, 347.
    67. The study of Sidonius Apollinaris I have found the most perceptive is that of
Harries, Sidonius Apollinaris and the Fall of Rome.
    68.	Sidonius Apollinaris, Letter 1.3.1, ed. and trans. W. B. Anderson, Sidonius: Poems
and Letters, Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965),
1:346.
    69.	Sidonius Apollinaris, Letter 8.6.6, Anderson, 2:424.


                                            613
                              notes to pages 405–412


     70.	Sidonius Apollinaris, Letter 4.2.5, Anderson, 2:142.
     71. The mixture of realistic description and timeless stereotypes has not endeared
Sidonius to archaeologists engaged in reconstructing what fifth-­century villas were really
like: see J. Bodel, “Monumental Villas and Villa Monuments,” Journal of Roman Archae­
ology 10 (1997): 3–­35 at p. 16: “a confused agglomeration of conceits that frustrate
rather than aid the reader.” See also J. Percival, “Desperately Seeking Sidonius: The Re-
alities of Life in Fifth-­Century Gaul,” Latomus 56 (1997): 279–­92. But see the largely
successful attempt to reconstruct one such villa (that of the Burgus Leontii in Sidonius,
Poem 22) by Balmelle, Les demeures aristocratiques d’Aquitaine, 144.
     72. Harries, Sidonius Apollinaris, 132; on Letter 2.2.5–­6, Anderson, 1:420–­22.
     73. Harries, Sidonius Apollinaris, 15.
     74.	Sidonius Apollinaris, Letter 3.2.2, Anderson, 2:8.
     75.	Sidonius Apollinaris, Letter 8.6.16, Anderson, 2:432. See Prosopography of the
Later Roman Empire, 2:771.
     76.	Sidonius Apollinaris, Letter 7.7.1–­2, Anderson, 2:388–­90. See Prosopography of
the Later Roman Empire, 2:1162–­63.
     77. Gregory of Tours, Histories 2.20; ed. Bruno Krusch and Wilhelm Levison, in
Libri historiarum X, MGH: Scriptores rerum Merovingicarum, vol. 1, 2nd ed. (Han-
nover: Hahn, 1951), trans. Lewis Thorpe, Gregory of Tours: The History of the Franks
(Harmonds­worth, UK: Penguin, 1974). See Harries, Sidonius Apollinaris, 195.
     78. Gregory of Tours, Histories 2.20. See Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire,
2:406.
     79. Receuil des inscriptions chrétiennes de la Gaule, vol. 8, Aquitanie première, ed.
F. Prévot (Paris: CNRS, 1991), no. 21 at p. 126.
     80. Gregory of Tours, Histories 2.37; Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire, 2:114.
     81. Gregory of Tours, Histories 3.18. Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire, 2:
131–­32.


                                     Chapter 25
                                    Among the Saints

      1. Paulinus of Pella, Eucharisticos, 520–­21. On the background of this widely used
term, see É. Griffe, “La pratique religieuse en Gaule au Ve siècle: Saeculares et sancti,” Bul­
letin de littérature ecclésiastique 63 (1962): 241–­67.
      2.	S. T. Loseby, “Arles in Late Antiquity: Gallula Roma Arelas and Urbs Genesii,” in
Towns in Transition: Urban Evolution in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages, ed.
N. Christie and S. T. Loseby (Aldershot: Scolar, 1996), 45–­70; Heijmans, Arles durant
l’Antiquité tardive. For continued relations between Arles, Narbonne, and Mediterranean
Spain, see Reynolds, Hispania and the Roman Mediterranean, 84–­85.
      3.	S. T. Loseby, “Marseille: A Late Antique Success Story?” Journal of Roman Stud­
ies 82 (1992): 165–­85.
      4.	R. W. Mathisen, Ecclesiastical Factionalism and Religious Controversy in Fifth-­
Century Gaul (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1989), 76–­78.


                                             614
                              notes to pages 412–415


     5. Hilary of Arles, Vita Honorati 22, ed. S. Cavallin, Vitae Sanctorum Honorati et
Hilarii episcoporum Arelatensium (Lund: Gleerup, 1952), 65. See Mathisen, Ecclesiastical
Factionalism, 93–­96.
     6. Honoratus of Marseille, Vita Hilariti 15, ed. S. Cavallin, trans. P.-­A. Jacob, La vie
d’Hilaire d’Arles SC 404 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1995), 124. The poet deliberately plays on the
way in which Hilary wove his time and duties as skillfully as he wove his baskets.
     7. Honoratus, Vita Hilarii 14, p. 122.
     8. M. Vessey, “Peregrinus against the Heretics: Classicism, Provinciality and the
Place of the Alien Writer in Late Roman Gaul,” Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 46
(1994): 529–­65 at p. 550, now in Latin Christian Writers in Late Antiquity and Their
Texts (Ashgate: Variorum, 2005). On the wider implications of these networks as vehicles
of master-­disciple relationships, see R. Alciati, Monaci, vescovi e scuola nella Gallia tardo­
antica, Temi e Testi 72 (Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 2009), 119–­21, 228. See
also M. Dulaey, “La bibliothèque du monastère de Lérins dans les premières décennies
du Ve siècle,” Augustinianum 46 (2006): 187–230. A further aspect of the ecclesiastical
culture of Provence, which is less often considered, is now well treated by Bailey, Christi­
anity’s Quiet Success.
     9.	S. Baumgart, Die Bischofsherrschaft im Gallien des 5. Jahrhunderts: Eine Untersu­
chung zu den Gründen und Anfängen weltlicher Herrschaft der Kirche, Münchener Arbe-
iten zur Alten Geschichte 8 (Munich: Editio Maris, 1995), 14–­15.
    10.	See most recently, R. Goodrich, Contextualizing Cassian: Aristocrats, Asceti­
cism, and Reformation in Fifth-­Century Gaul (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
There is an abundant literature on Cassian: see P. Rousseau, Ascetics, Authority, and
the Church in the Age of Jerome and Cassian (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978),
169–­234; idem, “Cassian: Monastery and World,” in The Certainty of Doubt: Tributes to
Peter Munz, ed. M. Fairburn and W. H. Oliver (Wellington, New Zealand: Victoria Uni-
versity Press, 1995), 68–­89; C. Stewart, Cassian the Monk (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1998); and O. Chadwick, John Cassian (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1968).
    11. J.-­C. Guy, ed., Jean Cassien: Institutions Cénobitiques, SC 109 (Paris: Le Cerf,
1965), from which I cite. Translated by B. Ramsey, The Institutes, Ancient Christian
Writers (New York: Newman Press, 2000).
    12.	E. Pichéry, ed., Jean Cassien: Conférences, vol. 1, I–­VII, SC 42 (Paris: Le Cerf,
1955); Conférences, vol. 2, VIII–­XVII, SC 54 (1958); Conférences, vol. 3, XVIII–­XXIV,
SC 64 (1959). I will cite from the volume and page number of the SC edition. Translated
selections by C. Luibheid, Conferences (New York: Paulist Press, 1985); and in full by
B. Ramsey, The Conferences (New York: Paulist Press, 1997). Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du
mouvement monastique, 6:173–­439 provides a commentary of characteristic erudition
and judiciousness.
    13.	Cassian, Inst. Preface 3, p. 29 and 2.2, p. 60. See now Goodrich, Contextualizing
Cassian, 117–­50.
    14. Goodrich, Contextualizing Cassian, 32–­116.
    15. Institutes 4.4 (126): Goodrich, Contextualizing Cassian, 151–­207, esp. at pp.
173–­74.


                                             615
                              notes to pages 415–420


    16. Regula Macarii 24, ed. A. de Vogüé, Les Règles des saints Pères, SC 297 (Paris:
Cerf, 1982), 1:382, and ed. and trans. S. Pricoco, La Regola di San Benedetto e le Regole
dei Padri (Verona: Mondadori, 1995), 52.
    17. Inst. 4.3.1 (124).
    18. Inst. 4.4 (127).
    19. Inst. 12.32.1 (498).
    20. Inst. 1.2.3 (60).
    21. Goodrich, Contextualizing Cassian, 190.
    22. Inst. 4.5 (129).
    23. Inst. 4.19.1 (146).
    24. This aspect of Cassianic and post-­Cassianic monasticism is well understood by
G. Hartmann, Selbststigmatisierung und Charisma christlicher Heiliger der Spätantike,
Studien und Texte zu Antike und Christentum 38 (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2006), 51–­
94 on the Fathers of the Jura.
    25. Inst. 4.14 (138).
    26. Wipszycka, “Les aspects économiques de la vie de la communauté de Kellia”;
idem, “Le monachisme égyptien et les villes,” Travaux et mémoires 12 (1994): 1–­44; idem,
“Les formes institutionnelles et les formes d’activité économique du monachisme égyp-
tien,” in Foundations of Power and Conflicts of Authority in Late Antique Monasticism, ed.
A. Camplani and S. Filoramo, Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 157 (Louvain: Peeters,
2007), 109–­54 at pp. 149–­50. A. Laniado, “The Early Byzantine State and the Christian
Ideal of Voluntary Poverty,” in Charity and Giving in Monotheistic Religions, 15–­43 shows
that total individual poverty, such as Cassian proposed, was not considered obligatory
for monks until the sixth century. For Gaul, see A. Diem, “Monastic Poverty and Institu-
tion Forming: Evidence from Early Medieval Historiography and from Monastic Rules,”
(paper presented at the Cornell Conference on Medieval Poverty, March 2008).
    27. Coll. 24.12 (64:183).
    28. Coll. 8.21 (54:31).
    29. Coll. 1.10 (32:89).
    30. Inst. 7.13 (309).
    31.	Salvian, Letter 9.10; Ad Ecclesiam 2.3.12 and 2.9.43. Both edited by G. Lagar­
rigue, in Salvien de Marseille: Oeuvres, vol. 1, Les lettres, les livres de Timothée à l’Église,
SC 176 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1971).
    32. Hilary of Arles, Vita Honorati 15, Cavallin, p. 54; Eucherius, De laude eremi 3
and 6, ed. C. Wotke, CSEL 31 (Vienna: Tempsky, 1894), 178–­79. See esp. S. Pricoco,
L’isola dei santi: Il cenobio di Lerino e le origini del monachesimo gallico (Rome: Edizioni
dell’Ateneo e Bizzarri, 1978), 129–­64; Vogüé, Histoire littéraire du mouvement monas­
tique, 7:58–­180, with M.-­E. Brunert, Das Ideal der Wüstenaskese und seine Rezeption in
Gallien bis zum Ende des 6. Jahrhunderts, Beiträge zur Geschichte des alten Mönchtums
und des Benediktinerordens 42 (Münster: Aschendorff, 1994).
    33. Brunert, Das Ideal der Wüstenaskese, 181–­83.
    34. Regula quattuor patrum 3.11, ed. A. de Vogüé, Régles des saints pères, SC 297
(Paris: Le Cerf, 1982), 1:194, and ed. and trans. S. Pricoco, La Regola di San Benedetto e
le Regole dei Padri (Verona: Mondadori, 1995), 16.


                                             616
                             notes to pages 420–424


    35. Regula quattuor patrum 2.35, Vogüé, p. 192, Pricoco, p. 14.
    36.	I. Schrunk and V. Begović, “Roman Estates on the Island of Brioni, Istria,” Jour­
nal of Roman Archaeology 13 (2000): 252–­76; Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and
Religious Change, 138–­40.
    37. Regula Macarii 24, Vogüé, p. 382, Pricoco, p. 52.
    38. Fontaine, Sulpice Sévère: Vie de Saint Martin, 45, with 152 and 170.
    39. A. S. McKinley, “The First Two Centuries of Saint Martin of Tours,” Early Medi­
eval Europe 14 (2006): 173–­200 at pp. 178–­83.
    40. Hilary, Vita Honorati 17, Cavallin, p. 61.
    41. This dominant interpretation was first suggested by F. Prinz, Frühes Mönchtum
im Frankenreich: Kultur und Gesellschaft in Gallien, den Rheinlanden und Bayern am
Beispiel der monastischen Entwicklung (4. bis 8. Jahrhundert) (Vienna: Oldenbourg,
1965). R. Nouhailhat, Saints et patrons: Les premiers moines de Lérins, Université de
Besançon: Centre de Recherches d’Histoire Ancienne 84 (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1988) is
a thought-­provoking but extreme statement of this view.
    42.	C. M. Kasper, Theologie und Askese: Die Spiritualität des Inselmönchtums von
Lérins im 5. Jahrhundert, Beiträge zur Geschichte des Alten Mönchtums und des Bene-
diktinertums 40 (Münster: Aschendorff, 1991), 62.
    43.	See esp. Pricoco, L’isola dei santi, 59–­74, 177–­85. See the reserves of Vogüé, Hi­
stoire littéraire du mouvement monastique 7:432–­34. C. Leyser, Authority and Asceticism
from Augustine to Gregory the Great (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2000), 33–­34 presents a
more complex picture.
    44. Mathisen, Roman Aristocrats in Barbarian Gaul, 89–­104.
    45. The most clear statement of this view is in Constantius, Life of Germanus of
Auxerre 1. We should note that Germanus was a bishop from 407 to 437, but the Life
was written around 475–­80 by a friend of Sidonius Apollinaris. It may not reflect
early fifth-­century perceptions of Germanus. See Näf, Senatorisches Standesbewusstsein,
117–­92.
    46. The curial background of many “noble” bishops is cogently argued by F. D. Gil-
liard, “Senatorial Bishops in the Fourth Century,” Harvard Theological Review 77 (1984):
153–­75 at pp. 163–­65. The Testament of Ansemundus speaks of the senatus nobilis of
Vienne: P. Amory, “The Textual Transmission of the Donatio Ansemundi,” Francia 20
(1993): 163–­83 at pp. 180–­83; for Lyon, see Recueil des Inscriptions chrétiennes de la
Gaule, vol. 15, part 11, pp. 220–­26—­the nobile consilium of Lyon.
    47. Harries, Sidonius Apollinaris, 34, 170–­71.
    48. Mathisen, Ecclesiastical Factionalism, 82–­83.
    49.	On the Basilica Constantia, see now Heijmans, Arles, 193–­94.
    50. Mathisen, Ecclesiastical Factionalism, 27–­43.
    51. Inst. 1.1 (36); cf. Celestine, Letter 4, PL 50:431B (Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846):
Delage, “Le canon 13 de Sardique,” 73.
    52. Hilary, Vita Honorati 28, Cavallin, p. 69.
    53. Gennadius, De viris illustribus 70.
    54. Honoratus, Vita Hilarii 15, Cavallin, p. 126.
    55.	Epitaph of Hilary, line 9 in Cavallin, Vitae, p. 110.


                                           617
                             notes to pages 424–428


    56. Julianus Pomerius, De vita contemplativa 2.9, PL 59:453C (Paris: J. P. Migne,
1847).
    57. Jacob, Vie d’Hilaire, 48.
    58.	R. W. Mathisen, “Episcopal Hierarchy and Tenure of Office in Late Roman
Gaul: A Method for Establishing Dates of Ordination,” Francia 17 (1990):125–­39 at
pp. 130–­134.
    59. M. Heinzelmann, “The ‘Affair’ of Hilary of Arles (445) and Gallo-­Roman Iden-
tity in the Fifth Century,” in Fifth Century Gaul, 239–­51.
    60. Honoratus, Vita Hilarii 22, Cavallin, p. 138.
    61. Leo, Letter 10.3. The best characterization of the relations between the two men
is now S. Wessel, Leo the Great and the Spiritual Rebuilding of a Universal Rome, Supple-
ments to Vigiliae Christianae 93 (Leiden: Brill, 2008), 76.
    62. Novella of Valentinian III 17 (445).
    63. Zosimus, Letter 9.1.2 (418), PL 20:671AB.
    64. This important point is maintained by P. Norton, Episcopal Elections, 250–­600:
Hierarchy and Popular Will in Late Antiquity (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
    65.	Celestine, Letter 4, 430A–­431A, 434B.
    66.	See in general R. H. Weaver, Divine Grace and Human Agency: A Study of the
Semi-­Pelagian Controversy, Patristic Monographs Series 15 (Macon, GA: Mercer Univer-
sity Press, 1996); and R. Lorenz, “Der Augustinismus Prospers von Aquitanien,” Zeitschrift
für Kirchengeschichte 73 (1962): 217–­52. The best study is now A. Y. Hwang, Intrepid
Lover of Perfect Grace: The Life and Thought of Prosper of Aquitaine (Washington, DC:
Catholic University of America Press, 2009).
    67. Brown, Augustine of Hippo, 400–­410; Hwang, Intrepid Lover of Perfect Grace,
91–­94.
    68. Prosper, Contra Collatorem, PL 51: 213–­76, trans. J. R. O’Donnell, Prosper of
Aquitaine: Grace and Free Will, Fathers of the Church 7 (New York: Fathers of the
Church, 1949).
    69. Gennadius, De viris illustribus 85.
    70. A.M.C. Casiday, Tradition and Theology in St. John Cassian (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2007), 6.
    71. Prosper, Contra Collatorem 12.4:246B, O’Donnell, p. 380.
    72. Prosper, Contra Collatorem 18.2:263B, O’Donnell, p. 402.
    73. A. Casiday, “Rehabilitating John Cassian: An Evaluation of Prosper of Aqui­
taine’s Polemic against the ‘Semipelagians,’” Scottish Journal of Theology 58 (2005): 270–­84
at p. 280.
    74. Prosper, Contra Collatorem 18.2:263C, O’Donnell, p. 402.
    75.	Ibid.
     76.	C. Leyser, “‘This Sainted Isle’: Panegyric, Nostalgia and the Invention of Lerinian
Monasticism,” in The Limits of Ancient Christianity: Essays on Late Antique Thought and
Culture in Honor of R. A. Markus, ed. W. E. Klingshirn and M. Vessey (Ann Arbor: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press, 1999), 188–­206 at p. 190; and Leyser, s.v. “Semi-­Pelagianism,”
Augustine through the Ages, 761–­66.



                                            618
                             notes to pages 428–433


      77. Prosper, Pro Augustino responsiones ad excerpta Genuensium 4, PL51:193A (Paris:
J.-­P. Migne, 1846).
      78.	R. A. Markus, “The Legacy of Pelagius: Orthodoxy, Heresy and Conciliation,” in
The Making of Orthodoxy: Essays in Honour of Henry Chadwick, ed. R. Williams (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 214–­34; idem, The End of Ancient Christian­
ity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 178–­79; with É. Rebillard, “Quasi
funambuli: Cassien et la controverse pélagienne sur la perfection,” Revue des Études Au­
gustiniennes 40 (1994): 197–­210.
      79. Wessel, Leo the Great, 82.
      80. Leyser, “Semi-­Pelagianism,” 764.
      81. J.-­M. Salamito, “Aspects aristocratiques et aspects populaires de l’être chrétien
aux IIIe et IVe siècles,” Antiquité tardive 9 (2001): 165–­78 at p. 174.
      82. Chronicle of 452 44, ad ann. 400.
      83. Faustus of Riez, De gratia 1.3, ed. A. Engelbrecht, Fausti Reiensis praeter sermones
pseudo-­eusebianos opera, CSEL 21 (Vienna: Tempsky, 1891), 15. See now R. Barcellona,
Fausto di Riez, interprete del suo tempo: Un vescovo tardoantico dentro la crisi dell’impero
(Soveria Manelli: Rubettino, 2006), 39–­83.
      84. Ad Deum post conversionem, ed. A. Hamman PL Supplementum 3:1130 (Paris:
Garnier, 1963).
      85. Faustus, Letter 2, Engelbrecht, p. 166.
      86. Faustus, De gratia, Prologue, Engelbrecht, p. 3.
      87.	Isaiah 43:19, cited in Prosper, De vocatione omnium gentium 1.9, PL 51:658B
(Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846).
      88. Prosper, De vocatione omnium gentium 1.4:651A; and Pro Augustino responsiones
ad capitula Gallorum 13, PL 51:168A (Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846).
      89. Prosper, De vocatione omnium gentium 2.4:689D.
      90. Muhlberger, The Fifth-­Century Chroniclers, 48–­135.
      91. Prosper, Chronicle of 452 1307, ad ann. 431, ed. Mommsen, in Chronica Minora.
      92. Prosper, Psalmorum C ad CL Expositio, ad Ps. 149.9, PL 51:424C (Paris:
J.-­P. Migne, 1846).
      93. Muhlberger, The Fifth-­Century Chroniclers, 130.
      94. Chronicle of 452 81, ad ann. 418.
      95. Chronicle of 452 73 (Aquitaine “handed over”); 108 (Vandals “lacerate” Africa);
117 (Gallia Ulterior “separates from the Roman order”).
      96. Chronicle of 452 138.
      97.	Salvian, De gubernatione Dei 3.1.2, Lagarrigue, p. 186.


                                   Chapter 26
                           Romana respublica vel iam mortua

     1.	I cite from the Sources Chrétiennes edition of the works of Salvian: De guberna­
tione Dei, ed. G. Lagarrigue, Salvien de Marseille: Oeuvres, vol. 2, SC 220 (Paris: Le Cerf,



                                            619
                             notes to pages 433–438


1975), translated as The Governance of God by J. F. O’Sullivan, The Writings of Salvian, the
Presbyter, Fathers of the Church 3 (New York: CIMA, 1947), 23–­232; and by E. M.
Sanford, On the Government of God, Columbia Records of Civilization (New York: Co-
lumbia University Press, 1930); Letters and Ad Ecclesiam, ed. Lagarrigue, Salvien de
Marseille: Oeuvres, vol. 1, SC 176 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1971), trans. Sullivan, The Writings
of Salvian, 237–­63, 267–­371. The best studies of Salvian known to me are J. Badewien,
Geschichtstheologie und Sozialkritik im Werk Salvians von Marseille, Forschungen zur
Kirchen-­ und Dogmengeschichte 32 (Göttingen: Vandenhouck and Ruprecht, 1980);
and, more recently, D. Lambert, “The Uses of Decay: History in Salvian’s De guberna­
tione dei,” Augustinian Studies 30 (1999): 115–­30; and L. Pietri, “Riches et pauvres dans
l’Ad Ecclesiam de Salvien de Marseille,” in Les Pères de l’Église et la voix des pauvres,
149–­61.
     2.	S. Dill, Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire, 2nd ed. (1919;
reprint, New York: Meridian, 1958), 137.
     3.	O’Sullivan, The Writings of Salvian, 6.
     4. Wickham, Framing the Early Middle Ages, 62–­64.
     5. Goodrich, Contextualizing Cassian, 19.
     6.	O’Sullivan, The Writings of Salvian, 15n45. For a sample of the literature from
both sides of the Rhine, see esp. Courcelle, Histoire littéraire des grandes invasions ger­
maniques, 146–­55; and J. Fischer, Die Völkerwanderung im Urteil der zeitgenössischen
kirchlichen Schriftsteller Galliens unter Einbeziehung des heiligen Augustinus (Heidelberg:
Kemper, 1948).
     7. Halsall, Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 354 indicates that Salvian’s
description of social conditions in Gaul is “usually assumed to refer to northern Gaul.”
This assumption is based on Salvian’s knowledge of the Rhineland and his remarks on the
Bacaudae. Northern Gaul is assumed to be a center of Bacaudic activity, but Bacaudae
were also known in Spain.
     8.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.6.30, Lagarrigue, p. 254.
     9.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 6.15.94, Lagarrigue, p. 416.
    10.	Salvian, Letter 1.5–­6, Lagarrigue, p. 78.
    11.	Salvian, Letter 4.6, Lagarrigue, p. 90.
    12. Hilary, Vita Honorati 19.11, Cavallin, p. 63.
    13. Gennadius, De viris illustribus 68. See esp. Alciati, Monaci, vescovi e scuola,
83–­100.
    14.	Salvian, Letter 9, Lagarrigue, pp. 120–­32.
    15.	Salvian, Ad Ecclesiam 1.1.2, Lagarrigue, p. 140.
    16. Goodrich, Contextualizing Cassian, 157–­77.
    17.	Salvian, Ad Ecclesiam 1.1.2, p. 140, and 1.1.4, Lagarrigue, p. 142; cf. De gub. Dei
6.1.4, Lagarrigue, p. 362.
    18.	Salvian, Ad Ecclesiam 1.1.2, Lagarrigue, p. 140.
    19.	Epitaph of Hilary, line 7, Cavallin, p. 110.
    20.	Salvian, Ad Ecclesiam 2.9.39, Lagarrigue, p. 214.
    21.	E. Loening, Geschichte des deutschen Kirchenrechts, vol. 1, Das Kirchenrecht in
Gallien von Constantin bis Chlodovech (Strassburg: Trübner, 1878), 235.


                                           620
                            notes to pages 438–444


     22.	E. Champlin, Final Judgments: Duty and Emotion in Roman Wills, 200 B.C.–
A.D. 250 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), 101.
     23.	Ibid., 102.
     24.	See now Cooper, The Fall of the Roman Household, 93–­142.
     25. Novella Maioriani 6; Jerome, Letter 130.6 (written in 413) refers only to a
wealthy priest who had placed his daughter in a convent, not to an aristocrat. See esp.
S.J.B. Barnish, “Transformation and Survival in the Western Senatorial Aristocracy, c.
A.D. 400–­700,” Papers of the British School at Rome 66 (1988): 120–­55 at pp. 143–­49.
     26.	Salvian, Ad Ecclesiam 3.4.21, Lagarrigue, p. 254.
     27.	Salvian, Ad Ecclesiam 3.13.57–­58, Lagarrigue, pp. 282–­84.
     28.	Salvian, Ad Ecclesiam 4.7.36, Lagarrigue, p. 334; Augustine, Sermon 86.10.13;
Valerianus of Cimiez, Homily 4.6, 705AB (Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1845). See E. F. Bruck,
Kirchenväter und soziales Erbrecht: Wanderungen religiöser Ideen durch die Rechte der
östlichen und westlichen Welt (Berlin: Springer, 1956).
     29.	Salvian, Ad Ecclesiam 1.3.10, Lagarrigue, p. 146.
     30.	Salvian, Letter 9.8, Lagarrigue, p. 124; and Ad Ecclesiam 3.18.31, Lagarrigue,
p. 298.
     31.	Rebillard, The Care of the Dead [Religion et sépulture], 140–­75; Brown, “Alms
and the Afterlife,” 153–­58.
     32. Honoratus of Marseille, Vie d’Hilaire 16.5, Cavallin, pp. 94–­95.
     33.	Salvian, Ad Ecclesiam 3.2.7, Lagarrigue, p. 244 and 3.3.15, Lagarrigue, p. 250.
     34.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.14.66, Lagarrigue, p. 286.
     35. Gennadius, De viris illustribus 68.
     36.	Eucherius, De contemptu mundi 614–­25, Pricoco, p. 98.
     37.	Valerianus of Cimiez, Homily 15.2:739A.
     38.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 3.8.38, Lagarrigue, p. 214.
     39. Badewien, Geschichtstheologie und Sozialkritik im Werk Salvians, 176–­99, at
p. 189.
     40.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.14.58 and 4.14.65, Lagarrigue, pp. 280 and 284.
     41. Lambert, “The Uses of Decay,” 128.
     42.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 1.9.43, Lagarrigue, p. 142.
     43.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 3.11.59, Lagarrigue, p. 320.
     44.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 3.9.44, Lagarrigue, p. 220.
     45.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.1.4, Lagarrigue, p. 234.
     46.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 6.18.93, Lagarrigue, p. 424.
     47.	S. T. Loseby, “Decline and Change in the Cities of Late Antique Gaul,” in Die
Stadt in der Spätantike, 67–­104 at pp. 68–­69. See in general Loseby, “Bishops and Cathe-
drals: Order and Diversity in the Fifth-­Century Urban Landscape in Gaul,” in Fifth-­
Century Gaul, 144–­55; J. Harries, “Christianity and the City in Late Roman Gaul,” in
The City in Late Antiquity, ed. J. Rich (London: Routledge, 1992), 77–­98.
     48. Loseby, “Decline and Change,” 69; J. Guyon, “La topographie chrétienne des
villes de la Gaule,” in Die Stadt in der Spätantike, 105–­28, figure 1 at p. 110.
     49. Marrou, “Le dossier épigraphique de l’évêque Rusticus de Narbonne,” 332–­33
and figures 2–­3 on pp. 335–­37.


                                          621
                             notes to pages 444–449


     50. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 773; see now Salona: Recherches ar­
chéologiques franco-­croates à Salone, vol. 3, Manastirine: Établissement préromain, nécro­
pole, et basilique paléochrétienne, ed. N. Duval, E. Marin, and C. Metzger, Collection de
l’École française de Rome 194:3 (Rome: École française de Rome; Split: Musée ar-
chéologique de Split, 2000), 306–­9.
     51. M. Maas, “Ethnicity, Orthodoxy and Community in Salvian of Marseilles,” in
Fifth-­Century Gaul, 275–­84 at p. 276.
     52.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.14.67–­70, Lagarrigue, pp. 284–­88.
     53.	E. A. Thompson, The Visigoths in the Time of Ulfila (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1966), 78–­156. See now esp. S. Esders, “Grenzen und Grenzüberschreitungen: Religion,
Ethnizität und politische Integration am Rande des oströmischen Imperiums (4.–­7. Jh.),”
in Gestiftete Zukunft im mittelalterlichen Europa: Festschrift für Michael Borgolte, ed.
W. Huschner and F. Rexroth (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2008), 3–­28 at pp. 5–­13.
     54.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.2.6, Lagarrigue, p. 314 and 5.3.10, Lagarrigue, p. 318.
     55.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 7.2.8, Lagarrigue, pp. 434–­36 (Aquitaine); 7.13.54, Lagar-
rigue, p. 468; 7.16.67–­68, Lagarrigue, pp. 478–­80 (Carthage).
     56.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.7.30, Lagarrigue, p. 334.
     57.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.3.15, Lagarrigue, p. 344.
     58.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.6.24, Lagarrigue, p. 330.
     59.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.5.22–­23, Lagarrigue, pp. 328–­30.
     60.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.8.37, Lagarrigue, p. 340.
     61.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.5.21, Lagarrigue, p. 328.
     62.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.5.22, Lagarrigue, p. 328.
     63. Mamertinus, Panegyric to Julian, Panegyrici Latini 11.3–­4 (AD 362); Orosius,
History against the Pagans 7.41.1 (AD 417).
     64. Augustine, New [Divjak] Letter 10*.5.
     65. Halsall, Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 250.
     66. H. Elton, “Defence in Fifth-­Century Gaul,” in Fifth-­Century Gaul, 167–­76;
T. Stickler, Aëtius: Gestaltungsspielräume eines Heermeisters im ausgehenden Weströmischen
Reich, Vestigia 54 (Munich: C. H. Beck, 2002), 155–­253.
     67. Novella of Valentinian III, 10, Preface (441): see Cecconi, Governo imperiale e
élites dirigenti, 162–­67. Compare Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.7.31, p. 336.
     68.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.6.30, Lagarrigue, p. 254.
     69.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.4.21 and 4.15.74, Lagarrigue, pp. 248 and 290.
     70.	See esp. C. Grey, “Salvian, the Ideal Christian Community and the Fate of the
Poor in Fifth-­Century Gaul,” in Poverty in the Roman World, 168–­82 at p. 173; with
Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 67–­73.
     71.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.4.18, Lagarrigue, p. 324.
     72.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.3.21, Lagarrigue, p. 248.
     73.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.9.45, Lagarrigue, p. 346. Much false certainty reigns on the
issue of rural patronage in Gaul: the best treatments are C. R. Whittaker, “Circe’s Pigs:
From Slavery to Serfdom in the Later Roman World,” Slavery and Abolition 8 (1987):
88–122; Grey, “Salvian, the Ideal Christian Community and the Fate of the Poor,” 176–­
80; and idem, “Contextualizing Colonatus.” On the language of “poverty” and “destitu-


                                           622
                             notes to pages 449–453


tion” in the establishment of vertical links in Gaul, see now A. Rio, “High and Low: Ties
of Dependence in the Frankish Kingdoms,” Transactions of the Royal Historical Society,
6th ser., 12 (2008): 43–­68, esp. pp. 51–­52. This language does not necessarily indicate
either real impoverishment or total dependence. For a comprehensive and original treat-
ment, see now W. Goffart, “Salvian of Marseille, De gubernatione Dei 3.38–­45 and the
‘Colonate’ Problem,” Antiquité tardive 17 (2009): 269–­88, esp. p. 286.
     74.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.8.30, Lagarrigue, p. 340.
     75.	See Grey, “Salvian, the Ideal Christian Community and the Fate of the Poor,”
168.
     76. Krause, Spätantike Patronatsformen, 233–­83.
     77.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.9.46, Lagarrigue, p. 346.
     78.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.2.10, Lagarrigue, p. 238, and 5.6.26, Lagarrigue, p. 332; cf.
Hydatius, Chronicle 49 (ad ann. 411) provinces of Spain se subiciunt servituti; Chronicle
of 452 126 (ad ann. 442) provinces of Britain in dicionem Saxonum rediguntur.
     79.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.9.46, Lagarrigue, p. 346.
     80. Markus, The End of Ancient Christianity, 169.
     81.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.11.53, Lagarrigue, p. 276.
     82.	Inglebert, Les romains chrétiens, 663.
     83.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 3.9.46, Lagarrigue, p. 220.
     84.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 5.5.19, Lagarrigue, p. 326.
     85.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.7.32, Lagarrigue, p. 256.
     86.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 4.15.74, Lagarrigue, pp. 290–­92.
     87. Eburnea Diptycha, ed. David. By contrast, the emperor was shown bearing the
Christian Labarum: A. Cameron, “The Probus Diptych and Christian Apologetic,” in
From Rome to Constantinople, 191–­202.
     88.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 6.12.37, Lagarrigue, p. 368.
     89. Prosper, Chronicle 1335 (ad ann. 439).
     90. Quodvultdeus, Dimidium temporis 7.14, ed. R. Braun, CCSL 60 (Turnhout:
Brepols, 1976), 199.
     91. Petrus Chrysologus, Sermon 155 and 155 bis, ed. A. Olivar, CCSL 24B (Turn-
hout: Brepols, 1982), 961–­69.
     92. Maioli, “Il complesso archeologico di Via d’Azeglio a Ravenna,” figure 4 on p. 52;
and La musica ritrovata: Iconografia e cultura musicale a Ravenna e in Romagna dal I al
VI secolo, ed. D. Castaldo, M. G. Maioli, and D. Restani (Ravenna: Longo, 1997), illustra-
tion 23, p. 96. See now Archeologia urbana a Ravenna, ed. Montevecchi.
     93.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 6.15.85, Lagarrigue, p. 416: see H. Heinen, “Reichstreue nob­
iles im zerstörten Trier,” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 131 (2000): 271–­78.
     94.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 7.12.71, Lagarrigue, p. 408.
     95.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 6.8.43, Lagarrigue, p. 390.
     96. Markus, The End of Ancient Christianity, 172–­73.
     97. Consularia Caesaraugustana 85a: see Kulikowski, Late Roman Spain and Its
Cities, 207.
     98. Gregory of Tours, Histories 5.17.
     99.	Salvian, De gub. Dei 7.1.6, Lagarrigue, p. 434, with n. 1.


                                            623
                             notes to pages 454–458


                                     Chapter 27
                                  Ob italiae securitatem

       1. L’Année épigraphique 1950, no. 50 = Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum VI, part
8:3, ed. G. Alföldy (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2000), 5093–­94, no. 41389. See esp. Stickler,
Aëtius, 255–­73.
       2.	C. Wickham, Early Medieval Italy: Central Power and Local Society, 400–­1000
(London: MacMillan, 1981), 1–­14 gives a splendid overview of the regional diversity of
Italy.
       3.	Cracco Ruggini, Economia e società nell’ “Italia annonaria,” 205–­406 remains
essential. See especially Barnish, “Transformation and Survival in the Western Senatorial
Aristocracy,” 138–­51. J. J. O’Donnell, The Ruin of the Roman Empire: A New History
(New York: Harper Collins, 2008), 97–­170 is a vivid evocation of the society of Italy on
the eve of Justinian’s fateful invasion. See now Deliyannis, Ravenna, 106–­187.
       4. Halsall, Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 331.
       5. Krautheimer, Three Christian Capitals, 107.
       6. Krautheimer, Rome: Profile of a City, 52–­53.
       7. F. Marazzi, “Rome in Transition: Economic and Political Change in the Fourth
and Fifth Centuries,” in Early Medieval Rome and the Christian West: Essays in Honour of
Donald A. Bullough, ed. J.M.H. Smith (Leiden: Brill, 2000), 21–­41 at p. 22.
       8. Gillett, “Rome, Ravenna and the Last Western Emperors,” 145.
       9. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 72; Gillett, “Rome,
Ravenna and the Last Western Emperors,” 145n53.
     10.	R. Krautheimer, “The Architecture of Sixtus III: A Fifth-­Century Renaissance?”
in De artibus opuscula XL: Essays in Honor of Erwin Panofsky, ed. M. Meiss (New York:
University of Columbia Press, 1961), 291–­302 remains a classic statement of this view.
See now J. Martin, Der Weg zur Ewigkeit führt über Rom: Die Frühgeschichte des Papst­
tums und die Darstellung der neutestamentlichen Heilsgeschichte im Triumphbogenmosaik
von Santa Maria Maggiore in Rom (Stuttgart: Steiner, 2010), 109–­71.
     11. Gillett, “Rome, Ravenna and the Last Western Emperors,” 145n53.
     12. Liber Pontificalis 46, Davis, p. 35.
     13. Leader-­Newby, Silver and Society in Late Antiquity, 64–­66.
     14. D. De Francesco, La proprietà fondiaria nel Lazio, secoli IV-­VIII: Storia e topogra­
fia (Rome: Quasar, 2004), 289. A strong case for a wider range of donors (in which mem-
bers of the clergy were a significant element) is made by Hillner, “Clerics, Property and
Patronage.” The list of aristocratic patrons on 59n1 is slim—­twelve names only, most of
them courtiers, officials, and military men, not nobles.
     15. Gerontius, VG 53, Gorce, p. 232.
     16. Brown, Power and Persuasion, 128–­29. The phrase comes from C. J. Halperin,
Russia and the Golden Horde: The Mongol Impact on Medieval Russian History (London:
Tauris, 1985), 5. See recently, C. Ando, The Matter of the Gods: Religion and the Roman
Empire (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008), 149–­86. The reader should know
that Cameron, Last Pagans, 231–­72, 567–­626 argues strongly against the idea of a re-
sidual paganism among such persons. The issue remains open.


                                            624
                              notes to pages 458–460


    17. Arnobius Iunior, Commentaria in Psalmos 95, PL 53:464C (Paris: J.-­P. Migne,
1847).
    18.	N. B. McLynn, “Crying Wolf: The Pope and the Lupercalia,” Journal of Roman
Studies 98 (2008): 161–­75.
    19. s.v. “Asterius 11,” Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire, 2:173–­74. Writing in
502, Ennodius, Libellus pro synodo 133–­34, ed. F. Vogel, MGH: Auctores Antiquissimi 7
(Berlin: Weidmann, 1885), 66–­67 claimed that almsgiving accompanied consular pro-
cessions. But this assertion is part of a rhetorical juxtaposition between pagan and Chris-
tian Rome. It does not describe a Christian practice integrated into a secular ceremony.
    20. The significance of these figures was first demonstrated by Mazzarino, Aspetti
sociali del quarto secolo, 239. The drop after 410 may be exaggerated, as the high figure for
367 remains uncertain. For a clear survey, see R. Hodges and D. Whitehouse, Moham­
med, Charlemagne and the Origins of Europe: Archaeology and the Pirenne Thesis (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1983), 48–­51; Christie, From Constantine to Charlemagne,
58–­61.
    21. Wickham, Framing the Early Middle Ages, 651–­53, 709–­13.
    22. F. di Gennaro and F. Dell’Era, “Dati archeologici di età tardoantica del territorio
dell’ insula inter duo flumina,” in Suburbium, 97–­121 at p. 120. It is the refrain of the
entire volume (but see the cautions of P. Pergola and J. Guyon, on pp. 170–­71). For
southern Etruria, see Hodges and Whitehouse, Mohammed, Charlemagne, and the Ori­
gins of Europe, 36–­46. For a summary of recent work, see H. Patterson, “The Tiber Valley
Project: Archaeology, Comparative Survey and History,” in General Issues in the Study of
Medieval Logistics: Sources, Problems and Methodologies, ed. J. F. Haldon (Leiden: Brill,
2006), 93–­117.
    23. Liebeschuetz, The Decline and Fall of the Roman City, 386: “the delay between
the effect and its suggested cause presents an intriguing puzzle.”
    24.	Cassiodorus, Variae 11.39.1, trans. S.J.B. Barnish, Cassiodorus: Variae, Translated
Texts for Historians 12 (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1992), 161. The reader
should know that Cracco Ruggini, Economia e società, nell’ “Italia annonaria,” 315–­16,
and J. Durliat, De la ville antique à la ville byzantine: Le problème des subsistences, Collec-
tion de l’École française de Rome 136 (Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1990), 104–­7 reach widely
different conclusions from this one edict. Durliat uses it to posit a drop of up to 60 per-
cent in the population of Rome since 410; in 1961, Cracco Ruggini already dismissed
such a conclusion as “inadmissable.” The reader should know that our view of Rome after
410 hangs on such slender threads.
    25. Anonymus Valesianus 12.64; Procopius, Anecdota 26.29.
    26. Barnish, “Pigs, Plebeians and Potentes,” 161.
    27.	Cracco Ruggini, Economia e società, nell’ “Italia annonaria,” 205–­321, 349–­59.
    28.	Sidonius Apollinaris, Letter 1.10; Barnish, “Pigs, Plebeians and Potentes,” 159–­66.
    29.	See now esp. R. Meneghini and R. Santangeli Valenzani, Roma nell’altomedioevo:
Topografia e urbanistica della città dal V al X secolo (Rome: Libreria dello Stato, 2004), 33.
    30. Diefenbach, Römische Erinnerungsräume, 404–­13 uses the term “nuclearization”
and speaks of “islands” of settlement.
    31. Liber Pontificalis 48, Davis, pp. 39–­40.


                                             625
                            notes to pages 461–464


     32.	R. Lim, “The Roman Pantomime Riot of A.D. 509,” in Humana sapit, 35–­42.
     33.	See now Statuen in der Spätantike, ed. Bauer and Witschel. This volume makes
plain that financial recession alone does not account for the end of the “Statue Habit.”
Changing structures of public life and changing tastes also played an important role.
     34. H. Brandenburg, “Osservazioni sulla fine della produzione e dell’uso dei sar-
cophagi a rilievo nella tarda antichità nonché sulla loro decorazione,” in Sarcofagi tardo­
antichi, paleocristiani ed altomedievali, ed. F. Bisconti and H. Brandenburg (Vatican:
Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 2004), 1–­14.
     35. Marazzi, “Rome in Transition,” 34.
     36. Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum 6:1783 set up to Nicomachus Flavianus, now
edited and commented in Hedrick, History and Silence; C. Machado, “Building the Past:
Monuments and Memory in the Forum Romanum,” in Social and Political Life in Late
Antiquity, 157–­92.
     37.	See the masterly study of Orlandi, Epigrafia anfiteatrale, 545–­63.
     38.	Ibid., 114–­15.
     39.	Ibid., 296.
     40.	Ibid., 102–­18.
     41. s.v. “Paulus 15,” Prosopographie chrétienne du Bas Empire, 2:1674.
     42. Brown, “Dalla ‘plebs romana’ alla ‘plebs Dei,’” 131.
     43. Agnellus of Ravenna, Liber pontificalis ecclesiae Ravennatensis 60, ed. and trans.
C. Nauerth (Freiburg: Herder, 1996), 272–­74, trans. D. M. Deliyannis, The Book of Pon­
tiffs of the Church of Ravenna (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press,
2004), 172–­77.
     44. Novella Valentiniani III 36.1.
     45.	Olympiodorus, Fragment 41, Blockley, p. 205.
     46. H. Scogin, “Poor Relief in Northern Sung China,” Oriens Extremus 25 (1978):
30–­45 at pp. 30–­31, citing the memorandum of Sung Ching, AD 717.
     47. Gregory of Tours, Histories 2.24 and Sidonius Apollinaris, Letter 6.12, well com-
mented by R. Mathisen, “Nature or Nurture? Some Perspectives on the Gallic Famine of
circa A.D. 470,” The Ancient World 24 (1993): 91–­105.
     48.	Cassiodorus, Variae 12.28. See C. Rapp, “Charity and Piety as Episcopal and
Imperial Virtues in Late Antiquity,” in Charity and Giving in Monotheistic Religions,
75–­88.
     49. Purcell, “The Populace of Rome in Late Antiquity,” 138.
     50. De vera humilitate, ed. and trans. M.K.C. Krabbe, Epistula ad Demetriadem
de vera humilitate, Catholic University of America Publications 97 (Washington, DC:
Catholic University of America Press, 1956), with extensive arguments for authorship by
Prosper. On Prosper in Rome, see N. W. James, “Leo the Great and Prosper of Aquitaine:
A Fifth-­Century Pope and His Adviser,” Journal of Theological Studies 44 (1993): 554–­84;
and Hwang, Intrepid Lover of Perfect Grace, 187–­234.
     51. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 94–­96.
     52. De vera humilitate 1, Krabbe, p. 142.
     53. De vera humilitate 22, Krabbe, p. 206.
     54. De vera humilitate 5, Krabbe, p. 158.


                                           626
                            notes to pages 465–471


    55. De vera humilitate 3, Krabbe, p. 146.
    56. Leo, Sermon 90.2, Dolle, 4:220.
    57. Leo, Sermon 22.1, Dolle, 2:34 with n. 4; Salzman, On Roman Time, figure 38 and
pp. 102–­3.
    58. Leo, Sermon 72.3, Dolle, 4:74.
    59. Leo, Sermon 22.1, Dolle, 2:34.
    60. Leo, Sermon 24.2, Dolle, 2:56.
    61. Leo, Sermon 75.2, Dolle, 4:92.
    62. Prosper, Chronicle ad ann. 426.
    63. s.v. “Felix 22,” Prosopographie chrétienne du Bas Empire 2, 1:776.
    64. Leo, Sermon 86.1, Dolle, 4:176.
    65. Priscus, Fragment 64, in The Fragmentary Classicising Historians of the Later
Roman Empire, vol. 2, ed. Blockley, p. 372.
    66. Petrus Chrysologus, Sermon 121.7, Olivar, 2:730.
    67. Leo, Sermon 23.3, Dolle, 2:44. See Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 58–­60; and
Freu, Les figures du pauvre, 418–­28.
    68.	See esp. Freu, Les figures du pauvre, 241–­96.
    69. Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 45–­73.
    70.	See Wessel, Leo the Great, 179–­257 for a fine evocation of this aspect of Leo. See
also M. J. Armitage, A Twofold Solidarity: Leo the Great’s Theology of Redemption (Strath-
field, NSW: St. Paul’s Publications, 2005), 169–­83.
    71. As suggested by Durliat, De la ville antique à la ville byzantine, 134–­37.
    72. Gregory I, Letter 7.23.
    73. Gregory I, Letter 1.39 and 1.44; John the Deacon, Life of Gregory 2.28 and
2.30, PL 75:97C and 98A (Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1849). See now E. Caliri, “Povertà e as-
sistenza nella Sicilia protobizantina,” in Poveri ammalati e ammalati poveri, 145–­66 at
pp. 157–­60.
    74. Gregory I, Letter 1.73 and 9.124; Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 63; A. Serfass,
“Slavery and Pope Gregory the Great,” Journal of Early Christian Studies 14 (2006): 77–­
103 at p. 87.
    75. Marazzi, “Rome in Transition,” 41.
    76.	Orlandi, Epigrafia anfiteatrale, 513–­16.
    77. Aurea Roma, 536, catalogue no. 178.
    78. Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres, no. 1785.
    79.	Orlandi, Epigrafia anfiteatrale, 515; D. De Francesco, “Aspetti della presenza
germanica in Italia: Le donazioni di Valila nel Tiburtino,” Rivista di Archeologia Cristi­
ana 74 (1998): 415–­53.
    80. L. Duchesne, Le Liber Pontificalis: Texte, Introduction et Commentaire, Biblio-
thèque de l’École française de Rome (Paris: de Boccard, 1955): cxlvi–­cxlvii. See esp. De
Francesco, La proprietà fondiaria nel Lazio, 95–­115. This study also dispels doubt as to
the authenticity of the document, which survives only in a medieval copy.
    81. D. Vera, “I paesaggi rurali del Meridione tardoantico: Bilancio consuntivo e pre-
ventivo,” in Paesaggi e insediamenti rurali in Italia meridionale fra tardoantico e altome­
dioevo, ed. G. Volpe and M. Turchiano (Bari: Edipuglia, 2005), 23–­38 at p. 25.


                                           627
                             notes to pages 471–476


     82.	Cracco Ruggini, Economia e società nell’ “Italia annonaria,” 205–­321; G. Volpe,
Contadini, pastori e mercanti nell’Apulia tardoantica (Bari: Edipuglia, 1996), 257–­392.
Some would also add the impact of a meteor that fell in the Abruzzi at this time: R. San-
tilli et al., “A Catastrophe Remembered: A Meteorite Impact of the Fifth Century AD in
the Abruzzo, Central Italy,” Antiquity 77 (2003): 313–­20.
     83. G. Volpe, G. De Felice, and M. Turchiano, “Faragola (Ascoli Satriano): Una resi­
denza aristocratica tardoantica e un ‘villaggio’ altomedievale nella Valle del Carapelle:
I primi dati,” in Paesaggi e insediamenti, 265–­97.
     84. Gelasius, Epistulae, 35–­36, ed. A. Thiel, Epistolae Romanorum pontificum genui­
nae (Braunsberg: E. Peter, 1867; Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1974), 1:447: see L. Pietri, “Éver-
gétisme chrétien et fondations privées dans l’Italie de l’Antiquité tardive,” in Humana
sapit, 253–­63; and M. De Fino, “Proprietà imperiali e diocesi rurali paleocristiane
dell’Italia tardoantica,” in Paesaggi e insediamenti, 691–­702 at pp. 694–­97.
     85. Gelasius, Fragment 21, Thiel, pp. 495–­96.
     86. Gelasius, Ep. 33, Thiel, p. 448.
     87. Gelasius, Ep. 14.xxxv.25, Thiel, p. 376.
     88. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 221–­26.
     89. F. Marazzi, I “Patrimonia Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae” nel Lazio (secoli IV–­X):
Struttura amministrativa e prassi gestionali, Istituto storico italiano per il Medioevo: Nuovi
Studi Storici 31 (Rome: Palazzo Borromini, 1998), 57. See the cautions of a seasoned
medievalist on the limitations of such fragments: W. Ullmann, Gelasius I (492–­496): Das
Papsttum an der Wende der Spätantike zum Mittelalter, Päpste und Papsttum 18 (Stuttgart:
Hiersemann, 1981), 227n36; and D. Jasper and H. Fuhrmann, Papal Letters in the Early
Middle Ages (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2001), 61–­70.
     90. Gelasius, Ep. 21, Thiel, p. 388.
     91.	On the various forms of “servility” through which a labor force was maintained
at this period, see now esp. Banaji, “Aristocracies, Peasantries,” 72–­74.
     92. Gelasius, Ep. 14.xiv.14, Thiel, p. 370.
     93. Gelasius, Ep. 6.4, Thiel, p. 328.
     94.	See esp. G. B. Picotti, “Sulle relazioni fra re Odoacre e il Senato e la chiesa di
Roma,” Rivista Storica Italiana ser. 5, no. 4 (1939): 363–­86; T. Sardella, Società, chiesa e
stato nell’età di Teodorico: Papa Simmaco e lo scismo laurenziano (Soveria Manelli: Rubet-
tino, 1996).
     95.	See the acts of the Synod of 502, held by Pope Symmachus: Symmachus, Ep.
6.II.4–­6, Thiel, pp. 685–­87. The classic studies of the ultimatum of Basilius of 483 and its
relation to the later schism between Laurence and Symmachus are by C. Pietri, “Le Sénat,
le peuple chrétien et les partis du cirque sous le pape Symmaque,” Mélanges d’archéologie
et d’histoire 78 (1966): 123–­39 at pp. 131–­38, now in Christiana respublica, 2:771–­87;
and idem, “Évergétisme et richesses ecclésiastiques,” in Christiana respublica, 2:813–­33.
As far as they affect the status of the tituli, Pietri’s views have been challenged. That form
of aristocratic endowment may not have been in question or have functioned as Pietri
supposed; see Hillner, “Families, Patronage and the Titular Churches of Rome.” See also
Diefenbach, Römische Erinnerungsräume, 404–­87.
     96.	Orlandi, Epigrafia anfiteatrale, 51–­56.


                                            628
                             notes to pages 476–485


    97.	Cited in Symmachus, Ep. 6.III.7, Thiel, p. 687; trans. Hillner, “Families, Patron-
age and the Titular Churches of Rome,” 249.
    98. Marazzi, “Patrimonia Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae,” 63, 76.
    99.	Symmachus, Ep. 6.IV.14, Thiel, p. 690; trans. Hillner, “Families, Patronage and
the Titular Churches of Rome,” 260.
  100. Brown, The Rise of Western Christendom, 487.


                                     Chapter 28
                                  Patrimonia pauperum

      1. McCormick, Origins of the European Economy, 27–­41; F. L. Cheyette, “The Dis-
appearance of the Ancient Landscape and the Climatic Anomaly of the Early Middle
Ages: A Question to Be Pursued,” Early Medieval Europe 16 (2008): 127–­65. P. Squatriti,
“The Floods of 589 and Climate Change at the Beginning of the Middle Ages: An Italian
Microhistory,” Speculum 85 (2010): 799–­826 at pp. 812–­19 is more cautious. Many
scholars feel no need to invoke “climatic anomaly” to explain the changes of this period:
see T. Lewit, “Pigs, Presses and Pastoralism: Farming in the Fifth to Sixth Centuries,” Early
Medieval Europe 17 (2009): 77–­91.
      2.	Inglebert, Histoire de la civilisation romaine, 483.
      3. Augustine, Letter 125.2.
      4. Augustine, Letter 126.9.
      5. Augustine, Letter 185.9.36.
      6. U. Meyer, Soziales Handeln im Zeichen des “Hauses”: Zur Ökonomik in der Spätan­
tike und im frühen Mittelalter (Göttingen: Vandenhouck and Ruprecht, 1998), 102–­88;
V. Toneatto, “I linguaggi della ricchezza nella testualità omiletica e monastica dal II al IV
secolo,” in Economica monastica: Dalla disciplina del desiderio all’amministrazione razio­
nale, ed. V. Toneatto, P. Černic, and S. Paulitti (Spoleto: Centro di Studi sull’Alto Medio-
evo, 2004), 1–­88.
      7. Augustine, Sermon 355.3.
      8. Lancel, Saint Augustin, 232. See now O’Donnell, Augustine, 166–­69. The best
summary of the incident is by N. B. McLynn, “Administrator: Augustine in His Diocese,”
in Companion to Augustine, ed. M. Vessey (Oxford: Wiley-­Blackwell, forthcoming).
      9. Augustine, Sermon 355.4.
    10.	Council of Carthage of AD 525, lines 252–­344, Concilia Africae, pp. 278–­81;
D. Ganz, “The Ideology of Sharing: Apostolic Community and Ecclesiastical Property
in the Early Middle Ages,” in Property and Power in the Early Middle Ages, ed. W. Davies
and P. Fouracre (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 17–­30.
    11. s.v. “Leporius 1,” Prosopographie chrétienne du Bas-­Empire, vol. 1, L’Afrique chré­
tienne (305–­533), ed. A. Mandouze (Paris: CNRS, 1982), 634–­35.
    12. Augustine, Sermon 356.10.
    13.	See esp. W. Klingshirn, Caesarius of Arles: The Making of a Christian Community
in Late Antique Gaul (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 72–­82; Alciati,
Monaci, vescovi e scuola, 147–­76.


                                            629
                            notes to pages 485–490


    14. Julianus Pomerius, De vita contemplativa 2.9, PL 59:453C.
    15. Julianus Pomerius, De vita contemplativa 2.9, PL 59:453B.
    16. Julianus Pomerius, De vita contemplativa 2.9, PL 59:454A.
    17.	Y. Thomas, “La construction de l’unité civique: Choses publiques, choses com-
munes et choses n’appartenant à personne et représentation,” Mélanges de l’école française
de Rome: Moyen Age 114 (2002): 7–­39; H. R. Hagemann, Die Stellung der Piae Causae
nach justinianischem Rechte, Basler Studien zur Rechtsgeschichte 37 (Basel: Helbing and
Lichtenhahn, 1953), 24, 36; Marazzi, “Patrimonia Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae,” 34; Hill-
ner, “Families, Patronage and the Titular Churches of Rome,” 237–­42.
    18. Codex Theodosianus 16.2.4 (AD 321). See esp. Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius,
50.
    19.	S. Wood, The Proprietary Church in the Medieval West (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2006), 730.
    20.	S. MacCormack, “Sin, Citizenship and the Salvation of Souls: The Impact of
Christian Priorities on Late Roman and Post-­Roman Society,” Comparative Studies in
Society and History 39 (1997): 644–­73 at pp. 662–­63.
    21.	Salvian, Ad Ecclesiam 4.4.21 and 7.3.5, Lagarrigue, pp. 324 and 332.
    22. Cod. Iustinianianus 1.2.25.1 (530); cf. Novella 131.9 (545). See Bruck, Kirchen­
väter und soziales Erbrecht, 120–­22.
    23.	E.g., Augustine, Tractatus in ev. Iohannis 6.24.
    24.	See the trenchant remarks of Carrié, “Pratique et idéologie chrétiennes de
l’économique,” esp. at p. 25.
    25.	Simplicius, Letter 1.1, ed. A. Thiel, Epistolae Romanorum pontificum genuinae
(Braunsberg: E. Peter, 1867; Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1974), 1:176. B. Bellomo, “Abusi
nell’economia di carità,” in Poveri ammalati e ammalati poveri, 449–­63 offers many more
examples.
    26. Agnellus, Liber pontificalis ecclesiae Ravennatensis 60, Nauerth, 268–­80, Deliyan-
nis, 173–­77. See O. R. Borodin, “Ekonomicheskie protivorechiia v srede ravennskovo
dukhenstva v VI–­VIII vv.,” Vizantiῐskiῐ vremennik 56 (81) (1995): 32–­44 at pp. 33–­36.
    27. Pseudo-­Jerome, De septem ordinibus ecclesiae, PL 30:154B (Paris: J.-­P. Migne,
1846).
    28. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 71 speaks of a per-
petual “whisper of tension” on this issue. Religion, Dynasty and Patronage, ed. Cooper
and Hillner, examines many of the scenarios of tension this situation can be supposed to
have generated.
    29. H. Chadwick, Boethius: The Consolations of Music, Logic, Theology and Philoso­
phy (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1981), 37.
    30.	On the complex situation in Rome, see now esp. Sardella, Società, chiesa e stato,
43–­66, esp. 46n7 (on the threefold pay raise, which is mentioned in only one version of
Symmachus’s life in the Liber pontificalis); and Diefenbach, Römische Erinnerungsräume,
404–­32.
    31. For two masterly surveys, though largely based on eastern evidence: see Jones,
The Later Roman Empire, 2:731–­63; and Liebeschuetz, The Decline and Fall of the Roman



                                           630
                              notes to pages 490–494


City, 29–­136. For Africa and, by implication, for much of the West, Lepelley, Les cités de
l’Afrique romaine, 1:243–­92 remains the best treatment.
     32.	E.g., Codex Theodosianus 12.1.146 (395); Novella of Majorian 7.1 (458).
     33. Clermont (535) c. 4, Concilia Galliae, vol. 2, a. 511–­a. 645, ed. C. de Clercq,
CCSL 148A (Turnhout: Brepols, 1963), 106; Orleans (541) c. 26, p. 139; Mâcon I (581–­
83) c. 10, p. 225; and Châlon (647/53) c. 14, p. 306.
     34. For the appointment of noble candidates in order to avoid conflict among the
local clergy, see Sidonius Apollinaris, Letter 7.9.3, with the characteristic comment—­
“some priests twittered in holes and corners” (Bourges in 472); Gregory of Tours, Histo­
ries 4.15 (Tours in 556).
     35.	In 530 the revenues of the church of Rome had sunk due to bad harvests to such
an extent that Felix IV insisted on nominating a successor rather than exposing the
church to the costs of a disputed election: L. Duchesne, “La succession du pape Félix IV,”
Mélanges d’archéologie et d’histoire 3 (1883): 239–­66 at pp. 245–­47. An election without
costs was considered to have been a miracle: Gregory of Tours, De vita patrum 6.3, trans.
E. James, Gregory of Tours: Life of the Fathers (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press,
1985).
     36. D. Claude, “Die Bestellung der Bischöfe im merowingischen Reiche,” Zeitschrift
der Savigny Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte: Kanonistische Abteilung 49 (1963): 1–­77 at
p. 59n290.
     37. Gregory, Histories 2.21.
     38. Gregory, Histories 2.23.
     39. Gregory, Histories 5.49.
     40. B. Caseau, “Objects in Churches: The Testimony of Inventories,” in Objects in
Context, Objects in Use: Material Spatiality in Late Antiquity, ed. L. Lavan, E. Swift, and
T. Putzeys, Late Antique Archaeology 5 (Leiden: Brill, 2007), 551–­79.
     41.	See esp. Duchesne, Le Liber Pontificalis, 1:cxli–­cliv; P. Carmassi, “La prima re-
dazione del Liber Pontificalis nel quadro delle fonti contemporanee: Osservazioni in
margine alla vita di Simmaco,” in Atti del colloquio internazionale Il Liber Pontificalis e la
storia materiale, 235–­66; K. Blair-­Dixon, “Memory and Authority in Sixth-­Century
Rome: The Liber Pontificalis and the Collectio Avellana,” in Religion, Dynasty and Pa­
tronage, 59–­76.
     42. Gregory, Histories I, preface 1.
     43. Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 2:904–­7; Hübner, Der Klerus in der Gesellschaft
des spätantiken Kleinasiens, 217–­28.
     44. Gregory, Dialogues 1.9.2 and 3.8.1, ed. A. de Vogüé, Grégoire le Grand: Dia­
logues, SC 260 (Paris: Le Cerf, 1979), 76, 286.
     45. Pietri, “Évergétisme et richesses ecclésiastiques,” in Christiana respublica,
2:813–­33.
     46. P. Simonnot, Les papes, l’église et l’argent: Histoire économique du christianisme des
origines à nos jours (Paris: Bayard, 2005), 12—­because of celibacy and aristocratic invest-
ment, the wealth of the church “did not cease to grow with clockwork regularity”; see
also pp. 161–­66. It is a pity to see an intelligent and thought-­provoking survey marred by



                                             631
                             notes to pages 494–495


incorrect information passed on to the author in the form of stereotypes widely accepted
in learned circles.
     47.	Sotinel, “Les évêques italiens” for Italy is decisive. On the limited extent of the
“senatorial” enclaves in southern Gaul, see S. Esders, Römische Rechtstradition und
merowingisches Königtum: Zum Rechtscharakter politischer Herrschaft in Burgund im 6.
und 7. Jahrhundert (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1997), 185. For a differen-
tiated general survey, see Rapp, Holy Bishops, 172–­207.
     48. M. Heinzelmann, Gregory of Tours: History and Society in the Sixth Century,
trans. C. Carroll (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 190.
     49.	See esp. M. Heinzelmann, Bischofsherrschaften in Gallien: Zur Kontinuität rö­
mischer Führungsschichten vom 4. bis 7. Jahrhundert, Beihefte der Francia 5 (Munich:
Artemis Verlag, 1976); and Herrschaft und Kirche: Beiträge zur Entstehung und Wirkungs­
kreise episkopaler und monastischer Organisationsformen, ed. F. Prinz (Stuttgart: Hierse-
mann, 1988).
     50. A.H.B. Breukelaar, Historiography and Episcopal Authority: The Histories of Greg­
ory of Tours Interpreted in Their Historical Context, Forschungen zur Kirchen und Dog-
mengeschichte 57 (Göttingen: Vandenhoek and Ruprecht, 1994), 266–­67.
     51. For criticisms of this position, see now especially S. Patzold, “Zur Sozialstruk-
tur des Episkopats und zur Ausbildung bischöflicher Herrschaft in Gallien zwischen
Spätantike und Frühmittelalter,” in Völker, Reiche und Namen im frühen Mittelalter, ed.
M. Becker and S. Dick (Munich: W. Fink, 2010), 121–­40; P. Brown, introduction to The
World of Gregory of Tours, ed. K. Mitchell and I. Wood (Leiden: Brill, 2002), 1–­28 at pp.
12–­13; Esders, Römische Rechtstradition und merowingisches Königtum, 184–­86; Loseby,
“Decline and Change,” 90–­92; and J.-­U. Krause, “Überlegungen zur Sozialgeschichte des
Klerus im 5./6. Jh. n. Chr.,” in Die Stadt in der Spätantike, 413–­39 at p. 432. On the
strength of the new nobility connected with the royal courts, see Halsall, Barbarian Mi­
grations and the Roman West, 356–­57.
     52. É. Lesne, Histoire de la propriété ecclésiastique en France, vol. 1, Époques romaine
et mérovingienne (Lille: Giard, 1910), 74: “dû à la même rosée que la piété des premiers
âges chrétiens, semblables à la fraîcheur d’un matin, verse sur la riche végétation des ég-
lises”; see also pp. 143, 146. Despite these effusions, Lesne’s study has not been surpassed.
     53. J. Goody, The Development of the Family and Marriage in Europe (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1983). This is effectively demolished by B. Shaw and R. P.
Saller, “Close-­Kin Marriage in Roman Society?” Man, n.s., 19 (1984): 432–­44.
     54.	E.g., Gregory, Histories 4.24 on the lawyer Celsus of Vienne: see D. Liebs, Rö­
mische Jurisprudenz in Gallien (2. bis 8. Jahrhundert) (Berlin: Duncker and Humblot,
2002), 63.
     55. Gregory, Histories 6.46.
     56. Gregory, Histories 5.17.
     57. Gregory, Histories 6.46.
     58.	Ibid.
     59. The centuries-­long background to Chilperic’s attitude is well understood by Es-
ders, Römische Rechtstradition und merowingisches Königtum, 137–­41.



                                            632
                             notes to pages 495–499


    60. Marazzi, “Patrimonia Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae,” 63. The best survey remains
Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 2:894–­910.
    61. Bransbourg, “Fiscalité impériale et finances municipales,” 261–­67.
    62. Codex Justinianus 11.75.1 (AD 343)—­exemptions from corvées for tenants and
farmers on imperial estates. See Esders, Römische Rechtstradition und merowingisches
Königtum, 250.
    63.	Sotinel, “Le personnel épiscopal,” 110–­12.
    64. Pelagius I, Letter 16, ed. P. M. Gassó and C. M. Batlle, Pelagii I papae: Epistulae
quae supersunt (556–­61) (Montserrat: Abbey of Montserrat, 1956), 49–­50.
    65. Pelagius, Letter 84, Gassó and Batlle, p. 206.
    66. Gregory, Histories 4.36.
    67. Letter of Gogo the referendarius to Peter, bishop of Metz, ed. W. Gundlach, in
Epistulae Austrasiacae 22.1, CCSL 117 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1957), 441.
    68. Gregory, Histories 6.20: s.v. “Chrodinus,” Prosopography of the Later Roman Em­
pire 3A:312–­13.
    69.	Ennodius, Life of Epiphanius 9–­10, 21–­25; C. Sotinel, “Les ambitions d’historien
d’Ennode de Pavie: La Vita Epiphanii,” in La narrativa cristiana antica: Codici narrative,
strutture formali, schemi retorici, Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 50 (Rome: Istituto
Patristicum Augustinianum, 1995), 585–­605 at p. 596.
    70. Gregory, Glory of the Confessors 39, trans. R. Van Dam (Liverpool: Liverpool
University Press, 1988), 51 (Van Dam translates notae litterarum as “letters of the alpha-
bet”: see p. 51n44 for his reasons). For a precise and sympathetic account of the family
background of Gregory and his affective ties to particular saints and their churches, see
R. Van Dam, Saints and Their Miracles in Late Antique Gaul (Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1993), 50–­81.
    71. Heinzelmann, Gregory of Tours, 11. On Gregory’s general vision of the church,
see pp. 153–­201.
    72.	Esp. Gregory, Histories 5.18, but also Histories 6.15 and 8.19. This element is well
seen by Heinzelmann, Gregory of Tours, 45, 75, 97.
    73. Gregory, Histories 8.31.
    74. This is clearly shown by H. G. Ziche, “Administrer la propriété de l’église:
L’évêque comme clerc et comme entrepreneur,” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 69–­78.
    75. The will of Ranilo in AD 553 mentions the need to recall slaves and dependent
farmers who had escaped “in this time of war with the barbarians” (the wars of Justinian):
Pap. Ital. 13.21, Tjäder, 1:304.
    76.	R. Mazza, “Tra Oriente e Occidente: La gestione del patrimonium Petri in Italia
meridionale,” in Paesaggi e insediamenti rurali, 703–­715. The strenuous measures of land-
owners in Egypt are now discussed by P. Sarris, Economy and Society in the Age of Justin­
ian (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 227.
    77.	Council of Mâcon II (AD 585), canon 7, Concilia Galliae, 2:242.
    78.	See esp. D. Claude, “Freedmen in the Visigothic Kingdom,” in Visigothic Spain:
New Approaches, ed. E. James (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980), 139–­88 and the
important recent study of S. Esders, Die Formierung der Zensualität: Zur kirchlichen



                                           633
                              notes to pages 499–501


Transformation des spätrömischen Patronatswesens im früheren Mittelalter (Ostfildern:
Jan Thorbecke, 2010).
    79.	Council of Toledo IV (AD 633), canon 70, ed. Vives, Concilios visigóticos e
hispano-­romanos, 215.
    80. Banaji, “Aristocracies, Peasantries,” 65–­71.
    81.	Ibid., 64.
    82. Ward-­Perkins, The Fall of Rome, 148–­50.
    83. M. Vieillard-­Troïekouroff, Les monuments religieux de la Gaule d’après les oeuvres
de Grégoire de Tours (Paris: Champion, 1976), 366, 368.
    84. Topographie chrétienne des cités de la Gaule, vol. 7, Narbonne, ed. P.-­A. Février
(Paris: Boccard, 1989), 21 (on Rusticus of Narbonne); vol. 6, Bourges, ed. F. Prévot
(1989), 32 (on Namatius of Clermont); vol. 5, Tours, ed. L. Pietri (1987), 28 (on Gregory
of Tours). See now B. Beaujard, “La topographie chrétienne des cités de la Gaule: Bilan
et perspectives,” in Le problème de la christianisation du monde antique, ed. H. Inglebert,
S. Destephen, and B. Dumézil (Paris: Picard, 2010), 203–­18.
    85.	On Paris, see Topographie chrétienne des cités de la Gaule, vol. 8, Sens, ed. J.-­C.
Picard (Paris: Boccard, 1992), 116–­21; on Chalon-­sur-­Saone and King Guntram, see
Topographie chrétienne, vol. 4, Lyon, ed. B. Beaujard (Paris: Boccard, 1989), 76.
    86.	Venantius Fortunatus, Carmina 2.10.17, ed. and trans. M. Reydellet, Venance
Fortunat: Poèmes I–­IV (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1994), 67; see also Carmina 1.1.12 (p. 20);
1.2.13 (p. 22); 1.9.19 (p. 29); 1.12.11 (p. 31); 3.7.50 (p. 96); 4.23.30 (p. 121). See now
Roberts, The Humblest Sparrow, 65–­69. Fortunatus brought these images with him from
Italy, where they had already been used: e.g., the inscription in the chapel of bishop Petrus
Junior in the episcopal palace at Ravenna (which Venantius would have seen): Agnellus,
Liber pontificalis 50, Nauerth, p. 242, Deliyannis, p. 162. In general, see G. Bührer-­Thierry,
“Lumière et pouvoir dans le haut moyen-­âge occidental: Célébration de pouvoir et méta-
phores lumineuses,” Mélanges de l’École française de Rome: Moyen-­âge 116 (2004): 521–­58.
    87. Topographie chrétienne des cités de la Gaule, vol. 10, Bordeaux, ed. L. Maurin (Paris:
Boccard, 1998), 30.
    88.	S.J.B. Barnish, “The Wealth of Julianus Argentarius: Late Antique Banking
and the Mediterranean Economy,” Byzantion 55 (1985): 5–­38. See also F. W. Deich-
mann, Ravenna: Hauptstadt des spätantiken Abendlandes, bd. 2, Kommentar 2 (Stutt-
gart: F. Steiner, 1989), 21–­27. See now Deliyannis, Ravenna, 223–­54.
    89. s.v. “Sabinus 7,” Prosopographie chrétienne du Bas-­Empire, 2:1975–­77. See esp.
G. Volpe et al., “Il complesso sabiniano di San Pietro a Canosa,” in La cristianizzazione in
Italia tra Tardoantico e Altomedioevo, ed. R. M. Bonacasa Carra and E. Vitale (Palermo:
Carlo Saladino, 2007), 2:1113–­65 at pp. 1129 and 1142. See now also G. Volpe, “Archi-
tecture and Church Power in Late Antiquity: Canosa and San Giusto (Apulia),” in Hous­
ing in Late Antiquity, 131–­68 at pp. 134–­52.
    90.	Volpe, Contadini, pastori e mercanti, 102–­5, esp. figure 21 on p. 102.
    91.	Volpe et al., “Il complesso sabiniano di San Pietro a Canosa,” 1114–­21.
    92. M. Corrente, R. Giuliano, and D. Leone, “Il complesso religioso di Piano di San
Giovanni e il problema del primo polo episcopale canosino,” in La cristianizzazione in
Italia, 2:1167–­1200.


                                             634
                              notes to pages 501–507


    93.	Volpe, Contadini, pastori e mercanti, 151.
    94. Gregory, Dialogues 3.5, Vogüé 274.
    95.	Ebanista, Et manet in mediis quasi gemma intersita tectis, 146.
    96. A. Terry and H. Maguire, Dynamic Splendor: The Wall Mosaics in the Cathedral
of Eufrasius at Poreč (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2007), 82.
    97.	Ibid., 90.
    98.	Ibid., 98.
    99. P. Niewöhner, “Vom Sinnbild zum Abbild: Der justinianische Realismus und
die Genese der byzantinischen Heiligentypologie,” Millennium 5 (2008): 163–­89 at pp.
176–­79.


                                     Chapter 29
                        Servator fidei, patriaeque semper amator

      1.	C. Tedeschi, Congeries lapidum: Iscrizioni Britanniche dei secoli V–­VII, Scuola
Normale Superiore di Pisa: Centro di Cultura Medievale (Pisa: Scuola Normale Supe-
riore, 2005), Gso-­7 at 117–­19 with plate XXVI.
      2.	Venantius Fortunatus, Carmina 3.5.9 and 3.8.17, Reydellet, 1:91, 98; 5.3.5, Rey-
dellet, 1:17; Roberts, The Humblest Sparrow, 17–­27, 38–­53.
      3. Giardina, “Amor civicus.”
      4. The Inscriptions of Roman Tripolitania, ed. J. M. Reynolds and J. B. Ward Perkins
(London: British School at Rome, 1952), no. 603 at p. 159; See also Lepelley, Les cités de
l’Afrique romaine, 2:353 with 348n63. The term had Punic roots.
      5. M. Foucault, Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977–­
1978, ed. M. Senellart, trans. G. Burchell (Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan, 2007), 155.
      6.	Ibid., 129.
      7.	Ibid., 168.
      8.	Ibid., 128.
      9.	Venantius Fortunatus, Carmina 4.9.10 and 4.9.24, Reydellet, 1:140, 141.
     10. Gillett, Envoys and Political Communication in the Late Antique West, 178–­83 is
a valuable corrective to this bishop-­centered view. Out of forty-­one embassies recorded
by Hydatius of Chaves, only two were headed by bishops.
     11. Gregory of Tours, Histories 9.30, cf. Histories 4.2, 4.16, 5.23, and 6.45. See esp.
J. Strothmann, “Königsherrschaft oder nachantike Staatlichkeit? Merowingische Mone-
tarmünzen als Quelle für die politische Ordnung des Frankenreichs,” Millennium 5
(2008): 353–­81; and M. Hardt, Gold und Herrschaft: Die Schätze europäischer Könige
und Fürsten im ersten Jahrtausend (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2004), 146–­48.
     12. Loseby, “Decline and Change,” esp. at p. 92 is an effective criticism of current
overvaluations of episcopal power in the cities.
     13.	Cracco Ruggini, Economia e società nell’ “Italia annonaria,” 333–­35 on the activi-
ties of bishop Datius of Milan during the famine of 535–­36. It was the bishop’s wealth (as
administrator of the wealth of the church of Milan) and not any institutional role that
accounted for his importance.


                                             635
                             notes to pages 507–512


     14. G. A. Cecconi, “Crisi e trasformazioni del governo municipale in Occidente fra
 IV e VI secolo,” in Die Stadt in der Spätantike, 285–­318 rightly insists on the complexity
of the evolution of municipal government. There is no straightforward narrative of the
decline of town councils and their replacement by the church.
     15.	Cassiodorus, Variae 9.15.1, Barnish, p. 112.
     16.	Orléans II (549) canons 13 and 16, Concilia Galliae, pp. 152 and 154; Mâcon I
 (581–­85), canon 4, p. 224; Valence (583–­85), p. 235; Paris (614), canon 9, p. 277; and
Clichy (626–­27), canon 24, p. 296.
     17.	Tours II (567), canon 25, Concilia Galliae, p. 192.
     18. Brown, Poverty and Leadership, 68–­70; Freu, Les figures du pauvre, 264–­68—­on
 Ambrose.
     19. This is well seen by A. Firey, “‘For I was hungry and you fed me’: Social Justice
 and Economic Thought in the Late Patristic and Medieval Christian Traditions,” in
­Ancient and Medieval Economic Ideas and Concepts of Social Justice, ed. S. T. Lowry and
 B. Gordon (Leiden: Brill, 1998), 333–­370 at pp. 344–­45.
     20. Mâcon II (585), canon 12, Concilia Galliae, pp. 244–­45.
     21.	Esders, Römische Rechtstradition und merowingisches Königtum, 319–­38.
     22. Gregory of Tours, De vita Patrum 4.4, James, p. 46.
     23. Gregory of Tours, De gloria confessorum 109; see V. Neri, I marginali nell’Occidente
 tardoantico: Poveri, “infames” e criminali nella nascente società cristiana (Bari: Edipuglia,
 1998), 61–­62. For Elijah and Khidhr as the “living ones” who (like Jesus in Christian and
 Muslim legend) walk the world unrecognized after their death, see L. Ginzberg, The Leg­
 ends of the Jews, trans. H. Szold (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America,
 1925), 5:202–­35; and I. Omar, “Khidhr in the Islamic Traditions,” The Muslim World 83
 (1993): 279–­94.
     24. The best study is T. Sternberg, Orientalium more secutus: Räume und Institu­
tionen der Caritas des 5. bis 7. Jahrhunderts in Gallien, Jahrbuch für Antike und Christen-
tum, Ergänzungsband 16 (Münster in Wesfalen: Aschendorff, 1991), 136–­38.
     25. Gregory of Tours, De virtutibus sancti Martini, ed. B. Krusch, MGH: Scriptores
rerum Merovingcarum (Hannover: Hahn, 1885), 1.31.
     26. Gregory of Tours, Histories 7.29. See now A. E. Jones, Social Mobility in Late
 Antique Gaul: Strategies and Opportunities for the Non-­Elite (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
 versity Press, 2009), 226–­49.
     27. Liber Pontificalis 51, Duchesne, 1:255n5 at p. 256.
     28. For a memorable characterization of Pope Symmachus, see Chadwick, Boethius,
31–­39; see now Sardella, Società, chiesa e stato, 41–­111, 183–­95.
     29. Liber Pontificalis 53, Davis, pp. 45–­46.
     30. Vitae patrum Emeritensium 5.3.1–­8, ed. J. N. Garvin The Vitas sanctorum patrum
 Emeritensium (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1946), 192–­95.
     31. Vitae patrum Emeritensium 5.3.11, Garvin, p. 196.
     32.	E.g., Venantius Fortunatus, Vita Germani, PL:12 (Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846); and
 Cyprianus of Toulon, Vita Caesarii 2.8. On church warehouses and miracles of abun-
 dance, see Sternberg, Orientalium more secutus, 73–­79. For a similar mystification of the
 wealth of the church of Alexandria, see V. Déroche, Études sur Léontios de Néapolis, Stu-


                                            636
                            notes to pages 512–515


dia Byzantina Upsalensia 3 (Uppsala: Alqmvist and Wiksell, 1995), 238–­49—­speaking
of the “économie miraculeuse” constructed by hagiographers. See now D. Caner, “To-
wards a Miraculous Economy: Christian Gifts and Material ‘Blessings’ in Late Antiq-
uity,” Journal of Early Christian Studies 14 (2006): 329–­77.
    33.	Sternberg, Orientalium more secutus, 126–­35.
    34. M. Borgolte, “Felix est homo ille qui amicos bonos relinquit: Zur sozialen Gestal-
tungskraft letzwilliger Verfügungen am Beispiel Bischofs Bertrams von le Mans (616),” in
Festschrift für Berent Schwineköper, ed. H. Maurer and H. Patze (Sigmaringen: J. Thor-
becke, 1982), 5–­18 at p. 13.
    35.	Sternberg, Orientalium more secutus, 150 points to the contrast with the eastern
empire.
    36.	Tours II (567), canon 5, Concilia Galliae, p. 178. See Gregory of Tours, Histories
4.47–­48, 6.41, 7.2, 7.28—­on the impact of such warfare.
    37. Inscriptions chrétiennes de la Gaule antérieures au VIIIe siècle, ed. E. Le Blant
(Paris: Imprimerie impériale, 1856), no. 173, 1:234; well translated along with the De
virtutibus sancti Martini, trans. Van Dam, Saints and Their Miracles, 313.
    38. Gregory of Tours, De virtutibus sancti Martini 2.22, cf. 2.23.
    39. Gregory of Tours, De virtutibus sancti Martini 2.24.
    40. Gregory of Tours, De virtutibus sancti Martini 2.12.
    41. M. A. Handley, Death, Society and Culture: Inscriptions and Epitaphs in Gaul
and Spain, AD 300–­750, BAR International Series 1135 (Oxford: British Archaeological
Reports, 2003), 161–­63. See L. Tolstoy, War and Peace, book 6, chapter 17, trans. L. and
A. Maude (London: Macmillan, 1954), 527–­28. On Catholic “reverence,” see P. Brown,
“Relics and Social Status in the Age of Gregory of Tours,” in Society and the Holy in Late
Antiquity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982), 222–­50 at pp. 230–­35.
    42. Gregory of Tours, Histories 10.25.
    43. Gregory of Tours, Histories 7.44.
    44. Markus, The End of Ancient Christianity, 213–­28, esp. p. 225.
    45. Pap. Ital. 4–­5. B VII. 10–­11, Tjäder, 1:216. See esp. J. Barbier, “Testaments et
pratique testamentaire dans le royaume franc (VIe–­VIIIe siècles),” in Sauver son âme et
se perpétuer: Transmission du patrimoine et mémoire au haut Moyen Âge, ed. F. Bougard,
C. La Rocca, and R. Le Jan, Collection de l’École française de Rome 351 (Rome: École
française de Rome, 2005), 7–­79. See now A. Angenendt, “Donationes pro anima: Gift
and Countergift in the Early Medieval Liturgy,” in The Long Morning of Medieval Eu­
rope: New Directions in Early Medieval Studies, ed. J. R. Davis and M. McCormick (Al-
dershot: Ashgate, 2008), 131–­54. See also Magnani, “Almsgiving, donatio pro anima and
Eucharistic Offering.”
    46. Brown, “The Decline of the Empire of God.”
    47. W. Levison, “Das Testament des Diakons Adalgisel Grimo vom Jahre 634,” Trie­
rer Zeitschrift 7 (1932): 69–­85, now in Aus rheinischer und fränkischer Frühzeit (Dus­
seldorf: L. Schwann, 1948), 118–­38 at p. 125.
    48. Gregory of Tours, De virtutibus sancti Martini 2.60.
    49. M. Weidemann, Das Testament des Bischofs Bertram von Le Mans vom 27. März
616: Untersuchungen zu Besitz und Geschichte einer fränkischen Familie im 6. und 7. Jahr­


                                          637
                             notes to pages 515–520


hundert, Römisch-­germanisches Zentralmuseum, Monographien 9 (Mainz: R. Habelt,
1986), 11.
    50.	T. Head, “The Early Medieval Transformation of Piety,” in The Long Morning of
Medieval Europe, 155–­60 at p. 160.
    51. M. Rubin, Charity and Community in Medieval Cambridge (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1987), 299.
    52. A. Diem, Das monastische Experiment: Die Rolle der Keuschheit bei der Entste­
hung des westlichen Klosterwesens, Vita Regularis: Abhandlungen 24 (Münster: Lit, 2005),
178.
    53. Gregory of Tours, Histories 3.5. For a possible surviving example of one such
monastery outside Rome, see E. Fentress et al., Walls and Memory: The Abbey of San Se­
bastiano at Alatri (Lazio) from Late Roman Monastery to Renaissance Villa and Beyond,
Disciplina Monastica 2 (Turnhout: Brepols, 2005), 34–­70.
    54. Brown, The Rise of Western Christendom, 252–­55.
    55. Regula cuiusdam ad virgines III, PL 88:1056B (Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1850).
    56. Brown, “Alms and the Afterlife.”
    57.	See esp. B. Jussen, Name der Witwe: Erkundungen zur Semantik der mittelal­
terlichen Busskultur (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 2000), 47–­53, 176–­98.
See, e.g., Narbonne (589), canon 1, Concilios visigóticos e hispano-­romanos, 146, which
forbids priests to wear purple, for it was a dress “of worldly dignity.”
    58. H. Lutterbach, Monachus factus est: Die Mönchwerdung im frühen Mittelalter,
Beiträge zur Geschichte des alten Mönchtums und des Benediktinertums (Münster:
Aschendorff, 1995), 120–­22. On the subsequent ramifications of the meaning of the mo-
nastic tonsure, see E. James, “Bede and the Tonsure Question,” Peritia 3 (1984): 85–­98.
    59. Canones in Causa Apiarii, canon 25, Concilia Africae, 108–­9. See J.-­A. Sabw Kan-
yang, Episcopus et plebs: L’évêque et la communauté ecclésiale dans les conciles africains
(345–­525), European University Studies 701 (Bern: Peter Lang, 2000), 144–­45.
    60. Augustine, Confessions 6.3.3.
    61.	See in general Brown, Body and Society, 356–­59.
    62. Gregory of Tours, Histories 2.22.
    63. Gregory of Tours, De gloria confessorum 75.
    64.	Innocent I, Letter 38, PL 20:605B (Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1845).
    65.	R. Godding, Prêtres en Gaule mérovingienne, Subsidia Hagiographica 82 (Brus-
sels: Société des Bollandistes, 2001), 125, 143.
    66.	T. Sardella, “Continenza e uxorato del clero nell’Africa di Agostino,” in L’adorabile
vescovo d’Ippona, ed. F. E. Consolino (Soveria Manelli: Rubettino, 2001), 183–­226.
    67.	Tours II (567), canon 20, Concilia Galliae, p. 183 and canons 13–­17, pp. 180–­82.
    68.	Tours II (567), canon 20, Concilia Galliae, p. 183.
    69.	Veranus, Sententia de castitate sacerdotum, PL 72:701–­2 (Paris: J.-­P. Migne,
1849); see Godding, Prêtres en Gaule, 130.
    70. L. Duchesne, “Lovocat et Catihern, prêtres bretons du temps de saint Mélaine,”
Revue de Bretagne et de Vendée 57 (1885): 5–­21; Godding, Prêtres en Gaule, 147–­49.
    71. B. Tanguy, “De l’origine des évêchés bretons,” in Les débuts de l’organisation reli­
gieuse en la Bretagne Armoricaine, Brittania Monastica 3 (Landevennec: Brittania Mo-


                                            638
                              notes to pages 520–526


nastica, 1994), 6–­33 at pp. 13–­14. See in general W. Davies, Small Worlds: The Village
Community in Early Medieval Brittany (London: Duckworth, 1988).
    72. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 125–­88; S.J.B. Bar-
nish, “Religio in stagno: Nature, Divinity and the Christianization of the Countryside in
Late Antique Italy,” Journal of Early Christian Studies 9 (2001): 387–­402.
    73.	C. Pietri, “Chiesa e comunità locali nell’Occidente cristiano (iv–­vi d.C.):
L’esempio della Gallia,” in Società romana e impero tardoantico, vol. 3, Le merci, gli insedia­
menti, ed. A. Giardina (Bari: Laterza, 1986), 761–­97, in Christiana respublica, 1: 475–521.
R. Lizzi Testa, “L’Église, les domini, les païens rustici: Quelques strategies pour la chris-
tianisation de l’Occident (IVe–­VIe s.),” in Le problème de la christianisation, 77–­113.
    74.	Chavarría Arnau, El final de las villae en Hispania, 43–­62. J. Sanchez Velasco,
A. M. Rosa, and G. G. Muñoz, “Aproximación al estudio de la ciudad de Cabra y su
obispado al final de la Antigüedad,” Antiquitas 21 (Priego de Corboba: Museo Histórico
Municipal, 2009), 135–­80 shows what can be done from what are, alas, exiguous remains.
    75. Godding, Prêtres en Gaule, 331–­58; Wood, The Proprietary Church, 10–­11.
    76. G. Cantino Wataghin, V. Fiocchi Nicolai, and G. Volpe, “Aspetti della cristianiz-
zazione degli agglomerati secondari,” in La cristianizzazione in Italia, 1:83–­134.
    77. Inscripciones latinas de la España romana y visigóda, ed. J. Vives (Barcelona: Con-
sejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 1969), no. 303, p. 101.
    78.	Vieillard-­Troïekouroff, Les monuments religieux de la Gaule, 397–­98.
    79. Council of Toledo III (589), c. 15, Concilios visigóticos e hispano-­romanos, p. 129.
    80. Bowes, Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change, 130–­57.
    81. Krause, “Überlegungen zur Sozialgeschichte des Klerus,” 426.
    82. Goffart, Barbarian Tides, 136.
    83.	Y. Thébert, “L’évolution urbaine dans les provinces orientales de l’Afrique ro-
maine tardive,” Opus 2 (1982): 99–­131 at p. 120.
    84.	I. N. Wood, “Review Article: Landscapes Compared,” Early Medieval Europe 15
(2007): 223–­37 at p. 236.
    85. Gernet, Buddhism in Chinese Society, 166.
    86. Foucault, Security, Territory, Population, 129.
    87. J. M. Pardessus, ed., Diplomata, cartae, epistolae, leges aliaque instrumenta ad res
Gallo-­Francicas spectantia (Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 1969), no. 273, 2:37.
    88.	Ibid., no. 241, 1:227.
    89.	Sternberg, Orientalium more secutus, 128, 137.
    90. Mâcon II (585), canon 4, Concilia Galliae, pp. 240–­41.
    91.	Venantius Fortunatus, Carmina 4.23.15, Reydellet, 1:121.
    92. Weidemann, Das Testament des Bischofs Bertram, 11.
    93. P. Fouracre, “Eternal Light and Earthly Needs: Practical Aspects of the Develop-
ment of Frankish Immunities,” in Property and Power, 53–­81; see Xinru Liu, Silk and
Religion: An Exploration of Material Life and the Thought of People, AD 600–­1200 (Delhi:
Oxford University Press, 1996).
    94. This is well studied by Vuolanto, “Male and Female Euergetism.”
    95.	On Clamosus and his peers, see Kaster, Guardians of Language, 254–­55.
    96.	Vuolanto, “Male and Female Euergetism,” 262.


                                             639
                            notes to pages 526–527


   97. P. Chevalier, “Les graffitis de l’abside de l’Eufrasiana de Poreč: Un obituaire
monumental du haut Moyen Âge,” Mélanges Jean Pierre Sodini: Travaux et mémoires 15
(2005): 359–­70.


                                    Conclusion

    1. Eric the Red’s Saga 4, in The Norse Atlantic Saga, trans. G. Jones, 2nd ed. (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1986), 220.




                                           640
                         Works Cited
                          •••••




                                Primary Sources

The reader should know that this is not a comprehensive bibliography of all the
sources cited in this book. I have chosen only to indicate editions and trans­
lations: first, for authors and sources on which I have concentrated in individual
chapters; second, for those on which I have depended repeatedly in all chapters;
and last, in some cases, for sources that are taken from less well-­known authors
and where the reader might require an indication of the editions and transla-
tions in which they can be found. For many well-­known classical and Christian
authors, I have been content to cite the traditional titles and abbreviations, with
the knowledge that, in modern conditions of reference, readers will be able to
find their way to appropriate editions and translations when needed.

Acta et symbola conciliorum quae saeculo quarto habita sunt. Edited by E. J. Jonkers.
     Leiden: Brill, 1954.
Ad Deum post conversionem. Edited by Adalbert Hamman, in PL Supplementum 3.
     Paris: Garnier, 1963.
Agnellus of Ravenna. Liber pontificalis ecclesiae Ravennatensis.
     Edited and translated by Claudia Nauerth, Agnellus von Ravenna: Liber
           ­pontificalis/Bischofsbuch. Freiburg: Herder, 1996.
     Translated by Deborah Mauskopf Deliyannis, in The Book of Pontiffs of the Church
            of Ravenna. Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2004.
Ambrose of Milan. De Nabuthae.
     Edited by Karl Schenkl, in Sancti Ambrosii Opera, part 2. CSEL 62. Vienna:
            Tempsky, 1897.
     Translated by Boniface Ramsey, in Ambrose. New York: Routledge, 1997.
———. De officiis. Edited and translated by Ivor J. Davidson, in Ambrose: De officiis. 2
     vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.


                                          641
                                   works cited


Ambrose of Milan. Letters.
    Edited by Otto Faller and Michaela Zelzer, in Sancti Ambrosii Opera, part 10.
         CSEL 82. Vols. 1–­3. Vienna: Tempsky, 1968–­90.
    Selected letters translated by J.W.H.G. Liebeschuetz with the assistance of Carole
         Hill, in Ambrose of Milan: Political Letters and Speeches. Liverpool: Liverpool
         University Press, 2006.
Ambrosiaster. Commentarius in Epistulas Paulinas.
    Edited by Henry Joseph Vogels, in Ambrosiastri qui dicitur Commentarius in
         Epistulas Paulinas. 3 vols. CSEL 81. Vienna: Tempsky, 1966–­69.
    Translated by Gerald L. Bray, in Ambrosiaster: Commentaries on Romans and
         1–­2 Corinthians. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2009.
———. Quaestiones Veteris et Novi Testamenti.
    Edited by Alexander Souter, in Pseudo-­Augustini Quaestiones Veteris et Novi
         Testamenti CXXVII. CSEL 50. Vienna: Tempsky, 1908.
Ammianus Marcellinus. Res gestae.
    Edited and translated by John C. Rolfe, in Ammianus Marcellinus. Loeb Classical
         Library. 3 vols. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1952.
    Translated by Walter Hamilton, in The Later Roman Empire, A.D. 354–­378.
         Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1986.
Anonymus de rebus bellicis.
    Edited and translated by Andrea Giardina, in Anonimo: Le cose della guerra.
         [Milan]: Mondadori, 1989.
    Edited and translated by E. A. Thompson, in A Roman Reformer and Inventor.
         Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952.
Arnobius Iunior. Commentaria in Psalmos. PL 53. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1847.
Artemidorus. Oneirocritica. Translated by Robert J. White, in The Interpretation of
    Dreams. Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes Press, 1975.
Augustine of Hippo. Confessions.
    Edited with commentary by James J. O’Donnell, in Augustine: Confessions. 3 vols.
         Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992.
    Translated by Henry Chadwick, in Saint Augustine: Confessions. Oxford: Oxford
         University Press, 1991.
    Translated by Gary Wills, in Saint Augustine: Confessions. London: Penguin,
         2006.
———. Contra academicos libri tres.
    Edited by Pius Knöll, in Sancti Aureli Augustini Opera 1:3. CSEL 63. Vienna:
         Tempsky, 1922.
    Translated by John J. O’Meara, in St. Augustine: Against the Academics. Ancient
         Christian Writers 12. Westminster, MD: Newman Press, 1951.
    Translated in The Writings of Saint Augustine. Vol. 1. New York: CIMA Publish-
         ing, 1948.
———. De beata vita.
    Edited by Pius Knöll, in Sancti Aureli Augustini Opera 1:3. CSEL 63. Vienna:
         Tempsky, 1922.


                                          642
                                primary sources


  Translated by Ruth Allison Brown, in S. Aureli Augustini de beata vita. Washing-
       ton, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1944.
  Translated in The Writings of Saint Augustine. Vol. 1. New York: CIMA Publish-
       ing, 1948.
———. De civitate Dei.
  Edited by Bernard Dombart and Alfons Kalb. CCSL 47–­48. Turnhout: Brepols,
       1954–­55.
  Translated by Henry Bettenson, in Augustine: Concerning the City of God against
       the Pagans. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1972.
———. De ordine.
  Edited by Pius Knöll, in Sancti Aureli Augustini Opera 1:3. CSEL 63. Vienna:
       Tempsky, 1922.
  Translated by Silvano Borruso, in On Order. South Bend, IN: St. Augustine’s Press,
       2007.
  Translated in The Writings of Saint Augustine. Vol. 1. New York: CIMA Publish-
       ing, 1948.
———. Dolbeau Sermons.
  Nos. 2–­27, edited by François Dolbeau, in Vingt-­six sermons au peuple d’Afrique.
       Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 1996.
  No. 30, edited by François Dolbeau, in “Le sermon 384A de saint Augustin contre
       Pélage: Édition du texte integral.” Recherches augustiniennes 28 (1995): 37–­63.
  Translated by Edmund Hill, in Sermons (Newly Discovered) III/11. The Works of
       Saint Augustine: A Translation for the 21st Century. Hyde Park, NY: New
       City Press, 1997.
———. Enarrationes in Psalmos. Edited by Clemens Weidmann (1–­50), Hildegund
  Müller (51–­100), and Franco Gori (101–­150). CSEL 93, 94, 95. Vienna:
  Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2001–­04.
———. Erfurt Sermons.
  Nos. 1, 5, and 6, edited by Isabella Schiller, Dorothea Weber, and Clemens
       Weidmann, in “Sechs neue Augustinuspredigten: Teil 1 mit Edition dreier
       Sermones.” Wiener Studien 121 (2008): 227–­84.
  Nos. 2–­4, edited by Isabella Schiller, Dorothea Weber, and Clemens Weidmann,
       in “Sechs neue Augustinuspredigten: Teil 2 mit Edition dreier Sermones zum
       Thema Almosen.” Wiener Studien 122 (2009): 171–­214.
———. Letters 1*–­29* [New Letters].
  Edited by Johannes Divjak, in Sancti Aurelii Augustini Opera 2:6. CSEL 88.
       Vienna: Tempsky, 1981.
  Edited and translated, in Lettres 1*–­29*. Bibliothèque Augustinienne 46B. Paris:
       Desclée de Brouwer, 1987.
  Translated by Robert B. Eno, in St. Augustine: Letters: Volume VI (1*–­29*). Fathers
       of the Church 81. Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press,
       1989.
———. Praeceptum. Edited and translated by George Lawless, in Augustine of Hippo
  and His Monastic Rule. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987.


                                         643
                                    works cited


Augustine of Hippo. Sermons.
     Reprint of 1683 Maurist edition, in PL 38–­39. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1845–­46.
     Additional sermons collected by Adalbert Hamman, in PL Supplementum 2.
          Paris: Garnier, 1960. Includes Sermones Lambot 1–­29, discovered and edited
          by Cyrille Lambot and published in Revue bénédictine between 1933 and
          1958. (See “Secondary Sources” below for specific references.)
     Nos. 1–­50, edited by Cyrille Lambot, in Sancti Aurelii Augustini Sermones de
          Vetere Testamento. CCSL 41. Turnhout: Brepols, 1961.
     Translated by Edmund Hill, in The Works of Saint Augustine: Sermons. 11 vols.
          Hyde Park, NY: New City Press, 1997.
———. Soliloquia.
     Translated by Kim Paffenroth, in Saint Augustine: Soliloquies. Hyde Park, NY:
          New City Press, 2000.
     Translated in The Writings of Saint Augustine. Vol. 1. New York: CIMA Publish-
          ing, 1948.
Ausonius of Bordeaux. Works: Ephemeris; Gratiarum actio; De herediolo; Letters;
     Parentalia; Professors; Proptrepticus ad nepotem.
     Edited by R.P.H. Green, in The Works of Ausonius. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991.
     Edited and translated by H. G. Evelyn-­White, in Ausonius. 2 vols. Loeb Classical
          Library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1951.
The Babylonian Talmud. Edited by Isidore Epstein. Translated by Maurice Simon.
     London: Soncino, 1935.
Calendar of 354. Edited by Theodor Mommsen, in vol. 1 of Chronica Minora, saec. IV. V.
     VI. VII. MGH: Auctores Antiquissimi, vol. 9. Berlin: Weidmann, 1892.
Cassian, John. Collationes.
     Edited and translated by E. Pichéry, in Jean Cassien: Conférences. 3 vols. SC 42, 54,
          64. Paris: Le Cerf, 1955–­59.
     Selections translated by Colm Luibheid, in Conferences. New York: Paulist Press,
          1985.
     Translated by Boniface Ramsey, in The Conferences. New York: Paulist Press, 1997.
———. De institutis coenobiorum.
     Edited and translated by Jean-­Claude Guy, in Jean Cassien: Institutions Cénobi­
          tiques. SC 109. Paris: Le Cerf, 1965.
     Translated by Boniface Ramsey, in The Institutes. Ancient Christian Writers. New
          York: Newman Press, 2000.
Cassiodorus. Variae.
     Edited by Theodor Mommsen. MGH: Auctores Antiquissimi 12. Berlin:
          Weidmann, 1894.
     Translated by S.J.B. Barnish, in Cassiodorus: Variae. Translated Texts for Historians
          12. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1992.
Celestine I of Rome. Letters. PL 50. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846.
Chronicle of 452.
     Edited by Theodor Mommsen, in vol. 1 of Chronica Minora, saec. IV. V. VI. VII.
          MGH: Auctores Antiquissimi 9. Berlin: Weidmann, 1892.


                                          644
                                 primary sources


     Translated by Alexander Callander Murray, in From Roman to Merovingian Gaul:
           A Reader. Peterborough, Ontario: Broadview Press, 2000.
Cicero. De officiis. Edited and translated by Walter Miller. Loeb Classical Library.
     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1913.
Codex Iustinianus. Edited by Paul Krueger, in Corpus Iuris Civilis: Institutiones. Vol. 2.
     11th ed. Berlin: Weidmann, 1954.
Codex Theodosianus.
     Edited by Theodor Mommsen and Paul M. Meyer, in Theodosiani libri XVI cum
           Constitutionibus Sirmondianis et Leges novellae ad Theodosianum pertinentes.
           Berlin: Weidmann, 1905.
     Translated by Clyde Pharr, in collaboration with Theresa Sherrer Davidson and
           Mary Brown Pharr, in The Theodosian Code and Novels, and the Sirmondian
           Constitutions. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1952.
     Introduced with notes by Roland Delmaire and translated by Jean Rougé, in Les
           lois religieuses des empereurs romains de Constantin à Théodose II (312–­438).
           Vol. 1, Le code Théodosien: Livre XVI. SC 497. Paris: Le Cerf, 2005.
Collatio Carthaginensis. Edited and translated by Serge Lancel, in Actes de la Conférence
     de Carthage en 411. 4 vols. SC 194–­95, 224, 373. Paris: Le Cerf, 1972–­91.
Collectio Avellana. Edited by Otto Günther, in Epistulae imperatorum pontificum
     aliorum inde ab a. CCCLXVII usque ad a. DLIII datae: Avellana quae dicitur
     collectio. 2 vols. CSEL 35. Vienna: Tempsky, 1895–­98.
Collectio Quesnelliana. PL 56. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846.
Concilia Africae, a. 345–­a. 525. Edited by Charles Munier. CCSL 149. Turnhout:
     Brepols, 1974.
Concilia Galliae.
     Vol. 1, a. 314–­a. 506. Edited by Charles Munier. CCSL 148. Turnhout: Brepols,
           1963.
     Vol. 2, a. 511–­a. 695. Edited by Charles de Clerq. CCSL 148A. Turnhout: Brepols,
           1963.
Concilios visigóticos e hispano-­romanos. Edited by José Vives, with the collaboration of
     Tomás Marín Martínez and Gonzalo Martínez Díez. Madrid: Consejo Superior de
     Investigaciones Científicas, 1963.
Coptic Documentary Texts from Kellis. Vol. 1, edited by Iain Gardner, Anthony Alcock,
     and Wolf-­Peter Funk. Oxford: Oxbow, 1999. Selectively translated by Iain
     Gardner and Samuel N. C. Lieu, in Manichaean Texts from the Roman Empire.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum.
     Vol. 6, Inscriptiones Urbis Romae Latinae. Part 8:3, Titulos et imagines: Titulos
           magistratuum populi romani ordinum senatorii equestrisque thesauro schedarum
           imaginumque ampliato. Edited by Géza Alföldy. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2000.
     Vol. 8, Inscriptiones Africae Latinae. Edited by Gustav Wilmanns and Theodor
           Mommsen. Berlin: G. Reimer, 1881.
     Vol. 10. Inscriptiones Bruttiorum, Lucaniae, Campaniae, Siciliae, Sardiniae
           Latinae. Edited by Theodor Mommsen. Berlin: G. Reimer, 1883.


                                          645
                                    works cited


Cyprian of Carthage. Letters.
      Edited by G. F. Diercks, in Sancti Cypriani episcopi opera 3. CCSL 3B, 3C.
            Turnhout: Brepols, 1994–­96.
      Translated by G. W. Clarke, in The Letters of St. Cyprian of Carthage. 4 vols. Ancient
            Christian Writers 43–­44, 46–­47. New York: Newman Press, 1984–­88.
De divina lege.
      PL 30. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846.
      Translated by B. R. Rees, in The Letters of Pelagius and His Followers. Woodbridge,
            UK: Boydell, 1998.
De divitiis.
      Edited by C. P. Caspari, in Briefe, Abhandlungen und Predigten aus der zwei letzten
            Jahrhunderten des kirchlichen Altertums und dem Anfang des Mittelalters.
            Christiania/Oslo: Malling, 1890; reprint, Brussels: Culture et Civilisation,
            1964.
      Edited and translated by Andreas Kessler, in Reichtumskritik und Pelagianismus:
            Die pelagianische Diatribe De divitiis. Situierung, Lesetext, Übertsetzung,
            Kommentar. Paradosis 43. Freiburg, Switzerland: Universitätsverlag, 1999.
      Translated by B. R. Rees, in The Letters of Pelagius and His Followers. Woodbridge,
            UK: Boydell, 1998.
Edictum Diocletiani et collegarum de pretiis rerum venalium. Edited by Marta Gi-
      acchero. 2 vols. Genoa: Università di Genova, 1974.
Epigrafia anfiteatrale dell’occidente romano. Vol. 6, Roma. Edited by Silvia Orlandi.
      Vetera 15. Rome: Quasar, 2004.
Epistulae Austrasiacae. Edited by Wilhelm Gundlach, in Liber scintillarum, quem
      recensuit Henricus M. Rochais. CCSL 117. Turnhout: Brepols, 1957.
Eric the Red’s Saga. Translated by Gwyn Jones, in The Norse Atlantic Saga. 2nd ed.
      Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Eucherius of Lyon. De contemptu mundi. Edited and translated by Salvatore Pricoco, in
      Eucherio di Lione: Il rifiuto del mondo. Florence: Nardini, 1990.
———. De laude eremi. Edited by Karl Wotke, in Sancti Eucherii Lugdunensis Formulae
      spiritalis intelligentiae, Instructionum libri duo, Passio agaunensium martyrum,
      Epistula de laude heremi. CSEL 31. Vienna: Tempsky, 1894.
Eusebius of Caesarea. Ecclesiastical History.
      Edited and translated by Kirsopp Lake. 2 vols. Loeb Classical Library 153, 265.
            London: Heinemann, 1926–­32.
      Translated by Hugh Jackson Lawlor and John Ernest Leonard Oulton, in Eusebius:
            The Ecclesiastical History and the Martyrs of Palestine. London: SPCK,
            1927–­28.
Expositio totius mundi et gentium. Edited and translated by Jean Rougé. SC 124. Paris:
      Le Cerf, 1966.
Faustus of Riez. De gratia. Edited by August Engelbrecht, in Fausti Reiensis praeter
      sermones pseudo-­eusebianos opera. CSEL 21. Vienna: Tempsky, 1891.
———. Letters. Edited by August Engelbrecht, in Fausti Reiensis praeter sermones
      pseudo-­eusebianos opera. CSEL 21. Vienna: Tempsky, 1891.


                                           646
                                 primary sources


Firmicus Maternus, Julius. Mathesis.
     Edited by W. Kroll and F. Skutsch, in Matheseos libri VII. 2 vols. Stuttgart:
          Teubner, 1968. Reprint of 1897–­1913 edition.
     Edited and translated by Pierre Monat, in Firmicus Maternus: Mathesis. 3 vols.
          Paris: Belles Lettres, 1992, 1994, 1997.
     Translated by Jean Rhys Bram, in Ancient Astrology: Theory and Practice. Park
          Ridge, NJ: Noyes Press, 1975.
Fortunatus, Venantius. Carmina. Edited and translated by Marc Reydellet, in Venance
     Fortunat: Poèmes. 3 vols. Paris: Belles Lettres, 1994–­2004.
———. Vita Germani. PL 88. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846.
Fredegar. Chronicae. Edited by Bruno Krusch, in MGH: Scriptores rerum Merovingi-
     carum. Vol. 2. Hannover: Hahn, 1888.
Gaudentius of Brescia. Tractatus. Edited by Ambrosius Glück, in S. Gaudentii episcopi
     brixiensis tractatus. CSEL 68. Leipzig: Teubner, 1936.
Gelasius I of Rome. Epistulae. Edited by Andreas Thiel, in Epistolae Romanorum
     pontificum genuinae. Vol. 1. Braunsberg: E. Peter, 1867; Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1974.
Gennadius. De viris illustribus. Edited by Ernest Cushing Richardson, in Hieronymus,
     Liber de viris inlustribus; Gennadius, Liber de viris inlustribus. Leipzig: Hinrichs,
     1896.
Gerontius. The Life of Melania.
     Vita Graeca [VG], edited and translated by Denys Gorce, in Vie de sainte Mélanie.
          SC 90. Paris: Le Cerf, 1962.
     VG, translated by Elizabeth A. Clark, in The Life of Melania the Younger. New
          York: Edwin Mellen, 1984.
     Vita Latina [VL] edited and translated by Patrick Laurence, in Gérontius: La vie
          latine de sainte Mélanie. Jerusalem: Franciscan Printing Press, 2002.
Gregory I of Rome. Dialogues.
     Edited and translated by Adalbert de Vogüé, in Grégoire le Grand: Dialogues.
          3 vols. SC 251, 260, 265. Paris: Le Cerf, 1978–­80.
     Translated by Odo John Zimmerman, in St. Gregory the Great: Dialogues. New
          York: Fathers of the Church, 1959.
———. Letters.
     Edited by Dag Norberg, in S. Gregorii Magni Registrum epistularum. 2 vols. CCSL
          140, 140A. Turnhout: Brepols, 1982.
     Translated by John R. C. Martyn, in The Letters of Gregory the Great. 3 vols.
          Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies, 2004.
Gregory of Tours. De gloria confessorum.
     Edited by Bruno Krusch, in MGH: Scriptores rerum Merovingicarum. Vol. 1.
          Hannover: Hahn, 1885.
     Translated by Raymond Van Dam, in Gregory of Tours: Glory of the Confessors.
          Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1988.
———. De gloria martyrum.
     Edited by Bruno Krusch, in MGH: Scriptores rerum Merovingicarum. Vol. 1.
          Hannover: Hahn, 1885.


                                          647
                                   works cited


Gregory of Tours. De gloria martyrum.
     Translated by Raymond Van Dam, in Gregory of Tours: Glory of the Martyrs.
           Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1988.
———. Histories.
     Edited by Bruno Krusch and Wilhelm Levison, in Libri historiarum X. MGH:
           Scriptores rerum Merovingicarum. Vol. 1. 2nd ed. Hannover: Hahn,
           1951.
     Translated by Lewis Thorpe, in Gregory of Tours: The History of the Franks.
           Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974.
———. De virtutibus sancti Martini.
     Edited by Bruno Krusch, in MGH: Scriptores rerum Merovingicarum. Vol. 1.
           Hannover: Hahn, 1885.
     Translated by Raymond Van Dam, in Saints and Their Miracles in Late Antique
           Gaul. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993.
———. De vita patrum.
     Edited by Bruno Krusch, in MGH: Scriptores rerum Merovingicarum. Vol. 1.
           Hannover: Hahn, 1885.
     Translated by Edward James, in Gregory of Tours: Life of the Fathers. Liverpool:
           Liverpool University Press, 1985.
Hilary of Arles. Vita Honorati. Edited by Samuel Cavallin, in Vitae Sanctorum Honorati
     et Hilarii episcoporum Arelatensium. Lund: Gleerup, 1952.
Honoratus of Marseille. Vita Hilarii. Edited by Samuel Cavallin. Translated by
     Paul-­André Jacob, in La vie d’Hilaire d’Arles. SC 404. Paris: Le Cerf, 1995.
Hydatius of Chaves. Chronicle. Edited and translated by R. W. Burgess, in The Chronicle
     of Hydatius and the Consularia Constantinopolitana. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
     1993.
Innocent I of Rome. Letters. PL 20. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1845.
Inscripciones latinas de la España romana y visigóda. Edited by José Vives. 2 vols.
     Barcelona: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 1969.
Inscriptiones Christianae Italiae. Vol. 1, Volsinii: Regio VII. Edited by Carlo Carletti.
     Bari: Edipuglia, 1985.
Inscriptiones Latinae Christianae Veteres. Edited by Ernst Diehl. 3 vols. Zurich:
     Weidmann, 1970.
Inscriptiones Christianae Urbis Romae Septimo Saeculo Antiquiores.
     Vol. 2, part 1. Edited by Giovanni Battista de Rossi. Rome: P. Cuggiani, 1888.
     New series, vol. 2, Coemeteria in viis Cornelia Aurelia, Portuensi et Ostiensi.
           Edited by Angelo Silvagni. Rome: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia
           Cristiana, 1935.
     New series, vol. 4, Coemeteria inter vias Appiam et Ardeatinam. Edited by Antonio
           Ferrua. Vatican: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 1964.
     New series, vol. 5, Coemeteria reliqua viae Appiae. Edited by Antonio Ferrua.
           Vatican: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 1971.
     New series, vol. 6, Coemeteria in viis Latina, Labicana et Praenestina. Edited by
           Antonio Ferrua. Vatican: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 1975.


                                          648
                                 primary sources


Inscriptiones Judaicae Orientis. Edited by Walter Ameling. 3 vols.
     Vol. 1, Eastern Europe. Edited by David Noy, Alexander Panayotov, and Hanswulf
           Bloedhorn. Texts and Studies in Ancient Judaism 101. Tübingen: Siebeck
           Mohr, 2002.
     Vol. 2, Kleinasien. Edited by Walter Ameling. Texts and Studies in Ancient
           Judaism 99. Tübingen: Siebeck Mohr, 2004.
     Vol. 3, Syria and Cyprus. Edited by David Noy and Hanswulf Bloedhorn. Texts
           and Studies in Ancient Judaism 102. Tübingen: Siebeck Mohr, 2004.
Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae. Edited by Hermann Dessau. 3 vols. Berlin: Weidmann,
     1892–­1916.
Inscriptions chrétiennes de la Gaule antérieures au VIIIe siècle. Edited by Edmond Le
     Blant. 2 vols. Paris: Imprimerie impériale, 1856–­65.
The Inscriptions of Roman Tripolitania. Edited by J. M. Reynolds and J. B. Ward Perkins.
     London: British School at Rome, 1952.
Jerome. Contra Vigilantium. Edited by Jean-­Louis Feiertag, in S. Hieronymi presbyteri
     opera. CCSL 79C. Turnhout: Brepols, 2005.
———. Letters. Edited by Isidore Hilberg, in Sancti Eusebii Hieronymi Epistulae.
     4 vols. CSEL 54–­56. Vienna: Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften,
     1996.
———. Opera. PL 23–­26. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1844–­45.
Pseudo-­Jerome. De septem ordinibus ecclesiae. PL 30. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846.
John the Deacon. Life of Gregory. PL 75. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1849.
John of Ephesus. Ecclesiastical History. Translated by R. Payne Smith, in The Third Part
     of the Ecclesiastical History of John, Bishop of Ephesus. Oxford: Oxford University
     Press, 1860.
———. Lives of the Eastern Saints. Edited and translated by E. W. Brooks. 3 vols.
     Patrologia Orientalis 17–­19. Paris: Firmin-­Didot, 1923–­25.
John Rufus. The Life of Peter the Iberian. Edited and translated by Cornelia B. Horn
     and Robert R. Phenix, in John Rufus: The Lives of Peter the Iberian, Theodosius of
     Jerusalem and the Monk Romanus. Atlanta, GA: Society for Biblical Literature,
     2008.
Julian of Eclanum. Expositio libri Iob; Tractatus prophetarum Osee, Iohel et Amos; operum
     deperditorum fragmenta. Edited by Lucas de Coninck. CCSL 88. Turnhout:
     Brepols, 1977.
Julianus Pomerius. De vita contemplativa. PL 59. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1847.
Lactantius. Divine Institutes. Translated by Anthony Bowen and Peter Garnsey.
     Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2003.
Leo I of Rome. Sermons. Edited and translated by René Dolle, in Léon le Grand:
     Sermons. 4 vols. SC 22, 49, 74, 200. Paris: Le Cerf, 1947–­73.
Liber Pontificalis.
     Biographies from A.D. 311 to 535, edited by Herman Geertman, in Atti del
           colloquio internazionale Il Liber Pontificalis e la storia materiale. Medelingen
           van het Nederlands Instituut te Rome: Antiquity 60–­61. Assen: Van
           Gorcum, 2003.


                                           649
                                   works cited


Liber Pontificalis.
     Edited by Louis Duchesne, in Le Liber Pontificalis: Texte, Introduction et Com­
           mentaire. Bibliothèque de l’École française de Rome. 3 vols. Paris: Boccard,
           1955–­57.
     Translated by Raymond Davis, in The Book of Pontiffs (Liber Pontificalis): The
           Ancient Biographies of the First Ninety Roman Bishops to AD 715. Liverpool:
           Liverpool University Press, 1989.
Pseudo-­Martyrius of Antioch. Vita Iohannis Chrysostomi. Edited by Martin Wallraff
     and Cristina Ricci, in Oratio funebris in laudem sancti Iohannis Chrysostomi:
     Epitaffio attribuito a Martirio di Antiochia. Spoleto: Centro Italiano di Studi
     sull’Alto Medioevo, 2007.
Naucellius. Poems. Edited by Franco Munari, in Epigrammata Bobiensia. Rome:
     Edizioni di storia e letteratura, 1955.
New Documents Illustrating Early Christianity. Edited by G.H.R. Horsley. Vol. 2.
     Sydney, NSW: Ancient History Documentary Research Centre, 1982.
Novellae. [See Codex Theodosianus.]
Olympiodorus. History. In The Fragmentary Classicising Historians of the Later Roman
     Empire: Eunapius, Olympiodorus, Priscus and Malchus. Vol. 2. Edited and
     translated by Roger C. Blockley. Liverpool: Francis Cairns, 1983.
Optatus of Milevis. De schismate donatistarum.
     Edited by Karl Ziwsa, in S. Optati Milevitani libri VII. CSEL 26. Vienna:
           Tempsky, 1893.
     Translated by Mark Edwards, in Optatus: Against the Donatists. Liverpool:
           Liverpool University Press, 1997.
Pacianus of Barcelona. Sermo de Paenitentibus. In Pacien de Barcélone: Écrits. Edited
     and translated by Carmelo Grandao. SC 410. Paris: Le Cerf, 1995.
Palladius of Ratiaria. Apologia. Edited and translated by Roger Gryson, in Scholies
     ariennes sur le concile d’Aquilée. SC 267. Paris: Le Cerf, 1980.
Pap. Ital. Die nichtliterarischen Papyri Italiens aus der Zeit 445–­700. Edited and
     translated by Jan Olof Tjäder. 3 vols. Skrifter utgivna av Svenska Institutet i Rom
     4.19. Lund: Gleerup, 1954–­82.
Pardessus, Jean Marie, ed. Diplomata, cartae, epistolae, leges aliaque instrumenta ad res
     Gallo-­Francicas spectantia. 2 vols. Reprint, Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 1969.
Passio Marculi. Edited and translated by Jean-­Louis Maier, in Le dossier du donatisme.
     Vol. 1, Des origines à la mort de Constance II (303–­361). Texte und Untersuchungen
     79. Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1987.
     Translated by Maureen A. Tilley, in Donatist Martyr Stories: The Church in
           Conflict in Roman North Africa. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1996.
Patricius. Letter to Coroticus. Edited and translated by A.B.E. Hood, in St. Patrick:
     His Writings and Muirchu’s Life. Chichester: Phillimore, 1978.
Paulinus of Milan. Vita Ambrosii.
     Edited and translated by Michele Pellegrino, in Vita di S. Ambrogio. Verba
           Seniorum n.s. 1. Rome: Studium, 1961.
     Translated by F. R. Hoare, in The Western Fathers. New York: Harper and Row, 1954.


                                          650
                                primary sources


Paulinus of Nola. Letters.
     Edited by Wilhelm von Hartel, in Sancti Pontii Meropii Paulini Nolani Epistulae.
           CSEL 29. Vienna: Tempsky, 1894.
     Edited and translated by Mattias Skeb, in Paulinus von Nola: Briefe/Epistulae.
           3 vols. Fontes Christianae 25/1–­3. Freiburg: Herder, 1998.
     Translated by P. G. Walsh, in Letters of St. Paulinus of Nola. 2 vols. Ancient
           Christian Writers 35–­36. New York: Newman Press, 1966–­67.
———. Poems.
     Edited by Wilhelm von Hartel, in Sancti Pontii Meropii Paulini Nolani Carmina.
           CSEL 30. Vienna: Tempsky, 1894.
     Translated by P. G. Walsh, in The Poems of St. Paulinus of Nola. Ancient Christian
           Writers 40. New York: Newman Press, 1975.
Paulinus of Pella. Eucharisticos.
     Edited and translated by Hugh G. Evelyn White, in Ausonius. Vol. 2. Loeb
           Classical Library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1949.
     Edited and translated by Claude Moussy, in Paulin de Pella: Poème d’action de
           grâces et Prière. SC 209. Paris: Le Cerf, 1974.
Pelagius. Commentaries on the Epistles of Saint Paul.
     Edited by Hermann Josef Frede, in Ein neuer Paulustext und Kommentar. 2 vols.
           Freiburg: Herder, 1973–­74.
     Commentary on Romans, translated by Theodore de Bruyn, in Pelagius’ Commen­
           tary on St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans. Oxford: Clarendon, 1993.
———. Letter to Demetrias.
     PL 30. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846.
     Translated by B. R. Rees, in The Letters of Pelagius and His Followers. Woodbridge,
           UK: Boydell, 1991.
Pelagius I of Rome. Letters. Edited by P. M. Gassó and C. M. Batlle, in Pelagii I
     papae: Epistulae quae supersunt (556–­561). Montserrat: Abbey of Montserrat,
     1956.
Petrus Chrysologus. Sermons. Edited by Alexandre Oliver, in Sancti Petri Chrysologi
     Collectio sermonum. 2 vols. CCSL 24, 24B. Turnhout: Brepols, 1975–­82.
Plotinus. Enneads. Edited and translated by A. H. Armstrong, in Plotinus. 7 vols. Loeb
     Classical Library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1966–­88.
     Translated by Stephen MacKenna, in Plotinus: The Enneads. Burdett, NY: Larson,
           1992.
Porphyry. Life of Plotinus.
     Edited and translated by A. H. Armstrong, in Plotinus. 7 vols. Loeb Classical
           Library. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1966–­68.
     Translated by Stephen McKenna, in Plotinus: The Enneads. Burdett, NY: Larson,
           1992.
Possidius. Vita Augustini.
     PL 32. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1845.
     Translated by F. R. Hoare, in The Western Fathers. New York: Harper and Row,
           1954.


                                          651
                                   works cited


Proba, Faltonia Betitia. Cento. Edited and translated by Elizabeth A. Clark and Diane F.
     Hatch, in The Golden Bough, the Oaken Cross: The Vergilian Cento of Faltonia
     Betitia Proba. American Academy of Religion: Texts and Translations 5. Chico,
     CA: Scholars Press, 1981.
Prosper of Aquitaine. Chronicle.
     Edited by Theodor Mommsen, in vol. 1 of Chronica Minora, saec. IV. V. VI. VII.
          MGH: Auctores Antiquissimi, vol. 9. Berlin: Weidmann, 1892.
     Excerpts translated by Alexander Callander Murray, in From Roman to Merovin­
          gian Gaul: A Reader. Peterborough, Ontario: Broadview Press, 2000.
———. Contra Collatorem.
     Printed in PL 51. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846.
     Translated by J. Reginald O’Donnell, in Prosper of Aquitaine: Grace and Free Will.
          Fathers of the Church 7. New York: Fathers of the Church, 1949.
———. Pro Augustino responsiones ad capitula Gallorum. PL 51. Paris: J.-­P. Migne,
     1846.
———. Pro Augustino responsiones ad excerpta Genuensium. PL 51. Paris: J.-­P. Migne,
     1846.
———. Psalmorum C ad CL Expositio. PL 51. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846.
———. De vera humilitate. Edited and translated by M. Kathryn Clare Krabbe, in
     Epistula ad Demetriadem de vera humilitate. Catholic University of America
     Publications 97. Washington DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1956.
———. De vocatione omnium gentium. PL 51. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846.
Querolus (Aulularia). Comédie latine anonyme: Le Grincheux.
     Edited and translated by Catherine Jacquemard-­Le Saos. Paris: Belles Lettres, 2003.
Recueil des inscriptions chrétiennes de la Gaule. Published under the direction of Henri
     Irénée Marrou.
     Vol. 8, Aquitanie première. Edited by Françoise Prévot. Paris: CNRS, 1991.
     Vol. 15, Viennoise du Nord. Edited by Françoise Descombes. Paris: CNRS, 1975.
Regula cuiusdam ad virgines. PL 88. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1850.
Regula Macarii.
     Edited and translated by Salvatore Pricoco, in La Regola di San Benedetto e le
          Regole dei Padri. Verona: Mondadori, 1995.
     Edited and translated by Adalbert de Vogüé, in Les règles des saints pères. Vol. 1.
          SC 297. Paris: Le Cerf, 1982.
Regula quattuor patrum.
     Edited and translated by Salvatore Pricoco, in La Regola di San Benedetto e le
          Regole dei Padri. Verona: Mondadori, 1995.
     Edited and translated by Adalbert de Vogüé, in Les règles des saints pères. Vol. 1.
          SC 297. Paris: Le Cerf, 1982.
Repertorium der christlich-­antiken Sarkophage. Edited by Friedrich Wilhelm Deich-
     mann. Vol. 3, Frankreich, Algerien, Tunesien. Edited by Brigitte Christern-­
     Briesenick. Mainz: P. Zabern, 2003.
Rufinus of Aquileia. Apologia contra Hieronymum. Edited by Manlio Simonetti, in
     Opera. CCSL 20. Turnhout: Brepols, 1961.


                                          652
                                   primary sources


———. Prologus in Omelias Origenis in Numeros. Edited by Manlio Simonetti, in Opera.
      CCSL 20. Turnhout: Brepols, 1961.
Rutilius Namatianus, Claudius. De reditu suo. Edited by Charles Haines Keene and
      translated by George F. Savage-­Armstrong, in Rutilii Claudii Namatiani De reditu
      suo libri duo/The Home-­Coming of Rutilius Claudius Namatianus from Rome to
      Gaul in the Year 416 A.D. London: George Bell and Sons, 1907.
Salvian of Marseilles. Ad Ecclesiam.
      Edited and translated by Georges Lagarrigue, in Salvien de Marseille: Oeuvres.
            Vol. 1, Les lettres, les livres de Timothée à l’Église. SC 176. Paris: Le Cerf, 1971.
      Translated by Jeremiah F. O’Sullivan, in The Writings of Salvian, the Presbyter.
            Fathers of the Church 3. New York: CIMA, 1947.
———. De gubernatione Dei.
      Edited and translated by Georges Lagarrigue, in Salvien de Marseille: Oeuvres.
            Vol. 2, Du gouvernement de Dieu. SC 220. Paris: Le Cerf, 1975.
      Translated by Eva M. Sanford, in On the Government of God. Columbia Records
            of Civilization. New York: Columbia University Press, 1930.
      Translated by Jeremiah F. O’Sullivan, in The Writings of Salvian, the Presbyter.
            Fathers of the Church 3. New York: CIMA, 1947.
———. Letters.
      Edited and translated by Georges Lagarrigue, in Salvien de Marseille: Oeuvres.
            Vol. 1, Les lettres, les livres de Timothée à l’Église. SC 176. Paris: Le Cerf, 1971.
      Translated by Jeremiah F. O’Sullivan, in The Writings of Salvian, the Presbyter.
            Fathers of the Church 3. New York: CIMA, 1947.
Severus, Sulpicius. Chronica. Edited and translated by Ghislaine de Senneville-­Grave,
      in Sulpice Sévère: Chroniques. SC 441. Paris: Le Cerf, 1999.
———. Dialogues. Edited and translated by Jacques Fontaine, in Gallus: Dialogues sur
      les “vertus” de saint Martin. SC 510. Paris: Le Cerf, 2006.
———. Life of Martin.
      Edited and translated by Jacques Fontaine, in Sulpice Sévère: Vie de Saint Martin.
            Introduction, texte et traduction. 3 vols. SC 133–­35. Paris: Le Cerf, 1967–­69.
      Translated by F. R. Hoare, in The Western Fathers. New York: Harper and Row,
            1954.
Sidonius Apollinaris. Letters. Edited and translated by W. B. Anderson, in Sidonius:
      Poems and Letters. 2 vols. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
      University Press, 1965.
———. Poems. Edited and translated by W. B. Anderson, in Sidonius: Poems and Letters.
      2 vols. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965.
Simplicius of Rome. Epistulae. Edited by Andreas Thiel, in Epistolae Romanorum
      pontificum genuinae. Vol. 1. Braunsberg: E. Peter, 1867; Hildesheim: G. Olms,
      1974.
Siricius of Rome. Letters. PL 13. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1845.
The Story of Apollonius King of Tyre. Translated by Gerald N. Sandy. In Collected Ancient
      Greek Novels. Edited by B. P. Reardon. Berkeley: University of California Press,
      1989.


                                              653
                                   works cited


Symmachus. Letters. Edited and translated by Jean Pierre Callu, in Symmaque: Lettres.
     4 vols. Paris: Belles Lettres, 1972–­2002.
———. The Letters of Symmachus. Book 1. Edited and translated by Michale Renee
     Salzmann and Michael Roberts. Writings from the Greco-Roman World 30. Atlanta,
     Ga.: Society of Biblical Literature, 2011.
———. Orationes. Edited and translated by Jean-­Pierre Callu, in Symmaque: Discours,
     rapports. Paris: Belles Lettres, 2009.
———. Relationes.
     Edited and translated by Jean-­Pierre Callu, in Symmaque: Discours, rapports. Paris:
          Belles Lettres, 2009.
     Edited and translated by R. H. Barrow, in Prefect and Emperor: The Relationes of
          Symmachus, A.D. 384. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973.
Symmachus, Pope. Epistulae. Edited by Andreas Thiel, in Epistolae Romanorum pontifi­
     cum genuinae. Vol. 1. Braunsberg: E. Peter, 1867; Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1974.
Le Talmud de Jérusalem. Translated by Moïse Schwab. Paris: Maisonneuve, 1932–­33.
Uranius. De obitu Paulini.
     PL 53. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1847.
     Translated by Dennis Trout, in Paulinus of Nola: Life, Letters, and Poems.
          Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.
Valerianus of Cimiez. Homilies. PL 52. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1845.
Veranus. Sententia de castitate sacerdotum. PL 72. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1849.
Vindicianus. Letter to the Emperor Valentinian. Edited by Max Niedermann, in De
     medicamentis/Über Heilmittel. Vol. 1. Corpus Medicorum Latinorum 5. Berlin:
     Akademie, 1968.
De vita christiana.
     PL 50. Paris: J.-­P. Migne, 1846.
     Translated by B. R. Rees, in The Letters of Pelagius and His Followers. Woodbridge,
          UK: Boydell, 1998.
Vitae patrum Emeritensium. Edited by Joseph N. Garvin, in The Vitas sanctorum patrum
     Emeritensium. Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1946.
Zosimus. Historia nova.
     Edited by Ludwig Mendelssohn, in Zosimi comitis et exadvocati fisci Historia nova.
          Leipzig: Teubner, 1887.
     Translated by Ronald T. Ridley, in Zosimus: New History. Canberra: American
          Association of Byzantine Studies, 1982.


                              Secondary Sources

Aarjava, Antti. Women and Law in Late Antiquity. Oxford: Clarendon, 1996.
Adkin, Neil. Jerome on Virginity: A Commentary on the Libellus de virginitate servanda
     (Letter 22). ARCA 42. Liverpool: Francis Cairns, 2003.
Age of Spirituality: Late Antique and Early Christian Art, Third to Seventh Century.
     Catalogue of the exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, November 19,


                                          654
                              secondary sources


     1977, through February 12, 1978. Edited by Kurt Weitzmann. New York:
     Metropolitian Museum of Art, New York 1988.
Albana, Mela. “Archiatri . . . honeste obsequi tenuioribus malint quam turpiter servire
     divitibus (CTH 13,3,8).” In Poveri ammalati e ammalati poveri: Dinamiche
     socio-­economiche, trasformazioni culturali e misure assistenziali nell’Occidente
     romano in età tardoantica, 253–­79. Edited by Rosalia Marino, Concetta Molè,
     and Antonino Pinzone, with the collaboration of Margherita Cassia. Catania:
     Edizioni del Prisma, 2006.
Alciati, Roberto. Monaci, vescovi e scuola nella Gallia tardoantica. Temi e Testi 72.
     Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 2009.
Alciati, Roberto, and Maria Chiara Giorda. “Possessions and Asceticism: Melania the
     Younger and Her Slow Way to Jerusalem.” Zeitschrift für Antikes Christentum 14
     (2010): 425–­44.
Alföldy, Géza. The Social History of Rome. London: Croom Helm, 1985.
Algazi, Gadi. “Introduction: Doing Things with Gifts.” In Negotiating the Gift:
     Pre-­Modern Figurations of Exchange, 9–­27. Edited by Gadi Algazi, Valentin
     Groebner, and Bernhard Jussen. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 2003.
Almeida, Maria José de, and António Carvalho. “Villa romana da Quinta das Longas
     (Elvas, Portugal): A lixeira baixo-­imperial.” Revista Portuguesa de Arqueologia 8
     (2005): 299–­368.
Alvar, Jaime. Romanising Oriental Gods: Myth, Salvation and Ethics in the Cults of
     Cybele, Isis and Mithras. Translated and edited by Richard Gordon. Religions of
     the Greco-­Roman World 165. Leiden: Brill, 2008.
Amory, Patrick. “The Textual Transmission of the Donatio Ansemundi.” Francia 20
     (1993): 163–­83.
Anchora vitae: Atti del II Convegno Paoliniano nel XVI Centenario del Ritiro di Paolino a
     Nola. Edited by Gennaro Luongo. Naples: Redenzione, 1998.
Anderson, Gary A. “Redeem Your Soul by the Giving of Alms: Sin, Debt and the
     ‘Treasury of Merit’ in Early Jewish and Christian Tradition.” Letter and Spirit 3
     (2007): 36–­69.
———. Sin: A History. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
Ando, Clifford. Imperial Ideology and Provincial Loyalty in the Roman Empire.
     Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000.
———. The Matter of the Gods: Religion and the Roman Empire. Berkeley: University
     of California Press, 2008.
Angenendt, Arnold. “Donationes pro anima: Gift and Countergift in the Early Medieval
     Liturgy.” In The Long Morning of Medieval Europe: New Directions in Early
     Medieval Studies, 131–­54. Edited by Jennifer R. Davis and Michael McCormick.
     Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008.
L’Année épigraphique.
     1928. Edited by René Cagnat and Maurice Besnier. Paris: CNRS.
     1990. Edited by André Chastagnol, André Laronde, Marcel Le Glay, and Patrick
           Le Roux. Paris: CNRS.
Arce, Javier. Bárbaros y romanos en Hispania (400–­507 A.D.). Madrid: Marcial Pons, 2005.


                                          655
                                     works cited


Arce, Javier, Alexandra Chavarría, and Gisela Ripoll. “The Urban Domus in Late
     Antique Hispania: Examples from Emerita, Barcino and Complutum.” In Housing
     in Late Antiquity: From Palaces to Shops, 305–­36. Edited by Luke Lavan, Lale
     Özgenel, and Alexander Sarantis. Late Antique Archaeology 3.2. Leiden: Brill,
     2007.
Archeologia urbana a Ravenna: La Domus dei tapetti di pietro, il complesso archeologico
     di via D’Azeglio. Edited by Giovanna Montevecchi. Ravenna: Longo, 2004.
Arena, Gaetano. “Il ‘potere di guarire’: L’attività medica fra politica e cultura nella tarda
     antichità.” In Poveri ammalati e ammalati poveri: Dinamiche socio-­economiche,
     trasformazioni culturali e misure assistenziali nell’Occidente romano in età tardoan­
     tica, 387–­424. Edited by Rosalia Marino, Concetta Molè, and Antonino Pinzone,
     with the collaboration of Margherita Cassia. Catania: Edizioni del Prisma, 2006.
Armitage, Mark J. A Twofold Solidarity: Leo the Great’s Theology of Redemption.
     Strathfield, NSW: St. Paul’s Publications, 2005.
Arnaud, José Marais, and Carla Verela Fernandes. Construindo a memória: As colecções
     do Museu Arqueológico do Carmo. Lisbon: Museu Arqueológico do Carmo, 2005.
Arthur, Paul. “From Vicus to Village: Italian Landscapes, AD 400–­1000.” In Landscapes
     of Change: Rural Evolutions in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages, 103–­33.
     Edited by Neil Christie. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.
———. Romans in Northern Campania: Settlement and Land-­Use around the Massico
     and the Garigliano Basin. Archaeological Monographs of the British School at
     Rome 1. London: British School at Rome, 1991.
Atti del colloquio internazionale. Il Liber Pontificalis e la storia materiale. Edited by
     Herman Geertman. Medelingen van het Nederlands Instituut te Rome: Antiquity
     60–­61. Assen: Van Gorcum, 2003.
Augustine through the Ages: An Encyclopedia. Edited by Allan D. Fitzgerald. Grand
     Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1999.
Augustinus-­Lexikon. Edited by Cornelius Mayer. Basel: Schwabe, 1986.
Aurea Roma: Dalla città pagana alla città cristiana. Edited by Serena Ensoli and
     Eugenio La Rocca. Rome: Bretschneider, 2000.
Ausone et Paulin de Nole: Correspondance. Edited by David Amherdt. Sapheneia 9.
     Bern: Peter Lang, 2004.
Bachrach, Bernard S. “The Fortification of Gaul and the Economy of the Third and
     Fourth Centuries.” Journal of Late Antiquity 3 (2010): 38–­64.
Badel, Christophe. La noblesse de l’empire romain: Les masques et la vertu. Seyssel:
     Champ Vallon, 2005.
Badewien, Jan. Geschichtstheologie und Sozialkritik im Werk Salvians von Marseille.
     Forschungen zur Kirchen-­und Dogmengeschichte 32. Göttingen: Vandenhouck
     and Ruprecht, 1980.
Bailey, Lisa Kaaren. “Building Urban Christian Communities: Sermons on Local Saints
     in the Eusebius Gallicanus Collection.” Early Medieval Europe 12 (2003): 1–­24.
———. Christianity’s Quiet Success: The Eusebius Gallicanus Sermon Collection and the
     Power of the Church in Late Antique Gaul. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
     Dame Press, 2010.


                                            656
                               secondary sources


Bakhtin, Mikhail M. Rabelais and His World. Translated by Helene Iswolsky. Cam-
     bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1968.
Baldini Lippolis, Isabella. La domus tardoantica: Forme e rappresentazioni dello spazio
     domestico nelle città del Mediterraneo. Imola: University Press of Bologna, 2001.
Balmelle, Catherine. Les demeures aristocratiques d’Aquitaine: Société et culture de
     l’Antiquité tardive dans le Sud-­Ouest de la Gaule. Bordeaux and Paris: Ausonius
     and Aquitania, 2001.
———. “Le répertoire végétal des mosaïstes du Sud-­Ouest de la Gaule et des sculpteurs
     des sarcophages dits d’Aquitaine.” Antiquité tardive 1 (1993): 101–­7.
Balmelle, Catherine, A. Ben Abed-­Ben Khader, A. Bourgeois, Cl. Brenot, H. Broise,
     J.-­P. Darmon, M. Ennaïfer, and M.-­P. Raynaud. “Vitalité de l’architecture
     domestique à Carthage au Ve siècle: L’exemple de la maison dite de la Rotonde,
     sur la colline de l’Odéon.” Antiquité tardive 11 (2003): 151–­66.
Banaji, Jairus. Agrarian Change in Late Antiquity: Gold, Labour, and Aristocratic
     Dominance. 2001. Reprint, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
———. “Aristocracies, Peasantries and the Framing of the Early Middle Ages.” Journal
     of Agrarian Change 9 (2009): 59–­91.
———. “Lavoratori liberi e residenza coatta: Il colonato romano in prospettiva storica.”
     In Terre, proprietari e contadini dell’impero romano: Dall’affitto agrario al colonato
     tardoantico, 253–­80. Edited by Elio Lo Cascio. Rome: Nuova Italia Scientifica, 1997.
Barbier, Josianne. “Testaments et pratique testamentaire dans le royaume franc
     (VIe–­VIIIe siècles).” In Sauver son âme et se perpétuer: Transmission du patrimoine
     et mémoire au haut Moyen Âge, 7–­79. Edited by François Bougard, Cristina La
     Rocca, and Régine Le Jan. Collection de l’École française de Rome 351. Rome:
     École française de Rome, 2005.
Barcellona, Rossana. Fausto di Riez, interprete del suo tempo: Un vescovo tardoantico
     dentro la crisi dell’impero. Soveria Manelli: Rubettino, 2006.
Barceló, Pedro. Constantius II. und seine Zeit: Die Anfänge des Staatskirchentums.
     Stuttgart: Klett-­Cotta, 2004.
Barnes, Timothy D. Ammianus Marcellinus and the Representation of Historical Reality.
     Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998.
———. Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire.
     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.
———. Constantine: Dynasty, Religion and Power in the Later Roman Empire. Oxford:
     Wiley-Blackwell, 2011.
———. Constantine and Eusebius. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981.
———. “Statistics and the Conversion of the Roman Aristocracy.” Journal of Roman
     Studies 85 (1995): 135–­47.
———. “Was There a Constantinian Revolution?” Journal of Late Antiquity 2 (2009):
     374–­84.
Barnish, S.J.B. “Pigs, Plebeians and Potentes: Rome’s Economic Hinterland, c. 350–­600
     A.D.” Papers of the British School at Rome 55 (1987): 157–­85.
———. “Religio in stagno: Nature, Divinity and the Christianization of the Countryside
     in Late Antique Italy.” Journal of Early Christian Studies 9 (2001): 387–­402.


                                           657
                                   works cited


Barnish, S.J.B. “Transformation and Survival in the Western Senatorial Aristocracy,
     c. A.D. 400–­700.” Papers of the British School at Rome 66 (1988): 120–­55.
———. “The Wealth of Julianus Argentarius: Late Antique Banking and the Mediter-
     ranean Economy.” Byzantion 55 (1985): 5–­38.
Baslez, Marie-­Françoise. Comment notre monde est devenu chrétien. Tours: Éditions
     CLD, 2008.
Baumann, Peter. Spätantike Stifter im Heiligen Land: Darstellungen und Inschriften auf
     Bodenmosaik in Kirchen, Synagogen und Privathäusern. Wiesbaden: Reichert,
     1999.
Baumgart, Susanne. Die Bischofsherrschaft im Gallien des 5. Jahrhunderts: Eine
     Untersuchung zu den Gründen und Anfängen weltlicher Herrschaft der Kirche.
     Münchener Arbeiten zur Alten Geschichte 8. Munich: Editio Maris, 1995.
Baus, Karl. Das Gebet zu Christus beim hl. Ambrosius. Edited by Ernst Dassmann.
     Berlin: Philo, 2000.
Bavel, Tarsicius J. van. “‘Ante omnia’ et ‘in Deum’ dans la ‘Regula Sancti Augustini.’”
     Vigiliae Christianae 12 (1958): 157–­65.
Baynes, Norman Hepburn. Constantine the Great and the Christian Church. 2nd ed.
     Preface by Henry Chadwick. London: Oxford University Press for the British
     Academy, 1972.
Beaucamp, Joëlle. “Le testament de Grégoire de Nazianze.” In Fontes Minores 10. Edited
     by Ludwig Burgmann. Forschungen zur byzantinischen Rechtsgeschichte.
     Frankfurt: Löwenklau, 1998.
Beaujard, Brigitte. “La topographie chrétienne des cités de la Gaule: Bilan et perspec-
     tives.” In Le problème de la christianisation du monde antique, 203–­18. Edited by
     Hervé Inglebert, Sylvain Destephen, and Bruno Dumézil. Paris: Picard, 2010.
BeDuhn, Jason David. “Augustine Accused: Megalius, Manichaeism and the Inception
     of the Confessions.” Journal of Early Christian Studies 17 (2009): 85–­124.
———. Augustine’s Manichaean Dilemma. Vol. 1, Conversion and Apostasy, 373–­388
     C.E. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2010.
———. The Manichaean Body: In Discipline and Ritual. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
     University Press, 2000.
Behlmer, Heike. Schenute von Atripe: De Iudicio (Torino, Museo Egizio: Catalogo 63000
     Cod. IV). Turin: Museo Egizio, 1996.
Bek, Lise. “Quaestiones conviviales: The Idea of the Triclinium and the Staging of
     Convivial Ceremony from Rome to Byzantium.” Analecta Romana Instituti
     Danici 12 (1983): 81–­107.
Belayche, Nicole. “Des lieux pour le ‘profane’ dans l’empire tardo-­antique? Les fêtes
     entre koinônia sociale et espaces de rivalités religieuses.” Antiquité tardive 15
     (2007): 35–­46.
Bellomo, Barbara. “Abusi nell’economia di carità.” In Poveri ammalati e ammalati
     poveri: Dinamiche socio-­economiche, trasformazioni culturali e misure assistenziali
     nell’Occidente romano in età tardoantica, 449–­63. Edited by Rosalia Marino,
     Concetta Molè, and Antonino Pinzone, with the collaboration of Margherita
     Cassia. Catania: Edizioni del Prisma, 2006.


                                          658
                               secondary sources


Benoit, Fernand. “La crypte en triconque de Théopolis.” Rivista di archeologia cristiana
     27 (1951): 69–­89.
Bergmann, Marianne. Chiragan, Aphrodisias, Konstantinopel: Zur mythologischen
     Skulptur der Spätantike. Deutsches Archäologisches Institut, Rom: Palilia 7.
     Wiesbaden: Reichert, 1999.
Bernardini, Paolo. Un solo battesimo, una sola chiesa: Il concilio di Cartagine del
     settembre 256. Bologna: Mulino, 2009.
Berrouard, Marie-­François. “Un tournant dans la vie de l’église d’Afrique: Les deux
     missions d’Alypius en Italie à la lumière des Lettres 10*, 15*, 16*, 22* et 23A.” Revue
     des études augustiniennes 31 (1985): 46–­70.
Berthier, André. La Numidie: Rome et le Maghreb. Paris: Picard, 1981.
———. Les vestiges du christianisme antique dans la Numidie centrale. Algiers: Maison-­
     Carrée, 1942.
Bertolino, Alessandro. “‘In area Callisti’: Contributo alla topografia di Roma tardoan-
     tica.” Rivista di archeoloigia cristiana 70 (1994): 181–­90.
Bickerman, Elias. Four Strange Books of the Bible. New York: Schocken, 1967.
Blackhurst, Andy. “The House of Nubel: Rebels or Players?” In Vandals, Romans and
     Berbers: New Perspectives on Late Antique Africa, 59–­76. Edited by Andrew H.
     Merrills. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.
Blair-­Dixon, Kate. “Memory and Authority in Sixth-­Century Rome: The Liber
     Pontificalis and the Collectio Avellana.” In Religion, Dynasty and Patronage in
     Early Christian Rome, 300–­900, 59–­76. Edited by Kate Cooper and Julia Hillner.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Bland, Roger, and Catherine Johns. The Hoxne Treasure: An Illustrated Introduction.
     London: British Museum Press, 1993.
Blázquez, José María. Mosaicos romanos de Córdoba, Jaén y Málaga. Corpus de mosaicos
     de España 3. Madrid: CSIC, 1981.
Bloch, Maurice, and Jonathan Parry. Introduction to Money and the Morality of
     Exchange, 1–­32. Edited by Jonathan Parry and Maurice Bloch. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Bodel, John. “From Columbaria to Catacombs: Collective Burial in Pagan and
     Christian Rome.” In Commemorating the Dead: Texts and Artifacts in Context.
     Studies of Roman, Jewish, and Christian Burials, 177–­242. Edited by Laurie Brink
     and Deborah Green. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2008.
———. “Monumental Villas and Villa Monuments.” Journal of Roman Archaeology 10
     (1997): 3–­35.
Bonamente, Giorgio. “Chiesa e impero nel IV secolo: Constanzo II fra il 357 e il 361.”
     In La comunità cristiana di Roma: La sua vita e la sua cultura dalle origini all’alto
     medioevo, 113–­38. Edited by Letizia Pani Ermini and Paolo Siniscalco. Vatican
     City: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 2000.
Bonneau, Danielle. La crue du Nil, divinité égyptienne, à travers mille ans d’histoire
     (322 av.–­641 ap. J.-­C.). Paris: Klincksieck, 1964.
Borg, Barbara, and Christian Witschel. “Veränderungen im Repräsentationsverhalten
     der römischen Eliten während des 3. Jhrdts n. Chr.” In Inschriftliche Denkmäler als


                                           659
                                   works cited


     Medien der Selbstdarstellung in der römischen Welt, 47–­120. Edited by Geza
     Alföldy and Silvio Panciera. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2001.
Borgolte, Michael. “Felix est homo ille qui amicos bonos relinquit: Zur sozialen Gestal-
     tungskraft letzwilliger Verfügungen am Beispiel Bischofs Bertrams von le Mans
     (616).” In Festschrift für Berent Schwineköper, 5–­18. Edited by Helmut Maurer
     and Hans Patze. Sigmaringen: J. Thorbecke, 1982.
Bori, Pier Cesare. Chiesa primitiva: L’imaggine della communità delle origini—­Atti 2,
     42–­47; 4, 32–­37—­nella storia della chiesa antica. Brescia: Paideia, 1974.
Borodin, O. R. “Ekonomicheskie protivorechiia v srede ravennskovo dukhenstva v
     VI–­VIII vv.” Vizantĭskĭ vremennik 56 (81) (1995): 32–­44.
Boudartchouk, Jean-­Luc. “Production et diffusion des sarcophages romains tardifs et
     mérovingiens dans la région de Lourdes (Hautes Pyrénées).” Gallia 59 (2002):
     53–­60.
Bourgeois, Luc. “Les résidences des élites et les fortifications du Haut Moyen-­Âge en
     France et en Beligique dans leur cadre européen: Aperçu historiographique
     (1955–­2005).” Cahiers de civilisation médiévale 49 (2006): 113–­42.
Bowersock, Glen W. “From Emperor to Bishop: The Self-­Conscious Transformation
     of Political Power in the Fourth Century A.D.” Classical Philology 81 (1986):
     298–­307. Reprinted in Selected Papers on Late Antiquity.
———. “Peter and Constantine.” In St. Peter’s in the Vatican, 5–­15. Edited by William
     Tronzo. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
———. Selected Papers on Late Antiquity. Bari: Edipuglia, 2000.
———. “Symmachus and Ausonius.” In Colloque genèvois sur Symmaque, 1–­15. Edited
     by François Paschoud. Paris: Belles Lettres, 1986. Reprinted in Selected Papers on
     Late Antiquity.
Bowes, Kimberly. “Building Sacred Landscapes: Villas and Cult.” In Villas Tardoanti­
     guas en el Mediterráneo Occidental, 73–­95. Edited by Alexandra Chavarria, Javier
     Arce, and Gian Pietro Brogiolo. Anejos de Archivo Español de Arqueología 39.
     Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 2006.
———. “‘Une coterie espagnole pieuse’: Christian Archaeology and Christian Commu-
     nities in Theodosian Hispania.” In Hispania in Late Antiquity: Current Perspec­
     tives, 189–­258. Edited by Kim Bowes and Michael Kulikowski. Leiden: Brill, 2005.
———. Houses and Society in the Later Roman Empire. London: Duckworth, 2010.
———. Private Worship, Public Values, and Religious Change in Late Antiquity.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Bowes, Kimberly, and Adam Gutteridge. “Rethinking the Later Roman Landscape.”
     Journal of Roman Archaeology 18 (2005): 405–­13.
Brandenburg, Hugo. “Das Baptisterium und der Brunnen des Atriums von Alt-­St.Peter
     in Rom.” Boreas 26 (2003): 55–­71.
———. “Bellerophon christianus? Zur Deutung des Mosaiks von Hinton St. Mary und
     zum Problem der Mythendarstellungen in der kaiserzeitlichen dekorativen Kunst.”
     Römische Quartalschrift 63 (1968): 49–­86.
———. “Christussymbole in frühchristlichen Bodenmosaiken.” Römische Quartalschrift
     64 (1969): 74–­138.


                                          660
                               secondary sources


———. “Osservazioni sulla fine della produzione e dell’uso dei sarcophagi a rilievo nella
     tarda antichità nonché sulla loro decorazione.” In Sarcofagi tardoantichi, paleocris­
     tiani ed altomedievali, 1–­14. Edited by Fabrizio Bisconti and Hugo Brandenburg.
     Vatican: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 2004.
Bransbourg, Gilles. “Fiscalité impériale et finances municipales au IVe siècle.” Antiquité
     tardive 16 (2008): 255–­96.
Braudel, Fernand. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip
     II. Translated by Siân Reynolds. 2 vols. London: Collins, 1972–­73.
“Bread and Circuses”: Euergetism and Municipal Patronage in Roman Italy. Edited by
     Kathryn Lomas and Tim Cornell. London: Routledge, 2003.
Brenk, Beat. “L’anno 410 e il suo effetto sull’arte chiesastica a Roma.” In vol. 2 of
     Ecclesiae urbis, 1001–­18. Edited by Federico Guidobaldi and Alessandra Guiglia
     Guidobaldi. Studi di Antichità Cristiana 59. 3 vols. Rome: Pontificio Istituto di
     Antichità Cristiana, 2002.
———. Die Christianisierung der spätrömischen Welt: Stadt, Land, Haus, Kirche und
     Kloster in frühchristlicher Zeit. Wiesbaden: Reichert, 2003.
———. “La cristianizzazione della Domus dei Valerii sul Celio.” In The Transformations
     of Vrbs Roma in Late Antiquity, 69–­84. Edited by W. V. Harris. Journal of Roman
     Archaeology: Supplementary Series 33. Portsmouth, RI: Journal of Roman
     Archaeology, 1999.
Brennecke, Hans Christof. Hilarius von Poitiers und die Bischofsopposition gegen
     Konstantius II: Untersuchungen zur dritten Phase des Arianischen Streites
     (337–­361). Patristische Texte und Studien 26. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1984.
Breukelaar, Adriaan H. B. Historiography and Episcopal Authority: The Histories
     of Gregory of Tours Interpreted in Their Historical Context. Forschungen zur
     Kirchen und Dogmengeschichte 57. Göttingen: Vandenhoek and Ruprecht,
     1994.
Briand-­Ponsart, Claude, and Christophe Hugoniot. L’Afrique romaine de l’Atlantique
     à la Tripolitaine, 146 av. J.-­C.–­533 ap. J.-­C. Paris: Armand Colin, 2005.
Brock, Sebastian P. “Saints in Syriac: A Little-­Tapped Resource.” Journal of Early
     Christian Studies 16 (2008): 181–­96.
———. The Syriac Fathers on Prayer and the Spiritual Life. Cistercian Studies 101.
     Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Studies, 1987.
Broise, Henri, Martine Dewailly, and Vincent Jolivet. “Scoperta di un palazzo tardo­
     antico nella piazzale di Villa Medici.” Rendiconti: Pontificia Accademia Romana
     di Archeologia 72 (1999–­2000): 1–­17.
Brown, Peter. “Alms and the Afterlife: A Manichaean View of an Early Christian
     Practice.” In East and West: Papers in Ancient History Presented to Glen W.
     Bowersock, 145–­58. Edited by T. Corey Brennan and Harriet I. Flower. Cam-
     bridge, MA: Department of Classics, Harvard University, 2008.
———. “Aspects of the Christianization of the Roman Aristocracy.” Journal of Roman
     Studies 51 (1961): 1–­11. Reprinted in Religion and Society.
———. Augustine of Hippo: New Edition with an Epilogue. Berkeley: University of
     California Press, 2000.


                                           661
                                    works cited


Brown, Peter. Authority and the Sacred: Aspects of the Christianisation of the Roman
    World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
———. The Body and Society: Men, Women and Sexual Renunciation in Early Chris­
    tianity. Reprint with new introduction. New York: Columbia University Press,
    2008.
———. The Cult of the Saints: Its Rise and Function in Latin Christianity. Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 1981.
———. “Dalla ‘plebs romana’ alla ‘plebs Dei’: Aspetti della cristianizzazione di Roma.”
    In Governanti e intellettuali: Popolo di Roma e popolo di Dio, I–­VI secolo, 123–­45.
    Passatopresente 2. Turin: Giapichelli, 1982.
———. “The Decline of the Empire of God: Amnesty, Penance and the Afterlife from
    Late Antiquity to the Middle Ages.” In Last Things: Death and the Apocalypse in
    the Middle Ages, 41–­59. Edited by Caroline Walker Bynum and Paul Freedman.
    Philadephia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2000.
———. “The Diffusion of Manichaeism in the Roman Empire.” Journal of Roman
    Studies 59 (1969): 92–­103. Reprinted in Religion and Society.
———. Introduction to The World of Gregory of Tours, 1–­28. Edited by Kathleen
    Mitchell and Ian Wood. Leiden: Brill, 2002.
———. “The Patrons of Pelagius: The Roman Aristocracy between East and West.”
    Journal of Theological Studies, n.s., 21 (1970): 56–­72. Reprinted in Religion and
    Society.
———. “Pelagius and His Supporters: Aims and Environment.” Journal of Theological
    Studies, n.s., 19 (1968): 93–­114. Reprinted in Religion and Society.
———. Poverty and Leadership in the Later Roman Empire. Menahem Stern Jerusalem
    Lectures. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 2002.
———. Power and Persuasion in Late Antiquity: Towards a Christian Empire. Madison:
    University of Wisconsin Press, 1992.
———. “Relics and Social Status in the Age of Gregory of Tours.” In Society and the
    Holy in Late Antiquity, 222–­50. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982.
———. Religion and Society in the Age of Saint Augustine. London: Faber, 1972;
    Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 2007.
———. “Religious Coercion in the Later Roman Empire: The Case of North Africa.”
    History 48 (1963): 283–­305. Reprinted in Religion and Society.
———. Review article on Richard Sorabji, Emotion and Peace of Mind: From Stoic
    Agitation to Christian Temptation. Philosophical Books 43 (2002): 185–­208.
———. The Rise of Western Christendom: Triumph and Diversity, A.D. 200–­1000.
    2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell, 2003.
———. “Sexuality and Society in the Fifth Century A.D.: Augustine and Julian of
    Eclanum.” In Tria corda: Scritti in onore di Arnaldo Momigliano, 49–­70. Edited
    by Emilio Gabba. Biblioteca di Athenaeum 1. Como: New Press, 1983.
———. “The World of Late Antiquity Revisited.” Symbolae Osloenses 72 (1997): 5–­90.
Bruck, Eberhard Friedrich. Kirchenväter und soziales Erbrecht: Wanderungen religiöser
    Ideen durch die Rechte der östlichen und westlichen Welt. Berlin: Springer, 1956.



                                          662
                                secondary sources


Brunert, Maria-­Elisabeth. Das Ideal der Wüstenaskese und seine Rezeption in Gallien bis
     zum Ende des 6. Jahrhunderts. Beiträge zur Geschichte des alten Mönchtums und
     des Benediktinerordens 42. Münster: Aschendorff, 1994.
Brunner, Otto. Land and Lordship: Structures of Governance in Medieval Austria.
     Translated by Howard Kaminsky and James van Horn Melton. Philadelphia:
     University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992.
Buenacasa Pérez, Carles. “La creación del patrimonio ecclesiastico de las iglesias
     norteafricanas en época romana (siglos II–­V): Renovación de la visión tradicional.”
     In Sacralidad y Arqueología: Homenaje al Prof. Thilo Ulbert, 493–­509. Antigüedad
     y Cristianismo 21. Murcia: Universidad de Murcia, 2004.
Bührer-­Thierry, Geneviève. “Lumière et pouvoir dans le haut moyen-­âge occidental:
     Célébration de pouvoir et métaphores lumineuses.” Mélanges de l’École française
     de Rome: Moyen-­âge 116 (2004): 521–­58.
Burns, J. Patout. Cyprian the Bishop. London: Routledge, 2002.
Burrus, Virginia. The Making of a Heretic: Gender, Authority and the Priscillianist
     Controversy. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995.
Bury, J. B. History of the Later Roman Empire from the Death of Theodosius I to the Death
     of Justinian (A.D. 395–­A.D. 565). 2 vols. London: MacMillan, 1923.
Caillet, Jean-­Pierre. L’évergétisme monumental chrétien en Italie et à ses marges d’après les
     pavements de mosaïque (IVe–­VIIe s.). Collection de l’École française de Rome 175.
     Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1993.
———. “La réalité de l’implantation monumentale chrétienne au temps d’Augustin:
     L’exemple de quelques cités de Numidie.” In Saint Augustin, la Numidie et la société
     de son temps, 55–­66. Edited by Serge Lancel. Bordeaux: Ausonia; Paris: Boccard,
     2005.
Cain, Andrew. The Letters of Jerome: Asceticism, Biblical Exegesis, and the Construction
     of Christian Authority in Late Antiquity. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Caliri, Elena. “Povertà e assistenza nella Sicilia protobizantina.” In Poveri ammalati e
     ammalati poveri: Dinamiche socio-­economiche, trasformazioni culturali e misure
     assistenziali nell’Occidente romano in età tardoantica, 145–­66. Edited by Rosalia
     Marino, Concetta Molè, and Antonino Pinzone, with the collaboration of
     Margherita Cassia. Catania: Edizioni del Prisma, 2006.
Callataÿ, François de. “The Graeco-­Roman Economy in the Super Long-­Run: Lead,
     Copper and Shipwrecks.” Journal of Roman Archaeology 18 (2005): 361–­72.
Callu, Jean-­Pierre. “Le ‘centenarium’ et l’enrichissement monétaire au Bas-­Empire.”
     Ktèma 3 (1978): 301–­16.
The Cambridge Ancient History. Vol. 13, The Late Empire, A.D. 337–­425. Edited by
     Averil Cameron and Peter Garnsey. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
     1998.
The Cambridge Companion to the Age of Constantine. Edited by Noel Lenski. Cam-
     bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
The Cambridge Economic History of the Greco-­Roman World. Edited by Walter Scheidel,
     Ian Morris, and Richard Saller. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.



                                            663
                                    works cited


The Cambridge History of Christianity. Vol. 2, Constantine to c. 600. Edited by Augus-
     tine Casiday and Frederick W. Norris. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
     2007.
Cameron, Alan. “The Antiquity of the Symmachi.” Historia 48 (1999): 477–­505.
———. “Filocalus and Melania.” Classical Quarterly 87 (1992): 140–­44.
———. Greek Mythography in the Roman World. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
     2004.
———. The Last Pagans of Rome. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
———. “The Probus Diptych and Christian Apologetic.” In From Rome to Constanti­
     nople: Studies in Honour of Averil Cameron, 191–­202. Edited by Hagit Amirav
     and Bas ter Haar Romeny. Louvain: Peeters, 2007.
Cameron, Averil. Christianity and the Rhetoric of Empire: The Development of Christian
     Discourse. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.
Caner, Daniel. “Towards a Miraculous Economy: Christian Gifts and Material
     ‘Blessings’ in Late Antiquity.” Journal of Early Christian Studies 14 (2006):
     329–­77.
———. Wandering, Begging Monks: Spiritual Authority and the Promotion of Monasti­
     cism in Late Antiquity. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002.
Cantino Wataghin, Gisella, Vincenzo Fiocchi Nicolai, and Giuliano Volpe. “Aspetti
     della cristianizzazione degli agglomerati secondari.” In vol. 1 of La cristianizzazi­
     one in Italia tra Tardoantico e Altomedioevo, 83–­134. Edited by Rosa Maria
     Bonacasa Carra and Emma Vitale. Palermo: Carlo Saladino, 2007.
Carlà, Filippo. L’oro nella tarda antichitá: Aspetti economici e sociali. Turin: Silvio
     Zamorani, 2009.
Carmassi, Patrizia. “La prima redazione del Liber Pontificalis nel quadro delle fonti
     contemporanee: Osservazioni in margine alla vita di Simmaco.” In Atti del
     colloquio internazionale, Il Liber Pontificalis e la storia materiale, 235–­66. Edited
     by Herman Geertman. Medelingen van het Nederlands Instituut te Rome:
     Antiquity 60–­61. Assen: Van Gorcum, 2003.
Carrié, Jean-­Michel. “Les associations professionnelles à l’époque tardive: Entre munus
     et convivialité.” In Humana sapit: Études d’Antiquité Tardive offeres à Lellia Cracco
     Ruggini, 309–­32. Edited by Carrié and Rita Lizzi Testa. Bibliothèque d’Antiquité
     Tardive 3. Turnhout: Brepols, 2002.
———. “Le ‘colonat du Bas-­Empire’: Un mythe historiographique?” Opus 1 (1982):
     351–­70.
———. “Dioclétien et la fiscalité.” Antiquité tardive 2 (1994): 33–­64.
———. “Les distributions alimentaires dans les cités de l’empire romain tardif.”
     Mélanges de l’École française de Rome: Antiquité 87 (1975): 995–­1101.
———. “Nihil habens praeter quod ipso die vestiebatur: Comment définir le seuil de la
     pauvreté à Rome?” In Consuetudinis amor: Fragments d’histoire romaine (IIe–­VIe
     siècles) offerts à Jean-­Pierre Callu, 71–­102. Edited by François Chausson and
     Étienne Wolff. Rome: Bretschneider, 2003.
———. “Pratique et idéologie chrétiennes de l’économique (IVe–­VIe siècle).” Antiquité
     tardive 14 (2006): 17–­26.


                                           664
                              secondary sources


Carrié, Jean-­Michel, and Aline Rousselle. L’empire romain en mutation: Des Sévères à
     Constantin, 192–­337. Paris: Du Seuil, 1999.
Caseau, Béatrice. “A Case Study for the Transformation of Law in Late Antiquity:
     The Legal Protection of Churches.” In Confrontation in Late Antiquity: Imperial
     Presentation and Regional Adaptation, 61–­77. Edited by Linda Jones Hall.
     Cambridge: Orchard Academic, 2003.
———. “Objects in Churches: The Testimony of Inventories.” In Objects in Context,
     Objects in Use: Material Spatiality in Late Antiquity, 551–­79. Edited by Luke
     Lavan, Ellen Swift, and Toon Putzeys. Late Antique Archaeology 5. Leiden: Brill,
     2007.
Casiday, Augustine M. C. “Rehabilitating John Cassian: An Evaluation of Prosper of
     Aquitaine’s Polemic against the ‘Semipelagians.’” Scottish Journal of Theology 58
     (2005): 270–­84.
———. Tradition and Theology in St. John Cassian. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
     2007.
Cavadini, John. “Feeling Right: Augustine on the Passions and Sexual Desire.”
     Augustinian Studies 36 (2005): 195–­217.
Cecconi, Giovanni Alberto. “Crisi e trasformazioni del governo municipale in
     Occidente fra IV e VI secolo.” In Die Stadt in der Spätantike—­Niedergang oder
     Wandel? 285–­318. Edited by Jens-­Uwe Krause and Christian Witschel. Historia
     Einzelschriften 190. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2006.
———. “Elemosina e propaganda: Un’analisi della ‘Macariana persecutio.’” Revue des
     études augustiniennes 31 (1990): 42–­66.
———. Governo imperiale e élites dirigenti nell’Italia tardoantica: Problemi di storia
     politico-­amministrativa (270–­476 d.C.). Biblioteca di Athenaeum 24. Como: New
     Press, 1994.
———. “Vescovi e maggiorenti cristiani nell’Italia centrale fra IV e V secolo.” In Vescovi
     e pastori in epoca Teodosiana, 205–­24. Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 58.
     Rome: Institutum Pontificium Augustinianum, 1997.
Chadwick, Henry. Boethius: The Consolations of Music, Logic, Theology and Philosophy.
     Oxford: Clarendon, 1981.
———. The Church in Ancient Society: From Galilee to Gregory the Great. Oxford:
     Oxford University Press, 2001.
———. Priscillian of Avila: The Occult and the Charismatic in the Early Church. Oxford:
     Clarendon, 1976.
Chadwick, Nora K. Poetry and Letters in Early Christian Gaul. London: Bowes and
     Bowes, 1955.
Chadwick, Owen. A History of the Popes, 1830–­1914. Oxford: Clarendon, 1998.
———. John Cassian. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968.
Chalon, Michel, Georges Devallet, Paul Force, Michel Griffe, Jean-­Marie Lassere, and
     Jean-­Noël Michaud. “Memorabile factum: Une célébration de l’évergétisme des rois
     vandales dans l’Anthologie Latine.” Antiquités africaines 21 (1985): 207–­62.
Champlin, Edward. Final Judgments: Duty and Emotion in Roman Wills, 200 B.C.–
     A.D. 250. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.


                                          665
                                        works cited


Champlin, Edward. “The Suburbium of Rome.” American Journal of Ancient History 7
      (1982): 97–­117.
Charity and Giving in Monotheistic Religions. Edited by Miriam Frenkel and Yaacov
      Lev. Studien zur Geschichte und Kultur des islamischen Orients, n. F. 22. Berlin:
      de Gruyter, 2009.
Charles-­Picard, Gilbert. “Civitas mactaritana.” Karthago 8 (1957): 1–­156.
Chastagnol, André. “Observations sur le consulat suffect et la préture au Bas-­Empire.”
      Revue historique 219 (1958): 221–­53.
———. “Un scandale du vin à Rome sous le Bas-­Empire: L’affaire du Préfet Orfitus.”
      Annales 5 (1950): 166–­83.
———. “Le Sénat dans l’oeuvre de Symmaque.” In Colloque genèvois sur Symmaque,
      73–­92. Edited by François Paschoud. Paris: Belles Lettres, 1986.
Chavarría Arnau, Alexandra. El final de las “villae” en “Hispania” (siglos IV–­VIII).
      Turnhout: Brepols, 2007.
Chevalier, Pascale. “Les graffitis de l’abside de l’Eufrasiana de Poreč: Un obituaire
      monumental du haut Moyen Âge.” Mélanges Jean Pierre Sodini: Travaux et
      mémoires 15 (2005): 359–­70.
Cheyette, Fredric L. “The Disappearance of the Ancient Landscape and the Climatic
      Anomaly of the Early Middle Ages: A Question to Be Pursued.” Early Medieval
      Europe 16 (2008): 127–­65.
Christe, Yves. “À propos du décor figuré des sarcophages d’Aquitaine.” Antiquité tardive
      1 (1993): 75–­80.
Christern, Jürgen. “Basilika und Memorie der heiligen Salsa in Tipasa: Ein Beitrag zum
      Verhältnis von Märtyrergrab und Zömeterialbasilika.” Bulletin d’archéologie
      algérienne 3 (1968): 193–­250.
———. Das frühchristliche Pilgerheiligtum von Tebessa: Architektur und Ornamentik
      einer spätantiken Bauhütte in Nordafrika. Wiesbaden: F. Steiner, 1976.
Christie, Neil. From Constantine to Charlemagne: An Archaeology of Italy, AD 300–­800.
      Aldershot: Ashgate, 2006.
Cipriani, Nello. “Le fonti cristiane della dottrina trinitaria nei primi Dialoghi di
      S. Agostino.” Augustinianum 34 (1994): 253–­313.
———. “La morale pelagiana e la retorica.” Augustinianum 31 (1991): 309–­27.
———. “La polemica antiafricana di Giuliano di Eclano: Artificio letterario o scontro
      di tradizioni teologiche?” In Cristianesimo e specificità regionali nel Mediterraneo
      latino (sec. IV–­VI), 147–­60. Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 46. Rome:
      Institutum Pontificium Augustinianum, 1994.
Les cités de l’Italie tardo-­antique (IVe–­VIe siècle): Institutions, économie, société, culture et
      religion. Edited by Massimiliano Ghilardi, Christophe J. Goddard, and Pierfran-
      cesco Porena. Collection de l’École française de Rome 369. Rome: École française
      de Rome, 2006.
Clackson, James. “A Greek Papyrus in Armenian Script.” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und
      Epigraphik 129 (2000): 223–­58.
Clark, Elizabeth A. Jerome, Chrysostom and Friends: Essays and Translations. Lewiston,
      NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1979.


                                               666
                               secondary sources


———. The Origenist Controversy: The Cultural Construction of an Early Christian
     Debate. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992.
———. “Vitiated Seeds and Holy Vessels: Augustine’s Manichaean Past.” In Ascetic Piety
     and Women’s Faith: Essays on Late Ancient Christianity, 291–­349. Lewiston, NY:
     Edwin Mellen Press, 1986.
Clarke, W. K. Lowther. Saint Basil the Great: A Study in Monasticism. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press, 1913.
Claude, Dietrich. “Die Bestellung der Bischöfe im merowingischen Reiche.” Zeitschrift
     der Savigny Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte: Kanonistische Abteilung 49 (1963): 1–­77.
———. “Freedmen in the Visigothic Kingdom.” In Visigothic Spain: New Approaches,
     139–­88. Edited by Edward James. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980.
Cleary, Simon Esmonde. The Ending of Roman Britain. London: Batsford, 1989.
Cleland, Gary. “Unearthed after 1,600 Years, Dinner Set Hidden by Fleeing Romans.”
     Daily Telegraph, December 7, 2007.
Le Code Théodosien: Diversité des approches et nouvelles perspectives. Edited by Sylvie
     Crogiel-­Pétrequin and Pierre Jaillette. Collection de l’École française de Rome
     412. Rome: École française de Rome, 2009.
Colish, Marcia L. Ambrose’s Patriarchs: Ethics for the Common Man. Notre Dame, IN:
     University of Notre Dame Press, 2005.
Colloque genèvois sur Symmaque. Edited by François Paschoud. Paris: Belles Lettres,
     1986.
Commento storico al libro . . . dell’epistolario di Q. Aurelio Simmaco. Pisa: Giardini,
     1981–­2002.
     Vol. 2, Commento storico al libro II. By Giovanni Alberto Cecconi. 2002.
     Vol. 3, Commento storico al libro III. By Andrea Pellizzari. 1998.
     Vol. 4, Commento storico al libro IV. By Arnaldo Marcone. 1987.
     Vol. 5, Commento storico al libro V. By Paola Rivolta Tiberga. 1992.
     Vol. 6, Commento storico al libro VI. By Arnaldo Marcone. 1983.
     Vol. 9, Commento storico al libro IX. By Sergio Roda. 1981.
The Conflict between Paganism and Christianity in the Fourth Century. Edited by
     Arnaldo Momigliano. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963.
Connolly, Serena. “Fortifying the City of God: Dardanus’ Inscription Revisited.”
     Classical Journal 102 (2007): 145–­54.
Consolino, Franca Ela. “Tradizionalismo e trasgressione nell’élite senatoria romana:
     Ritratti di signore fra la fine del IV e l’inizio del V secolo.” In Le trasformazioni
     delle “élites” in età tardoantica, 65–­139. Edited by Rita Lizzi Testa. Rome:
     Bretschneider, 2006.
Conti, Marco. Priscillian of Avila: The Complete Works. Oxford: Oxford University
     Press, 2010.
Conybeare, Catherine. The Irrational Augustine. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
———. Paulinus Noster: Self and Symbol in the Letters of Paulinus of Nola. New York:
     Oxford University Press, 2000.
Cooper, Kate. The Fall of the Roman Household. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press, 2007.


                                          667
                                   works cited


Cooper, Kate. “Poverty, Obligation, and Inheritance: Roman Heiresses and the
     Varieties of Senatorial Christianity in Fifth-­Century Rome.” In Religion, Dynasty
     and Patronage in Early Christian Rome, 300–­900, 165–­89. Edited by Kate Cooper
     and Julia Hillner. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
———. The Virgin and the Bride: Idealized Womanhood in Late Antiquity. Cambridge,
     MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Corbo, Chiara. Paupertas: La legislazione tardoantica. Naples: Satura, 2006.
Corcoran, Simon. The Empire of the Tetrarchs: Imperial Pronouncements and Govern­
     ment, AD 284–­324. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996.
Corrente, Marisa, Roberto Giuliano, and Danilo Leone. “Il complesso religioso di
     Piano di San Giovanni e il problema del primo polo episcopale canosino.” In vol. 2
     of La cristianizzazione in Italia tra Tardoantico e Altomedioevo, 1167–­1200. Edited
     by Rosa Maria Bonacasa Carra and Emma Vitale. Palermo: Carlo Saladino, 2007.
Coşkun, Altay. “The Eucharisticos of Paulinus Pellaeus: Towards a Reappraisal of the
     Worldly Convert’s Life and Autobiography.” Vigiliae Christianae 60 (2006):
     283–­315.
———. Die gens Ausoniana an der Macht: Untersuchungen zu Decimius Magnus
     Ausonius und seiner Familie. Prosopographica et Genealogica 8. Oxford: Linacre
     College, 2002.
Courcelle, Pierre. Histoire littéraire des grandes invasions germaniques. 3rd ed. Paris:
     Études Augustiniennes, 1964.
Coveney, P. J. Introduction to France in Crisis, 1620–­1675. Edited by P. J. Coveney.
     Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1977.
Coyle, J. Kevin. “What Did Augustine Know about Manichaeism When He Wrote
     His Two Treatises De moribus?” In Augustine and Manichaeism in the Latin West,
     43–­56. Edited by Johannes van Oort, Otto Wermelinger, and Gregor Wurst. Nag
     Hammadi and Manichaean Studies 49. Leiden: Brill, 2001.
Cracco Ruggini, Lellia. Economia e società nell’ “Italia annonaria”: Rapporti fra
     agricoltura e commercio dal IV al VI secolo d.C. Milan: Giuffrè, 1961. 2nd ed. Bari:
     Edipuglia, 1995.
Crane, David. Scott of the Antarctic: A Life of Courage and Tragedy in the Extreme South.
     New York: Harper Percival, 2006.
La cristianizzazione in Italia tra Tardoantico e Altomedioevo. Edited by Rosa Maria
     Bonacasa Carra and Emma Vitale. 2 vols. Palermo: Carlo Saladino, 2007.
Crow, James. “Fortifications and Urbanism in Late Antiquity.” In Recent Research in
     Late Antique Urbanism, 89–­105. Edited by Luke Lavan. Journal of Roman
     Archaeology, Supplement 42. Portsmouth, RI: Journal of Roman Archaeology,
     1996.
Ćurčić, Slobodan. Architecture in the Balkans from Diocletian to Süleyman the Magnifi­
     cent. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2010.
Curran, John R. “Jerome and the Sham Christians of Rome.” Journal of Ecclesiastical
     History 48 (1997): 213–­29.
———. Pagan City and Christian Capital: Rome in the Fourth Century. Oxford: Oxford
     University Press, 2000.


                                          668
                               secondary sources


D’un monde à l’autre: Naissance d’une Chrétienté en Provence, IVe–­VIe siècle. Edited by
     Jean Guyon and Marc Heijmans. Arles: Musée de l’Arles antique, 2002.
Dark, K. R. Civitas to Kingdom: British Political Continuity, 300–­800. Leicester:
     Leicester University Press, 1994.
———. “The Late Antique Landscape of Britain, AD 300–­700.” In Landscapes of
     Change: Rural Evolutions in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages, 279–­99.
     Edited by Neil Christie. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.
Dassmann, Ernst. Die Frömmigkeit des Kirchenvaters Ambrosius von Mailand. Münster-­
     in-­Westfalen: Aschendorff, 1965.
Davies, Wendy. Small Worlds: The Village Community in Early Medieval Brittany.
     London: Duckworth, 1988.
De Bruyn, Theodore. Pelagius’ Commentary on St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans. Oxford:
     Clarendon, 1993.
Deckers, Johannes G. “Vom Denker zum Diener: Bemerkungen zu den Folgen der
     konstantinischen Wende im Spiegel der Sarkophagplastik.” In Innovation in der
     Spätantike, 137–­72. Edited by Beat Brenk. Wiesbaden: Reichert, 1996.
Decret, François. L’Afrique manichéenne, IVe–­Ve siècles: Étude historique et doctrinale.
     Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1978.
De Fino, Mariagrazia. “Proprietà imperiali e diocesi rurali paleocristiane dell’Italia
     tardoantica.” In Paesaggi e insediamenti rurali in Italia meridionale fra tardoantico
     e altomedioevo, 691–­702. Edited by Guiliano Volpe and Maria Turchiano. Bari:
     Edipuglia, 2005.
De Francesco, Daniela. “Aspetti della presenza germanica in Italia: Le donazioni di
     Valila nel Tiburtino.” Rivista di Archeologia Cristiana 74 (1998): 415–­53.
———. La proprietà fondiaria nel Lazio, secoli IV–­VIII: Storia e topografia. Rome:
     Quasar, 2004.
Deichmann, Friedrich Wilhelm. Ravenna: Hauptstadt des spätantiken Abendlandes.
     3 vols. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 1969–­89.
Delage, Pascal-­Grégoire. “Le canon 13 de Sardique ou Les inquietudes d’évêques
     d’origine modeste.” In Les Pères de l’Église et la voix des pauvres, 55–­74. Edited
     by Pascal-Grégoire Delage. La Rochelle: Histoire et Culture, 2006.
Deleto paene imperio Romano: Transformazionsprozesse des römischen Reiches im 3.
     Jahrhundert und ihre Rezeption in der Neuzeit. Edited by Klaus-­Peter Johne,
     Thomas Gerdhardt, and Udo Hartmann. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2006.
Deliyannis, Deborah Mauskopf. Ravenna in Late Antiquity. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 2010.
Delmaire, Roland, and Claude Lepelley. “Du nouveau sur Carthage: Le témoignage des
     Lettres de Saint Augustin découvertes par Johannes Divjak.” Opus 2 (1983): 473–­87.
Demandt, Alexander, and Guntram Brummer. “Der Prozess gegen Serena im Jahre 408
     n. Chr.” Historia 26 (1977): 479–­502.
Denzey, Nicola. The Bone Gatherers: The Lost Worlds of Early Christian Women.
     Boston: Beacon Press, 2007.
Déroche, Vincent. Études sur Léontios de Néapolis. Studia Byzantina Upsalensia 3.
     Uppsala: Alqmvist and Wiksell, 1995.


                                           669
                                   works cited


Desmulliez, Janine. “Paulin de Nole et la paupertas.” In Les Pères de l’Église et la voix
      des pauvres, 245–­63. Edited by Pascal-­Grégoire Delage. La Rochelle: Histoire et
      Culture, 2006.
Devos, Paul. “Quand Pierre l’Ibère vint-­il à Jérusalem?” Analaecta Bollandiana 86
      (1968): 337–­50.
Dey, Hendrik. “Art, Ceremony and City Walls: The Aesthetics of Imperial Resurgence
      in the Late Roman West.” Journal of Late Antiquity 3 (2010): 3–­37.
———. “Building Worlds Apart: Walls and the Construction of Communal Monasti-
      cism from Augustine through Benedict.” Antiquité tardive 12 (2004): 357–­71.
Diefenbach, Steffen. Römische Erinnerungsräume: Heiligenmemoria und kollektive
      Identitäten im Rom des 3. bis 5. Jahrhunderts n. Chr. Millennium-­Studien 11.
      Berlin: de Gruyter, 2007.
Diem, Albrecht. “Monastic Poverty and Institution Forming: Evidence from Early
      Medieval Historiography and from Monastic Rules.” Paper presented at the
      Cornell Conference on Medieval Poverty, March 2008.
———. Das monastische Experiment: Die Rolle der Keuschheit bei der Entstehung des
      westlichen Klosterwesens. Vita Regularis: Abhandlungen 24. Münster: Lit, 2005.
Digeser, Elizabeth DePalma. The Making of a Christian Empire: Lactantius and Rome.
      Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000.
Dill, Samuel. Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire. 1919. Reprint,
      New York: Meridian, 1958.
Dionisotti, A. C. “From Ausonius’ Schooldays? A Schoolbook and Its Relatives.”
      Journal of Roman Studies 72 (1982): 83–­125.
El disco de Teodosio. Edited by Martín Almagro-­Gorbea. Estudios del Gabinete de
      Antigüedades 5. Madrid: Real Academia de la Historia, 2000.
Disselkamp, Gabriele. “Christiani Senatus Lumina”: Zum Anteil römischer Frauen
      der Oberschicht im 4. und 5. Jahrhundert an der Christianisierung der römischen
      Senatsaristokratie. Theophaneia 34. Bodenheim: Philo, 1997.
Djurić, Srdjan. “Mosaic of Philosophers in an Early Byzantine Villa at Nerodimlje.”
      In VI Coloquio internacional sobre mosaico antiguo, 123–­34. Palencia/Mérida:
      Associación Español del Mosaico, 1994.
Dodds, E. R. Pagan and Christian in an Age of Anxiety: Some Aspects of Religious
      Experience from Marcus Aurelius to Constantine. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
      sity Press, 1965.
Doignon, Jean. “L’enseignement de l’Hortensius de Cicéron sur les richesses devant
      la conscience d’Augustin jusqu’aux Confessions.” Antiquité classique 51 (1982):
      193–­206.
Dolan, Jay P. The Immigrant Church: New York’s Irish and German Catholics, 1815–­1865.
      Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1975.
Dolbeau, François. “Nouveaux sermons de Saint Augustin pour la conversion des païens
      et des donatistes (IV).” Revue des études augustiniennes 38 (1992): 69–­141.
———. “‘Seminator verborum’: Réfléxions d’un éditeur des sermons d’Augustin.” In
      Augustin prédicateur (395–­411), 95–­111. Edited by Goulven Madec. Paris: Institut
      d’Études Augustiniennes, 1998.


                                          670
                              secondary sources


Dossey, Leslie. Peasant and Empire in Christian North Africa. Berkeley: University of
    California Press, 2010.
Dresken-­Weiland, Jutta. Sarkophagbestattungen des 4.–­6. Jahrhunderts im Westen des
    römischen Reiches. Römische Quartalschrift Supplementband 55. Rome: Herder,
    2003.
Drinkwater, John F. “The Bacaudae of Fifth-­Century Gaul.” In Fifth-­Century Gaul:
    A Crisis of Identity? 208–­17. Edited by John Drinkwater and Hugh Elton.
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Du latifundium au latifondo: Un héritage de Rome, une création médiévale ou moderne?
    Publications du Centre Pierre Paris 25. Paris: Boccard, 1995.
Duchesne, L. Le Liber Pontificalis: Texte, Introduction et Commentaire. Bibliothèque de
    l’École française de Rome. 3 vols. Paris: Boccard, 1955–­57.
———. “Lovocat et Catihern, prêtres bretons du temps de saint Mélaine.” Revue de
    Bretagne et de Vendée 57 (1885): 5–­21.
———. “La succession du pape Félix IV.” Mélanges d’archéologie et d’histoire 3 (1883):
    239–­66.
Dulaey, Martine. “La bibliothèque du monastère de Lérins dans les premières décennies
    du Ve siècle.” Augustinianum 46 (2006): 187–­230.
———. “La scène dite de l’arrestation de Pierre: Nouvelle proposition de lecture.”
    Rivista di Archeologia Cristiana 84 (2008): 299–­346.
Dunbabin, Katherine M. D. “Convivial Spaces: Dining and Entertainment in the
    Roman Villa.” Journal of Roman Archaeology 9 (1996): 66–­80.
———. Mosaics of the Greek and Roman World. Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press, 1999.
———. The Mosaics of Roman North Africa: Studies in Iconography and Patronage.
    Oxford: Clarendon, 1978.
———. The Roman Banquet: Images of Conviviality. Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press, 2003.
Duncan-­Jones, Richard P. “The Finances of the Younger Pliny.” Papers of the British
    School at Rome 33 (1965): 177–­88.
———. “The Impact of the Antonine Plague.” Journal of Roman Archaeology 9 (1996):
    108–­36.
Dunn, Geoffrey G. “The Care of the Poor in Rome and Alaric’s Sieges.” In Prayer and
    Spirituality in the Early Church. Vol. 5, Poverty and Riches, 319–­33. Edited by
    Geoffrey Dunn, David Luckensmeyer, and Lawrence Cross. Sydney: St. Paul’s, 2009.
———. “The Christian Networks of the Aniciae: The Example of the Letter of
    Innocent I to Anicia Iuliana.” Revue des études augustiniennes et patristiques 55
    (2009): 53–­72.
Dunphy, Walter. “Rufinus the Syrian: Myth and Reality.” Augustiniana 59 (2009):
    79–­157.
Durliat, Jean. De la ville antique à la ville byzantine: Le problème des subsistences.
    Collection de l’École française de Rome 136. Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1990.
Duval, Noël. “Deux mythes iconographiques de l’antiquité tardive: La villa fortifiée et
    le ‘chasseur vandale.’” In Humana sapit: Études d’Antiquité Tardive offeres à Lellia


                                          671
                                    works cited


      Cracco Ruggini, 333–­40. Edited by Jean-­Michel Carrié and Rita Lizzi Testa.
      Bibliothèque d’Antiquité Tardive 3. Turnhout: Brepols, 2002.
———. “La notion de ‘sarcophage’ et son rôle dans l’antiquité tardive.” Antiquité tardive
      1 (1993): 29–­35.
Duval, Yves-­Marie. “Sur trois lettres méconnues de Jérôme concernant son séjour à
      Rome.” In Jerome of Stridon: His Life, Writings and Legacy. Edited by Andrew
      Cain and Josef Lössl. Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2009.
Duval, Yvette. Les chrétientés d’Occident et leur évêque au IIIe siècle: Plebs in ecclesia
      constituta. Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 2005.
———. Loca sanctorum Africae: Le culte des martyrs en Afrique du IVe au VIIe siècle.
      2 vols. Collection de l’École française de Rome 58. Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1982.
Duval, Yvette, and Luce Pietri. “Évergétisme et épigraphie dans l’Occident chrétien
      (IVe–­VIe s.).” In Actes du Xe Congrès international d’épigraphie grecque et chré­
      tienne, 371–­96. Edited by Michel Christol and Olivier Masson. Paris: Publications
      de la Sorbonne, 1997.
Dworkin, Andrea. Intercourse. New York: The Free Press, 1987.
Dyson, R. W. The Pilgrim City: Social and Political Ideas in the Writings of St. Augustine
      of Hippo. Woodbridge: Boydell, 2001.
Ebanista, Carlo. Et manet in mediis quasi gemma intersita tectis: La basilica di S. Felice
      a Cimitile. Storia degli scavi, fasi edilizie, reperti. Memorie dell’Accademia di
      archeologia, lettere e belle arti in Napoli 15. Naples: Arte Tipografica, 2003.
Ebbeler, Jennifer V., and Cristiana Sogno. “Religious Identity and the Politics of
      Patronage: Symmachus and Augustine.” Historia 56 (2007): 230–­42.
Eburnea Diptycha: I dittici d’avorio tra Antichità e Medioevo. Edited by Massimiliano
      David. Bari: Edipuglia, 2007.
Edwards, Mark. “The Beginnings of Christianization.” In The Cambridge Companion to
      the Age of Constantine, 137–­56. Edited by Noel Lenski. Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press, 2006.
Ellis, Simon. “Power, Architecture and Décor: How the Late Roman Aristocrat
      Appeared to His Guests.” In Roman Art in the Private Sphere: New Perspectives
      on the Architecture and Decor of the Domus, Villa, and Insula, 117–­34. Edited by
      Elaine K. Gazda, assisted by Anne E. Haeckl. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
      Press, 1991.
———. “Shedding Light on Late Roman Housing.” In Housing in Late Antiquity: From
      Palaces to Shops, 283–­302. Edited by Luke Lavan, Lale Özgenel, and Alexander
      Sarantis. Late Antique Archaeology 3.2. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Elsner, Jás. Imperial Rome and Christian Triumph: The Art of the Roman Empire, AD
      100–­450. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Elton, Hugh. “Defence in Fifth-­Century Gaul.” In Fifth-­Century Gaul: A Crisis of
      Identity? 167–­76. Edited by John Drinkwater and Hugh Elton. Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Elvin, Mark. The Retreat of the Elephants: An Environmental History of China. New
      Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004.



                                           672
                                 secondary sources


Enceintes romaines d’Aquitaine: Bordeaux, Dax, Périgueux, Bazas. Edited by Pierre
     Garmy and Louis Maurin. Paris: Editions de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme,
     1996.
Enjuto Sánchez, Begoña. “I ‘Neratii’: Legami tra Roma e le città di Sannio nel IV secolo
     d.C.” In Les cités de l’Italie tardo-­antique (IVe–­VIe siècle): Institutions, économie,
     société, culture et religion, 113–­21. Edited by Massimiliano Ghilardi, Christophe J.
     Goddard, and Pierfrancesco Porena. Collection de l’École française de Rome 369.
     Rome: École française de Rome, 2006.
Ennabli, Abdelmagid. “Les thermes du Thiase Marin de Sidi Ghrib (Tunisie).”
     Monuments et mémoires publiés par l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres 68
     (1986): 1–­59.
Ennabli, Liliane. Carthage: Une métropole chrétienne du IVe à la fin du VIIe siècle. Paris:
     Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, 1997.
Erdkamp, Paul. The Grain Market in the Roman Empire: A Social, Political and
     Economic Study. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Errington, R. Malcom. Roman Imperial Policy from Julian to Theodosius. Chapel Hill:
     University of North Carolina Press, 2006.
Escribano, Victoria. “Heresy and Orthodoxy in Fourth Century Hispania: Arianism
     and Priscillianism.” In Hispania in Late Antiquity: Current Perspectives, 121–­49.
     Edited by Kim Bowes and Michael Kulikowski. Leiden: Brill, 2005.
Esders, Stefan. Die Formierung der Zensualität: Zur kirchlichen Transformation des
     spätrömischen Patronatswesens im früheren Mittelalter. Ostfildern: Jan Thorbecke,
     2010.
———. “Grenzen und Grenzüberschreitungen: Religion, Ethnizität und politische
     Integration am Rande des oströmischen Imperiums (4.–­7. Jh.).” In Gestiftete
     Zukunft im mittelalterlichen Europa: Festschrift für Michael Borgolte, 3–­28. Edited
     by Wolfgang Huschner and Frank Rexroth. Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2008.
———. Römische Rechtstradition und merowingisches Königtum: Zum Rechtscharakter
     politischer Herrschaft in Burgund im 6. und 7. Jahrhundert. Göttingen: Vanden-
     hoeck and Ruprecht, 1997.
Étienne, Robert. “Ausone, propriétaire terrien et le problème du latifundium au IVe
     siècle ap. J. C.” In Institutions, société et vie politique de l’empire romain au IVe siècle
     ap. J. C., 305–­11. Edited by Michel Christol et al. Collection de l’École française
     de Rome 159. Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1992.
L’évêque dans la cité du IVe au Ve siècle: Image et autorité. Edited by Éric Rebillard and
     Claire Sotinel. Collection de l’École française de Rome 248. Rome: École française
     de Rome, 1998.
Ewald, Björn Christian. Der Philosoph als Leitbild: Ikonographische Untersuchungen in
     römischen Sarkophagreliefs. Mainz: Zabern, 1999.
F. Bang, Peter. “Trade and Empire—­In Search of Organizing Concepts for the Roman
     Empire.” Past and Present 195 (2007): 3–­54.
Favro, Diane. The Urban Image of Augustan Rome. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press, 1996.



                                              673
                                    works cited


Fentress, Elizabeth, Caroline J. Goodson, Margaret L. Laird, and Stephanie C. Leone.
     Walls and Memory: The Abbey of San Sebastiano at Alatri (Lazio) from Late
     Roman Monastery to Renaissance Villa and Beyond. Disciplina Monastica 2.
     Turnhout: Brepols, 2005.
Fernández Ochoa, Carmen, and Angel Morillo Cerdán. “Walls in the Urban Landscape
     of Late Roman Spain: Defense and Imperial Strategy.” In Hispania in Late
     Antiquity: Current Perspectives, 299–­340. Edited by Kim Bowes and Michael
     Kulikowski. Leiden: Brill, 2005.
Ferrua, Antonio. “Cancelli di Cimitile con scritte bibliche.” Römische Quartalschrift 68
     (1973): 50–­68.
———. “Graffiti di pellegrini alla tomba di San Felice.” Palladio, n.s., 13 (1963): 17–­19.
Festugière, A. J. La révélation d’Hermès Trismégiste. Vol. 2, Le Dieu cosmique. Paris:
     Belles Lettres, 1981.
Février, Paul-­Albert. Approches du Maghreb romain: Pouvoirs, différences et conflits.
     2 vols. Aix-­en-­Provence and La Calade: Édisud, 1989–­90.
———. “Discours d’Église et réalité historique dans les nouvelles Lettres d’Augustin.”
     In Les Lettres de Saint Augustin découvertes par Johannes Divjak, 101–­15. Paris:
     Études Augustiniennes, 1983.
Fifth-­Century Gaul: A Crisis of Identity? Edited by John Drinkwater and Hugh Elton.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Finn, Richard. Almsgiving in the Later Roman Empire: Christian Promotion and
     Practice, 313–­450. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
———. “Portraying the Poor: Descriptions of Poverty in Christian Texts from the Late
     Roman Empire.” In Poverty in the Roman World, 130–­44. Edited by Margaret
     Atkins and Robin Osborne. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Fiocchi Nicolai, Vincenzo. “Evergetismo ecclesiastico e laico nelle iscrizioni paleocris-
     tiane del Lazio.” In Historiam pictura refert: Miscellanea in onore di Padre Alejan­
     dro Recio Veganzones O.F.M., 237–­52. Studi di Antichità Cristiana 51. Vatican:
     Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 1994.
Firey, Abigail. “‘For I was hungry and you fed me’: Social Justice and Economic
     Thought in the Late Patristic and Medieval Christian Traditions.” In Ancient and
     Medieval Economic Ideas and Concepts of Social Justice, 333–­70. Edited by S. Todd
     Lowry and Barry Gordon. Leiden: Brill, 1998.
Fischer, Josef. Die Völkerwanderung im Urteil der zeitgenössischen kirchlichen Schrift­
     steller Galliens unter Einbeziehung des heiligen Augustinus. Heidelberg: Kemper,
     1948.
Folliet, Georges. “Deificari in otio: Augustin, Epistula X,2.” Recherches augustiniennes 2
     (1962): 225–­36.
Fontaine, Jacques. “Damase, poète théodosien: L’imaginaire poétique des Epigram­
     mata.” In Saecularia Damasiana, 115–­45. Studi di Antichità Cristiana 39. Vatican:
     Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 1986.
———. “Un sobriquet perfide de Damase: Matronarum auriscalpius.” In Hommages
     à Henri le Bonnec: Res sacrae, 177–­92. Edited by D. Porte and J.-­P. Néraudau.
     Collection Latomus 201. Brussels: Latomus, 1988.


                                           674
                                 secondary sources


———. Sulpice Sévère: Vie de Saint Martin. Introduction, texte et traduction. 3 vols. SC
      133–­35. Paris: Le Cerf, 1967–­69.
———. “Valeurs antiques et valeurs chrétiennes dans la spiritualité des grands proprié-
      taires terriens à la fin du IVe siècle Occidental.” In Epektasis: Mélanges patristiques
      offerts au cardinal Jean Daniélou, 571–­95. Edited by Jacques Fontaine and Charles
      Kannengiesser. Paris: Beauchesne, 1972. Reprinted in Fontaine, Études sur la poésie
      latine tardive d’Ausone à Prudence. Paris: Belles Lettres, 1980.
Foucault, Michel. Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France,
      1977–­78. Edited by Michel Senellart. Translated by Graham Burchell. Basingstoke:
      Palgrave MacMillan, 2007.
Fouracre, Paul. “Eternal Light and Earthly Needs: Practical Aspects of the Develop-
      ment of Frankish Immunities.” In Property and Power in the Early Middle Ages,
      53–­81. Edited by Wendy Davies and Paul Fouracre. Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press, 1995.
Fournet, Jean-­Luc. “Entre document et littérature: La pétition dans l’antiquité tardive.”
      In La Pétition à Byzance, 61–­74. Edited by Denis Feissel and Jean Gascou. Centre
      de Recherche d’Histoire et Civilisation Byzantine: Monographies 14. Paris: Amis
      du Centre, 2004.
Francis, James A. Subversive Virtue: Asceticism and Authority in the Second-­Century
      Pagan World. University Park: Pennsylvania University Press, 1995.
Franzmann, Majella. Jesus in the Manichaean Writings. London: T. and T. Clark, 2003.
Frede, Hermann Josef. Ein neuer Paulustext und Kommentar. 2 vols. Freiburg: Herder,
      1973–­74.
Frederiksen, Paula. Augustine and the Jews: A Christian Defense of Jews and Judaism.
      New York: Doubleday, 2008.
Frend, W.H.C. The Donatist Church: A Movement of Protest in Roman North Africa.
      Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952.
———. “The Gnostic-­Manichaean Tradition in Roman North Africa.” Journal of
      Ecclesiastical History 4 (1953): 13–­36.
Freu, Christel. Les figures du pauvre dans les sources italiennes de l’antiquité tardive. Paris:
      Boccard, 2007.
From Rome to Constantinople: Studies in Honour of Averil Cameron. Edited by Hagit
      Amirav and Bas ter Haar Romeny. Louvain: Peeters, 2007.
From the Tetrarchs to the Theodosians: Later Roman History and Culture, 284–­450 CE.
      For John Matthews on the Occasion of His 70th Birthday. Edited by Scott McGill,
      Cristiana Sogno, and Edward Watts. Yale Classical Studies 34. Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Les frontières du profane dans l’antiquité tardive. Edited by Éric Rebillard and Claire
      Sotinel. Collection de l’École française de Rome 428. Rome: École française de
      Rome, 2010.
Fulford, M. G. “Economic Hotspots and Provincial Backwaters: Modelling the Late
      Roman Economy.” In Coin Finds and Coin Use in the Roman World, 153–­77.
      Edited by Cathy E. King and David G. Wigg. Studien zu Fundmünzen der Antike
      10. Berlin: Mann, 1996.


                                             675
                                    works cited


Gabba, Emilio. Del buon uso della ricchezza: Saggi di storia economica e sociale del mondo
    antico. Milan: Guerini, 1988.
Gabillon, Aimé. “Pour une datation de la lettre 243 d’Augustin à Laetus.” Revue des
    études augustiniennes 40 (1994): 127–­42.
———. “Romanianus alias Cornelius: Du nouveau sur le bienfaiteur et l’ami de saint
    Augustin.” Revue des études augustiniennes 24 (1978): 58–­70.
Galvão-­Sobrinho, Carlos R. “Funerary Epigraphy and the Spread of Christianity in the
    West.” Athenaeum, n.s., 83 (1995): 421–­66.
Ganz, David. “The Ideology of Sharing: Apostolic Community and Ecclesiastical
    Property in the Early Middle Ages.” In Property and Power in the Early Middle
    Ages, 17–­30. Edited by Wendy Davies and Paul Fouracre. Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1995.
García Mac Gaw, Carlos. Le problème du baptême dans le schisme donatiste. Scripta
    Antiqua 21. Bordeaux: Ausonius, 2008.
Gardner, Iain M. F., and Samuel N. C. Lieu. “From Narmouthis (Medinat Madi) to
    Kellis (Ismant el-­Kharab): Manichaean Documents from Roman Egypt.” Journal
    of Roman Studies 86 (1996): 146–­69.
Garnsey, Peter. Cities, Peasants and Food in Classical Antiquity: Essays in Social and
    Economic History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
———. Famine and Food Supply in the Graeco-­Roman World: Responses to Risk and
    Crisis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
———. “The Originality and Origins of Anonymous, De divitiis.” In From Rome to
    Constantinople: Studies in Honour of Averil Cameron, 29–­45. Edited by Hagit
    Amirav and Bas ter Haar Romeny. Louvain: Peeters, 2007.
———. “Roman Patronage.” In From the Tetrarchs to the Theodosians: Later Roman
    History and Culture, 284–­450 CE. For John Matthews on the Occasion of His 70th
    Birthday, 33–­54. Edited by Scott McGill, Cristiana Sogno, and Edward Watts.
    Yale Classical Studies 34. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
———. Social Status and Legal Privilege in the Roman Empire. Oxford: Clarendon, 1970.
———. Thinking about Property: From Antiquity to the Age of Revolution. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Gatz, Bodo. Weltalter, goldene Zeit und sinnverwandte Vorstellungen. Spudasmata 16.
    Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1967.
Geertz, Clifford. “Common Sense as a Cultural System.” In Local Knowledge: Further
    Essays in Interpretive Anthropology, 73–­93. New York: Basic Books, 1983.
Gennaro, Francesco di, and Francesca Dell’Era. “Dati archeologici di età tardoantica del
    territorio dell’ insula inter duo flumina.” In Suburbium: Il suburbio di Roma dalla
    crisi del sistema delle ville a Gregorio Magno, 97–­121. Edited by Phillippe Pergola,
    Riccardo Santangeli Valenzani, and Rita Volpe. Collection de l’École française de
    Rome 311. Rome: École française de Rome, 2003.
Gernet, Jacques. Buddhism in Chinese Society: An Economic History from the Fifth to the
    Tenth Centuries. New York: Columbia University Press, 1995.
Gernet, Louis. Le génie grec dans la religion. Paris: Renaissance du Livre, 1932.



                                          676
                                 secondary sources


Ghedini, Francesca, and Silvia Bullo. “Late Antique Domus of Africa Proconsularis:
     Structural and Decorative Aspects.” In Housing in Late Antiquity: From Palaces to
     Shops, 337–­66. Edited by Luke Lavan, Lale Özgenel, and Alexander Sarantis. Late
     Antique Archaeology 3.2. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Giardina, Andrea. “Amor civicus: Formule e immagini dell’evergetismo romano nella
     tradizione epigrafica.” In La terza età dell’epigrafia, 67–­87. Edited by Angela
     Donati. Faenza: Fratelli Lega, 1988.
———. “Carità eversiva: Le donazioni di Melania la Giovane e gli equilbrii della società
     tardoromana.” Studi storici 29 (1988): 127–­42.
———. “Esplosione di tardoantico.” Studi Storici 40 (1999): 157–­80.
———. “The Transition to Late Antiquity.” In The Cambridge Economic History of the
     Greco-­Roman World, 743–­68. Edited by Walter Scheidel, Ian Morris, and Richard
     Saller. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Gibbon’s Journey from Geneva to Rome: His Journal from 20 April to 2 October 1764.
     Edited by George A. Bonnad. London: Nelson, 1961.
Giglio, Stefano. “Il ‘munus’ della pretura a Roma e a Costantinopoli nel tardo impero
     romano.” Antiquité tardive 15 (2007): 65–­88.
Gillett, Andrew. “The Date and Circumstances of Olympiodorus of Thebes.” Traditio
     48 (1993): 1–­29.
———. Envoys and Political Communication in the Late Antique West, 411–­533.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
———. “Rome, Ravenna and the Last Western Emperors.” Papers of the British School at
     Rome 69 (2001): 131–­67.
Gilliard, Frank D. “Senatorial Bishops in the Fourth Century.” Harvard Theological
     Review 77 (1984): 153–­75.
Ginzberg, Louis. The Legends of the Jews. Translated by Henrietta Szold. 7 vols.
     Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909–­38.
Goddard, Christophe J. “Au coeur du dialogue entre païens et chrétiens: L’‘adventus’
     des sénateurs dans les cités de l’Antiquité tardive.” In Pagans and Christians in the
     Roman Empire (IVth–­VIth Century A.D.): The Breaking of a Dialogue, 371–­400.
     Proceedings of the International Conference at the Monastery of Bosé, October
     2008. Edited by Peter Brown and Rita Lizzi Testa. Münster: Lit, 2011.
———. “The Evolution of Pagan Sanctuaries in Late Antique Italy (Fourth–­Sixth
     Centuries A.D.): A New Administrative and Legal Framework: A Paradox.” In Les
     cités de l’Italie tardo-­antique (IVe–­VIe siècle): Institutions, économie, société, culture
     et religion, 281–­308. Edited by Massimiliano Ghilardi, Christophe J. Goddard,
     and Pierfrancesco Porena. Collection de l’École française de Rome 369. Rome:
     École française de Rome, 2006.
———. “Les formes festives de l’allégeance au Prince en Italie centrale, sous le règne de
     Constantin: Un suicide religieux?” Mélanges de l’École française de Rome: Antiquité
     114 (2002): 1025–­88.
Godding, Robert. Prêtres en Gaule mérovingienne. Subsidia Hagiographica 82. Brussels:
     Société des Bollandistes, 2001.



                                              677
                                     works cited


Goffart, Walter. Barbarian Tides: The Migration Age and the Later Roman Empire.
     Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2006.
———. Barbarians and Romans, A.D. 418–­584: The Techniques of Accommodation.
     Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980.
———. “Salvian of Marseille, De gubernatione Dei 3.38–­45 and the ‘Colonate’
     Problem.” Antiquité tardive 17 (2009): 269–­88.
———. “The Technique of Barbarian Settlement in the Fifth Century: A Personal,
     Streamlined Account with Ten Additional Comments.” Journal of Late Antiquity
     3 (2010): 65–­98.
Goldschmidt, R. C. Paulinus’ Churches at Nola: Translation and Commentary.
     Amsterdam: North Holland, 1940.
Goodrich, Richard. Contextualizing Cassian: Aristocrats, Asceticism, and Reformation
     in Fifth-­Century Gaul. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Goody, Jack. The Development of the Family and Marriage in Europe. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Gorman, Michael M. “The Oldest Annotations on Augustine’s De civitate Dei.”
     Augustinianum 46 (2006): 457–­79.
Grafton, Anthony, and Megan Williams. Christianity and the Transformation of the
     Book: Origen, Eusebius, and the Library of Caesarea. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
     University Press, 2006.
Granger Taylor, Hero. “The Two Dalmatics of Saint Ambrose.” Bulletin de Liaison,
     Centre International d’Études des Textiles Anciens 57–­58 (1983): 127–­73.
Grant, Robert M. Early Christianity and Society: Seven Studies. New York: Harper and
     Row, 1977.
Green, R.P.H. “Still Waters Run Deep: A New Study of the Professores of Bordeaux.”
     Classical Quarterly, n.s., 35 (1985): 491–­506.
Grey, Cam. “Contextualizing Colonatus: The Origo of the Late Roman Empire.” Journal
     of Roman Studies 97 (2007): 155–­75.
———. “Salvian, the Ideal Christian Community and the Fate of the Poor in Fifth-­
     Century Gaul.” In Poverty in the Roman World, 168–­82. Edited by Margaret
     Atkins and Robin Osborne. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Griffe, Élie. “La pratique religieuse en Gaule au Ve siècle: Saeculares et sancti.” Bulletin
     de littérature ecclésiastique 63 (1962): 241–­67.
Griffin, Miriam T. Seneca: A Philosopher in Politics. Oxford: Clarendon, 1976.
Grig, Lucy. “Throwing Parties for the Poor: Poverty and Splendour in the Late
     Antique Church.” In Poverty in the Roman World, 145–­61. Edited by Mar-
     garet Atkins and Robin Osborne. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
     2007.
Gros, Pierre. “La ville comme symbole: Le modèle central et ses limites.” In Hervé
     Inglebert, Histoire de la civilisation romaine, 155–­232. Paris: Presses Universitaires
     de France, 2005.
Gross, Jan T. Revolution from Abroad: The Soviet Conquest of Poland’s Western Ukraine
     and Western Belorussia. Expanded edition with a new preface. Princeton:
     Princeton University Press, 2002.


                                            678
                               secondary sources


Gsell, Stéphane. Atlas archéologique de l’Algérie. Algiers: A. Jourdain, 1911.
Guest, Peter. “Roman Gold and Hun Kings: The Use and Hoarding of Solidi in the
     Late Fourth and Fifth Centuries.” In Roman Coins outside the Empire: Ways and
     Phases, Contexts and Functions, 295–­307. Edited by Aleksander Bursche, Renata
     Ciołek, and Reinhard Wolters. Collection Moneta 82. Wetteren: Moneta, 2008.
Gui, Isabelle, Noël Duval, and Jean-­Pierre Caillet. Basiliques chrétiennes d’Afrique du
     Nord: Inventaire d’Algérie. 2 vols. Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 1992.
Guidobaldi, Federico. “Le domus tardoantiche di Roma come ‘sensori’ delle trasfor­
     mazioni culturali e sociali.” In The Transformations of Vrbs Roma in Late Antiquity,
     53–­68. Edited by W. V. Harris. Journal of Roman Archaeology: Supplementary
     Series 33. Portsmouth, RI: Journal of Roman Archaeology, 1999.
———. “La fondazione delle basiliche titolari di Roma nel IV e V secolo: Assenze e
     presenze nel Liber Pontificalis.” In Atti del colloquio internazionale Il Liber
     Pontificalis e la storia materiale, 5–­12. Edited by Herman Geertman. Medelingen
     van het Nederlands Instituut te Rome: Antiquity 60–­61. Assen: Van Gorcum,
     2003.
Gutilla, Joseph A. “Dalla Capua di Ausonio (Roma altera quondam) alla Nola di
     Paolino (post urbem titulos sortitus secundos).” Journal of Early Christian Studies
     12 (2004): 523–­36.
Gutsfeld, Andreas. “Kirche und civitas in der Spätantike: Augustin und die Einheit von
     Stadt und Land in Hippo Regius.” In Die spätantike Stadt und ihre Christianisie­
     rung, 135–­44. Edited by Gunnar Brands and Hans-­Georg Severin. Wiesbaden:
     Reichert, 2003.
Gutton, Jean Pierre. La société et les pauvres: L’exemple de la généralité de Lyon,
     1534–­1789. Paris: Belles Lettres, 1971.
Guyon, Jean. Le cimetière “Aux deux lauriers”: Recherches sur les catacombes romaines.
     Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises d’Athènes et de Rome 264. Rome: École
     française de Rome, 1987.
———. “Damase et l’illustration des martyrs: Les accents de la dévotion et l’enjeu
     d’une pastorale.” In Martyrium in Multidisciplinary Perspective: Memorial Louis
     Reekmans, 157–­77. Edited by Mathijs Lamberigts and Peter van Deun. Louvain:
     Peeters, 1995.
———. “L’oeuvre de Damase dans le cimetière ‘Aux deux lauriers’ sur la Via Labicana.”
     In Saecularia Damasiana, 227–­58. Studi di Antichità Cristiana 39. Vatican:
     Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 1986.
———. “La topographie chrétienne des villes de la Gaule.” In Die Stadt in der
     Spätantike—­Niedergang oder Wandel? 105–­28. Edited by Jens-­Uwe Krause and
     Christian Witschel. Historia Einzelschriften 190. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2006.
Haas, Jochen. Die Umweltkrise des 3. Jahrhunderts n. Chr. im Nordwesten des Imperium
     Romanum. Geographica Historica 22. Stuttgart: Steiner, 2006.
Habicht, Christian. “Spätantikes Epigram aus Demetrias.” In Demetrias, 199–­203.
     Edited by V. Milojčić and D. Theocharis. Bonn: R. Habelt, 1976.
Haensch, Rudolf. “Le financement de la construction des églises pendant l’Antiquité
     tardive et l’évergétisme antique.” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 47–­58.


                                          679
                                     works cited


Hagemann, Hans Rudolf. Die Stellung der Piae Causae nach justinianischem Rechte.
    Basler Studien zur Rechtsgeschichte 37. Basel: Helbing and Lichtenhahn, 1953.
Hagendahl, Harald. Augustine and the Latin Classics. 2 vols. Studia Graeca et Latina
    Gothoburgensia 20. Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1967.
Haldon, John. “Comes horreorum—­Komès tès Lamias.” Byzantine and Modern Greek
    Studies 10 (1986): 203–­9.
Halperin, Charles J. Russia and the Golden Horde: The Mongol Impact on Medieval
    Russian History. London: Tauris, 1985.
Halsall, Guy. Barbarian Migrations and the Roman West, 376–­568. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2007.
———. “The Technique of Barbarian Settlement in the Fifth Century: A Reply to
    Walter Goffart.” Journal of Late Antiquity 3 (2010): 99–­112.
Hammond, Caroline P. “The Last Ten Years of Rufinus’s Life and the Date of His Move
    South from Aquileia.” Journal of Theological Studies, n.s., 28 (1977): 372–­429.
Handley, Mark A. Death, Society and Culture: Inscriptions and Epitaphs in Gaul and
    Spain, AD 300–­750. BAR International Series 1135. Oxford: British Archaeologi-
    cal Reports, 2003.
———. “Two Hundred and Sixty-­Four Addenda and Corrigenda to PLRE from the
    Latin-­Speaking Balkans.” Journal of Late Antiquity 3 (2010): 113–­57.
Hanfmann, George M. A. The Season Sarcophagus in Dumbarton Oaks. 2 vols. Cam-
    bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1951.
Hannestad, Niels. Tradition in Late Antique Sculpture: Conservation, Modernization,
    Production. Acta Jutlandica 69:2. Aarhus, Denmark: Aarhus University Press, 1994.
Hanoune, Roger. “Le paganisme philosophique de l’aristocratie municipale.” In
    L’Afrique dans l’Occident romain (Ier siècle av. J.-­C.–­IVe siècle ap. J.-­C.), 63–­75.
    Collection de l’École française de Rome 134. Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1990.
Hardt, Matthias. Gold und Herrschaft: Die Schätze europäischer Könige und Fürsten im
    ersten Jahrtausend. Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2004.
Harlow, Mary. “Clothes Maketh the Man: Power Dressing and Elite Masculinity in the
    Later Roman World.” In Gender in the Early Medieval World: East and West,
    300–­900, 44–­69. Edited by Leslie Brubaker and Julia M. H. Smith. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Harper, Kyle. “The Greek Census Inscriptions of Late Antiquity.” Journal of Roman
    Studies 98 (2008): 83–­119.
Harries, Jill. “Christianity and the City in Late Roman Gaul.” In The City in Late
    Antiquity, 77–­98. Edited by John Rich. London: Routledge, 1992.
———. “Favor populi: Pagans, Christians and Public Entertainment in Late Antique
    Italy.” In “Bread and Circuses”: Euergetism and Municipal Patronage in Roman
    Italy, 125–­41. Edited by Kathryn Lomas and Tim Cornell. London: Routledge,
    2003.
———. Law and Empire in Late Antiquity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
    1999.
———. Sidonius Apollinaris and the Fall of Rome, AD 407–­485. Oxford: Clarendon,
    1994.


                                            680
                              secondary sources


———. “‘Treasure in Heaven’: Property and Inheritance among Senators of Late Rome.”
    In Marriage and Property, 54–­70. Edited by Elizabeth M. Craik. Aberdeen:
    University of Aberdeen Press, 1984.
Harris, W. V. Introduction to The Transformations of Vrbs Roma in Late Antiquity,
    9–­14. Edited by W. V. Harris. Journal of Roman Archaeology: Supplementary
    Series 33. Portsmouth, RI: Journal of Roman Archaeology, 1999.
Hartmann, Götz. Selbststigmatisierung und Charisma christlicher Heiliger der Spätan­
    tike. Studien und Texte zu Antike und Christentum 38. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck,
    2006.
Hays, Gregory. “Romuleis Libicisque litteris: Fulgentius and the ‘Vandal Renaissance.’”
    In Vandals, Romans and Berbers: New Perspectives on Late Antique North Africa,
    101–­32. Edited by A. H. Merrills. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.
Head, Thomas. “The Early Medieval Transformation of Piety.” In The Long Morning of
    Medieval Europe: New Directions in Early Medieval Studies, 155–­60. Edited by
    Jennifer R. Davis and Michael McCormick. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008.
Heather, Peter. “Elite Militarisation and the Post-­Roman West.” In Istituzioni, carismi
    ed esercizio del potere (IV–­VI secolo d.C.), 145–­65. Edited by Giorgio Bonamente
    and Rita Lizzi Testa. Bari: Edipuglia 2010.
———. The Fall of the Roman Empire: A New History of Rome and the Barbarians.
    Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
———. “New Men for New Constantines? Creating an Imperial Elite in the Eastern
    Mediterranean.” In New Constantines: The Rhythm of Imperial Renewal in
    Byzantium, 4th–­13th Centuries, 11–­34. Edited by Paul Magdalino. Aldershot:
    Variorum, 1994.
———. “Senators and Senates.” In The Cambridge Ancient History. Vol. 13, The Late
    Empire, A.D. 337–­425, 184–­210. Edited by Averil Cameron and Peter Garnsey.
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
———. “Why Did the Barbarians Cross the Rhine?” Journal of Late Antiquity 2 (2009):
    3–­29.
Hedrick, Charles. History and Silence: Purge and Rehabilitation of Memory in Late
    Antiquity. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2000.
Heijmans, Marc. Arles durant l’Antiquité tardive: De la duplex Arelas à l’urbs Genesii.
    Collection de l’École française de Rome 324. Rome: École française de Rome,
    2004.
Heinen, Heinz. “Reichstreue nobiles im zerstörten Trier.” Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und
    Epigraphik 131 (2000): 271–­78.
———. Trier und das Trevererland in römischer Zeit. Trier: Spee, 1985.
Heinzelmann, Martin. “The ‘Affair’ of Hilary of Arles (445) and Gallo-­Roman Identity
    in the Fifth Century.” In Fifth-­Century Gaul: A Crisis of Identity? 239–­51. Edited
    by John Drinkwater and Hugh Elton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
    1992.
———. Bischofsherrschaften in Gallien: Zur Kontinuität römischer Führungsschichten
    vom 4. bis 7. Jahrhundert. Beihefte der Francia 5. Munich: Artemis Verlag,
    1976.


                                          681
                                  works cited


Heinzelmann, Martin. “Gallische Prosopographie, 260–­527.” Francia 10 (1982):
     531–­718.
———. Gregory of Tours: History and Society in the Sixth Century. Translated by
     Christopher Carroll. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001. Originally
     published as Gregor von Tours (538–­594): “Zehn Bücher Geschichte.” Historiogra­
     phie und Gesellschaftskonzept im 6. Jahrhundert. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
     Buchgesellschaft, 1994.
Hen, Yitzhak. Roman Barbarians: The Royal Court and Culture in the Early Medieval
     West. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave MacMillan, 2007.
Henig, Martin, and Grahame Soffe. “The Thruxton Roman Villa and Its Mosaic
     Pavement.” Journal of the British Archaeological Association 146 (1993): 1–­28.
Herbert de la Portbarré-­Viard, Gaëlle. Descriptions monumentales et discours sur
     l’édification chez Paulin de Nole: Le regard et la lumière (epist. 32 et carm. 27
     et 28). Supplements to Vigiliae Christianae 79. Leiden: Brill, 2006.
Herrschaft und Kirche: Beiträge zur Entstehung und Wirkungskreise episkopaler und
     monastischer Organisationsformen. Edited by Friedrich Prinz. Stuttgart: Hierse-
     mann, 1988.
Hess, Hamilton. The Early Development of Canon Law and the Council of Serdica.
     Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.
Hillner, Julia. “Clerics, Property and Patronage: The Case of the Roman Titular
     Churches.” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 59–­68.
———. “Domus, Family, and Inheritance: The Senatorial Family House in Late Antique
     Rome.” Journal of Roman Studies 93 (2003): 129–­145.
———. “Families, Patronage and the Titular Churches of Rome, c. 300–­c. 600.” In
     Religion, Dynasty and Patronage in Early Christian Rome, 300–­900, 225–­261.
     Edited by Kate Cooper and Julia Hillner. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press, 2007.
Himmelfarb, Gertrude. “The Culture of Poverty.” In vol. 2 of The Victorian City:
     Images and Realities, 707–­36. Edited by H. J. Dyos and Michael Wolff. London:
     Routledge; Boston: Kegan Paul, 1973.
Hippone. Edited by Xavier Delestre. Aix-­en-­Provence: Édisud, 2005.
Hispania in Late Antiquity: Current Perspectives. Edited by Kim Bowes and Michael
     Kulikowski. Leiden: Brill, 2005.
Hitchner, Robert Bruce. “The Kasserine Archaeological Survey, 1982–­1985.” Africa
     11–­12 (1992–­93): 158–­259.
———. “The Kasserine Archaeological Survey, 1982–­1986.” Antiquités africaines 24
     (1988): 7–­41.
———. “The Kasserine Archaeological Survey, 1987.” Antiquités africaines 26 (1990):
     231–­59.
Hodges, Richard, and David Whitehouse. Mohammed, Charlemagne and the Origins of
     Europe: Archaeology and the Pirenne Thesis. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
     1983.
Hoek, Annewies van den. “Peter, Paul and a Consul: Recent Discoveries in African Red
     Slip Ware.” Zeitschrift für Antikes Christentum 9 (2005): 197–­246.


                                         682
                               secondary sources


Hoek, Annewies van den, and John J. Herrmann. “Paulinus of Nola, Courtyards, and
    Canthari.” Harvard Theological Review 93 (2000): 173–­219.
Holloway, R. Ross. Constantine and Rome. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004.
Hombert, Pierre-­Marie. Nouvelles recherches de chronologie augustinienne. Paris: Institut
    d’Études Augustiniennes, 2000.
Hopkins, Keith M. “Christian Number and Its Implications.” Journal of Early Christian
    Studies 6 (1998): 185–­226.
———. Death and Renewal. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Horden, Peregrine, and Nicholas Purcell. The Corrupting Sea: A Study of Mediterranean
    History. Oxford: Blackwell, 2000.
Horn, Cornelia B. Asceticism and Christological Controversy in Fifth-­Century Palestine:
    The Career of Peter the Iberian. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Housing in Late Antiquity: From Palaces to Shops. Edited by Luke Lavan, Lale Özgenel,
    and Alexander Sarantis. Late Antique Archaeology 3.2. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Hübner, Sabine. Der Klerus in der Gesellschaft des spätantiken Kleinasiens. Stuttgart:
    F. Steiner, 2006.
Hudák, Krisztina, and Levente Nagy. A Fine and Private Place: Discovering the Early
    Christian Cemetery of Sopiane/Pécs. Heritage Booklets 6. Pécs: Örökség Ház, 2009.
Hugoniot, Christophe. “Les acclamations dans la vie municipale tardive et la critique
    augustinienne des violences lors des spectacles africains.” In Idéologies et valeurs
    civiques dans le monde romain: Hommage à Claude Lepelley, 179–­87. Edited by
    Hervé Inglebert. Nanterre: Picard, 2002.
———. Les spectacles de l’Afrique romaine: Une culture officielle municipale sous l’empire
    romain. 3 vols. Lille: Atelier National de Réproduction de Thèses, 2003.
Humana sapit: Études d’Antiquité Tardive offeres à Lellia Cracco Ruggini. Edited by
    Jean-­Michel Carrié and Rita Lizzi Testa. Bibliothèque d’Antiquité Tardive 3.
    Turnhout: Brepols, 2002.
Humphreys, John H. Roman Circuses: Arenas for Chariot Racing. Berkeley: University
    of California Press, 1986.
Humphries, Mark. Communities of the Blessed: Social Environment and Religious
    Change in Northern Italy, AD 200–­400. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Hunt, E. D. “Imperial Building at Rome: The Role of Constantine.” In “Bread and
    Circuses”: Euergetism and Municipal Patronage in Roman Italy, 57–­76. Edited by
    Kathryn Lomas and Tim Cornell. London: Routledge, 2003.
Hunter, David G. Marriage, Celibacy, and Heresy in Ancient Christianity: The Jovinian­
    ist Controversy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
———. “Rereading the Jovinianist Controversy: Asceticism and Clerical Authority in
    Late Ancient Christianity.” In The Cultural Turn in Late Ancient Studies: Gender,
    Asceticism, and Historiography, 119–­35. Edited by Dale B. Martin and Patricia C.
    Miller. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2005.
———. “Resistance to the Virginal Ideal in Late-­Fourth-­Century Rome: The Case of
    Jovinian.” Theological Studies 48 (1987): 45–­64.
———. “The Significance of Ambrosiaster.” Journal of Early Christian Studies 17
    (2009): 1–­26.


                                           683
                                    works cited


Hunter, David G. “Vigilantius of Calagurris and Victricius of Rouen: Ascetics, Relics,
      and Clerics in Late Roman Gaul.” Journal of Early Christian Studies 7 (1999):
      401–­30.
Hwang, Alexander Y. Intrepid Lover of Perfect Grace: The Life and Thought of Prosper of
      Aquitaine. Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2009.
Iannacone, Laurence R. “Skewness Explained: A Rational Choice Model of Religious
      Giving.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 36 (1997): 141–­57.
Idéologies et valeurs civiques dans le monde romain: Hommage à Claude Lepelley. Edited
      by Hervé Inglebert. Nanterre: Picard, 2002.
Inglebert, Hervé. Histoire de la civilisation romaine. In collaboration with Pierre Gros
      and Gilles Sauron. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2005.
———. Les romains chrétiens face à l’histoire de Rome: Histoire, christianisme et
      romanités en Occident dans l’Antiquité tardive (IIIe–­Ve siècles). Paris: Institut
      d’Études Augustiniennes, 1996.
Istituzioni, carismi ed esercizio del potere (IV–­VI secolo d.C.). Edited by Giorgio
      Bonamente and Rita Lizzi Testa. Bari: Edipuglia, 2010.
Jacob, Paul-­André. La vie d’Hilaire d’Arles. SC 404. Paris: Le Cerf, 1995.
Jacobs, Martin. Die Institution des jüdischen Patriarchen. Texte und Studien zum
      Antiken Judentum 52. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1995.
Jacques, François. “Le défenseur de cité d’après la Lettre 22* de saint Augustin.” Revue
      des études augustiniennes 32 (1986): 5–­73.
———. “L’ordine senatorio attraverso la crisi del III secolo.” In Società romana e impero
      tardoantico. Edited by Andrea Giardina. Vol. 1, Istituzioni, ceti, economie, 81–­225.
      Bari: Laterza, 1986.
———. Le privilège de liberté: Politique impériale et autonomie municipale dans les cités
      de l’Occident romain (161–­244). Collection de l’école française de Rome 76. Rome:
      Palais Farnèse, 1984.
Jaïdi, Houcine. “Remarques sur la constitution des biens des églises africaines à l’époque
      romaine tardive.” In Splendidissima civitas: Études d’histoire romaine en hommage à
      François Jacques, 169–­91. Edited by André Chastagnol, Ségolène Demougin, and
      Claude Lepelley. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne, 1996.
James, Edward. “Bede and the Tonsure Question.” Peritia 3 (1984): 85–­98.
James, N. W. “Leo the Great and Prosper of Aquitaine: A Fifth-­Century Pope and His
      Adviser.” Journal of Theological Studies 44 (1993): 554–­84.
Janes, Dominic. God and Gold in Late Antiquity. Cambridge: Cambridge University
      Press, 1998.
Jasper, Detlev, and Horst Fuhrmann. Papal Letters in the Early Middle Ages. Washing-
      ton, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2001.
Jenal, Georg. Italia ascetica atque monastica: Das Asketen-­und Mönchtum in Italien von
      den Anfängen bis zur Zeit der Langobarden (ca. 150/250–­604). 2 vols. Stuttgart:
      A. Hiersemann, 1995.
Jerome of Stridon: His Life, Writings and Legacy. Edited by Andrew Cain and Josef
      Lössl. Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2009.



                                           684
                               secondary sources


Johnson, Mark J. The Roman Imperial Mausoleum in Late Antiquity. Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Johnson, Stephen. Later Roman Britain. London: Paladin, 1982.
Jones, A.H.M. The Later Roman Empire: A Social, Economic and Administrative Survey,
      284–­602. 2 vols. Oxford: Blackwell, 1964.
———. “The Social Background of the Struggle between Paganism and Christianity.”
      In The Conflict between Paganism and Christianity in the Fourth Century, 17–­37.
      Edited by Arnaldo Momigliano. Oxford: Clarendon, 1963.
Jones, Allen E. Social mobility in Late Antique Gaul: Strategies and Opportunities for the
      Non-­Elite. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Jones, Christopher P. New Heroes in Antiquity: From Achilles to Antinoos. Cambridge,
      MA: Harvard University Press, 2010.
Jullian, Camille. Histoire de la Gaule. 2 vols. Paris: Hachette, 1993.
Jussen, Bernhard. Name der Witwe: Erkundungen zur Semantik der mittelalterlichen
      Busskultur. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 2000.
Just, Patricia. Imperator et Episcopus: Zum Verhältnis vom Staatsgewalt und christlicher
      Kirche zwischen dem 1. Konzil von Nicaea (325) und dem 1. Konzil von Konstanti­
      nopel. Potsdamer Altertumswissenschaftliche Beiträge 8. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2003.
Kabiersch, Jürgen. Untersuchungen zum Begriff der Philanthropia bei dem Kaiser Julian.
      Klassisch-­Philosophische Studien 21. Wiesbaden: Harassowitz, 1960.
Kahlos, Maijastina. “Vettius Agorius Praetextatus and the Rivalry between the Bishops
      in Rome in 366–­367.” Arctos 31 (1997): 41–­54.
Kasper, Clemens M. Theologie und Askese: Die Spiritualität des Inselmönchtums von
      Lérins im 5. Jahrhundert. Beiträge zur Geschichte des Alten Mönchtums und des
      Benediktinertums 40. Münster: Aschendorff, 1991.
Kaster, Robert A. Emotion, Restraint, and Community in Ancient Rome. London:
      Oxford University Press, 2005.
———. Guardians of Language: The Grammarian and Society in Late Antiquity.
      Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988.
Die Katakombe “Commodilla”: Repertorium der Malereien. Edited by Johannes Georg
      Deckers, Gabriele Mietke, and Albrecht Weiland. 3 vols. Roma Sotteranea
      Cristiana 10. Vatican: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana, 1994.
Kelly, Christopher. Review of God and Gold in Late Antiquity by Dominic Janes.
      Journal of Roman Studies 89 (1999): 253–­54.
———. Ruling the Later Roman Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
      2004.
Kessler, Andreas. Reichtumskritik und Pelagianismus: Die pelagianische Diatribe De
      divitiis. Situierung, Lesetext, Übertsetzung, Kommentar. Paradosis 43. Freiburg,
      Switzerland: Universitätsverlag, 1999.
Kettering, Sharon. Patrons, Brokers, and Clients in Seventeenth-­Century France. Oxford:
      Oxford University Press, 1986.
Khoury, Dina Rizk. State and Provincial Society in the Ottoman Empire: Mosul,
      1540–­1834. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.



                                           685
                                   works cited


Kiely, Maria M. “The Interior Courtyard: The Heart of Cimitile/Nola.” Journal of
     Early Christian Studies 12 (2004): 443–­97.
Kieschnick, John. The Impact of Buddhism on Chinese Material Culture. Princeton:
     Princeton University Press, 2003.
Kinney, Dale. “First-­Generation Diptychs in the Discourse of Visual Culture.” In
     Spätantike und byzantinische Elfenbeinbildwerke im Diskurs, 149–­66. Edited by
     Gudrun Bühl, Anthony Cutler, and Arbe Effenberger. Wiesbaden: Reichert, 2008.
Klingshirn, William. Caesarius of Arles: The Making of a Christian Community in Late
     Antique Gaul. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
———. “Charity and Power: Caesarius of Arles and the Ransoming of Captives in
     Sub-­Roman Gaul.” Journal of Roman Studies 75 (1985): 183–­203.
Knoch, Stefan. Sklavenfürsorge im Römischen Reich: Formen und Motive. Sklaverei—­
     Knechtschaft—­Zwangsarbeit 2. Hildesheim: G. Olms, 2005.
Kotula, Tadeusz. “Le fond africain de la révolte d’Héraclien en 413.” Antiquités
     africaines 11 (1977): 257–­66.
Kranz, Peter. Jahreszeiten-­Sarkophage: Entwicklung und Ikonographie des Motivs der vier
     Jahreszeiten auf kaiserzeitlichen Sarkophagen und Sarkophagdeckeln. Deutsches
     Archäologisches Institut: Die antiken Sarkophagreliefs. Vol. 5. Part 4. Berlin:
     Mann, 1984.
Krause, Jens-­Uwe. Spätantike Patronatsformen im Westen des römischen Reiches. Vestigia
     38. Munich: C. H. Beck, 1987.
———. “Überlegungen zur Sozialgeschichte des Klerus im 5./6. Jh. n. Chr.” In Die
     Stadt in der Spätantike—­Niedergang oder Wandel? 413–­39. Edited by Jens-­Uwe
     Krause and Christian Witschel. Historia Einzelschriften 190. Stuttgart: F. Steiner,
     2006.
Krautheimer, Richard. “The Architecture of Sixtus III: A Fifth-­Century Renaissance?”
     In De artibus opuscula XL: Essays in Honor of Erwin Panofsky, 291–­302. Edited by
     Millard Meiss. New York: Columbia University Press, 1961.
———. Rome: Profile of a City, 312–­1408. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980.
———. Three Christian Capitals: Topography and Politics. Berkeley: University of
     California Press, 1983.
Kreuzsaler, Claudia. “Ho hierôtatos Nilos auf einer christlichen Nilstandsmarkierung.”
     Journal of Juristic Papyrology 34 (2004): 81–­86.
Kriegbaum, Bernhard. Kirche der Traditoren oder Kirche der Märtyrer? Die Vorgeschichte
     des Donatismus. Innsbruck: Tyrolia, 1986.
Krueger, Derek. Symeon the Holy Fool: Leontius’ Life and the Late Antique City.
     Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.
Kulikowski, Michael. “Barbarians in Gaul, Usurpers in Britain.” Britannia 31 (2000):
     325–­45.
———. Late Roman Spain and Its Cities. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
     2004.
———. “The Visigothic Settlement in Aquitania: The Imperial Perspective.” In Society
     and Culture in Late Antique Gaul: Revisiting the Sources, 26–­38. Edited by Ralph
     Mathisen and Danuta Shanzer. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001.


                                         686
                               secondary sources


Kurdock, Anne. “Demetrias ancilla Dei: Anicia Demetrias and the Problem of the
     Missing Patron.” In Religion, Dynasty and Patronage in Early Christian Rome,
     300–­900, 190–­224. Edited by Kate Cooper and Julia Hillner. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press, 2007.
La Bonnardière, Anne-­Marie. “Les commentaires simultanés de Mat. 6,12 et de 1 Jo. 1,18
     dans l’oeuvre de saint Augustin.” Revue des études augustiniennes 1 (1955): 129–­47.
———. “Les ‘Enarrationes in Psalmos’ prêchées par Saint Augustin à Carthage en
     décembre 409.” Recherches augustiniennes 11 (1976): 52–­90.
———. “Pénitence et réconciliation de pénitents d’après saint Augustin.” Revue des
     études augustiniennes 13 (1967): 31–­53.
Lambert, David. “The Uses of Decay: History in Salvian’s De gubernatione dei.”
     Augustinian Studies 30 (1999): 115–­30.
Lambot, Cyrille. “Lettre inédite de S. Augustin relative au ‘De civitate Dei.’” Revue
     bénédictine 51 (1939): 109–­21.
———. “Nouveaux sermons de saint Augustin.” Revue bénédictine 49 (1937): 233–­78.
Lancel, Serge. Actes de la Conférence de Carthage en 411. 4 vols. SC 194–­95, 224, 373.
     Paris: Le Cerf, 1972–­91.
———. Saint Augustin. Paris: Fayard, 1999. Translated by Antonia Nevill, as Saint
     Augustine. London: SCM Press, 2002.
Landscapes of Change: Rural Evolutions in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages.
     Edited by Neil Christie. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.
Lane Fox, Robin. “Movers and Shakers.” In The Philosopher and Society in Late
     Antiquity: Essays in Honor of Peter Brown, 19–­50. Edited by Andrew Smith.
     Swansea: Classical Press of Wales, 2005.
———. Pagans and Christians. New York: A. Knopf, 1987.
Laniado, Avshalom. “Le christianisme et l’évolution des institutions municipales du
     Bas-­Empire: L’exemple du defensor civitatis.” In Die Stadt in der Spätantike—­
     Niedergang oder Wandel? 319–­34. Edited by Jens-­Uwe Krause and Christian
     Witschel. Historia Einzelschriften 190. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2006.
———. “The Early Byzantine State and the Christian Ideal of Voluntary Poverty.” In
     Charity and Giving in Monotheistic Religions, 15–­43. Edited by Miriam Frenkel
     and Yaacov Lev. Studien zur Geschichte und Kultur des islamischen Orients,
     n. F. 22. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2009.
Late Antiquity: A Guide to the Postclassical World. Edited by G. W. Bowersock, Peter
     Brown, and Oleg Grabar. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.
Laurence, Patrick. Jérôme et le nouveau modèle feminine: La conversion à la “vie parfaite.”
     Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 1997.
———. “Proba, Juliana et Démétrias: Le christianisme des femmes de la gens Anicia
     dans la première moitié du Ve siècle.” Revue des études augustiniennes 48 (2002):
     131–­63.
Lawless, George. Augustine of Hippo and His Monastic Rule. Oxford: Clarendon,
     1987.
Laycock, Stuart. Britannia the Failed State: Tribal Conflicts and the End of Roman
     Britain. Stroud: The History Press, 2008.


                                           687
                                    works cited


Le Roux, Patrick. “L’amor patriae dans les cités sous l’empire romain.” In Idéologies et
     valeurs civiques dans le monde romain: Hommage à Claude Lepelley, 143–­61.
     Edited by Hervé Inglebert. Nanterre: Picard, 2002.
Leader-­Newby, Ruth E. Silver and Society in Late Antiquity: Functions and Meanings
     of Silver Plate in the Fourth to Seventh Centuries. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003.
Lee, A. D. War in Late Antiquity: A Social History. Oxford: Blackwell, 2007.
Lehmann, Tomas. “Martinus und Paulinus in Primuliacum (Gallien): Zu den frühesten
     nachweisbaren Mönchsbildnissen (um 400) in einem Kirchenkomplex.” In Vom
     Kloster zum Klosterverband: Das Werkzeug der Schriftlichkeit, 56–­67. Edited by
     Hagen Keller and Franz Neiske. Munich: W. Fink, 1997.
———. Paulinus Nolanus und die Basilica Nova in Cimitile/Nola: Studien zu einem
     zentralen Denkmal der spätantik-­frühchristlichen Architektur. Wiesbaden:
     P. Reichert, 2004.
———. “Zu Alarichs Beutezug in Campanien: Ein neu entdecktes Gedicht des Paulinus
     Nolanus.” Römische Quartalschrift 93 (1998): 181–­99.
Lendon, John. Empire of Honour: The Art of Government in the Roman World. Oxford:
     Oxford University Press, 1997.
Lenski, Noel. “Captivity, Slavery, and Cultural Exchange between Rome and the
     Germans from the First to the Seventh Century C.E.” In Invisible Citizens:
     Captives and Their Consequences, 80–­109. Edited by Catherine M. Cameron.
     Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 2008.
———. “Valens and the Monks: Cudgeling and Conscription as a Means of Social
     Control.” Dumbarton Oaks Papers 58 (2004): 93–­117.
Leone, Anna. Changing Townscapes in North Africa from Late Antiquity to the Arab
     Conquest. Munera 28. Bari: Edipuglia, 2007.
———. “Clero, proprietà, cristianizzazione delle campagne nel Nord Africa tardoan-
     tica: Status quaestionis.” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 95–­104.
Leone, Anna, and David Mattingly. “Vandal, Byzantine and Arab Rural Landscapes in
     North Africa.” In Landscapes of Change: Rural Evolutions in Late Antiquity and
     the Early Middle Ages, 135–­62. Edited by Neil Christie. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.
Lepelley, Claude. Les cités de l’Afrique romaine au Bas-­Empire. 2 vols. Paris: Études
     Augustiniennes, 1979–­81.
———. “De la réaction païenne à la sécularization.” Cristianesimo e storia 30 (2009):
     423–­39.
———. “Facing Wealth and Poverty: Defining Augustine’s Social Doctrine.” Augustin­
     ian Studies 38 (2007): 1–­18.
———. “Le lieu des valeurs communes: La cité terrain neutre entre païens et chrétiens
     dans l’Afrique de l’Antiquité tardive.” In Idéologies et valeurs civiques dans le monde
     romain: Hommage à Claude Lepelley, 271–­85. Edited by Hervé Inglebert.
     Nanterre: Picard, 2002.
———. “Spes saeculi: Le milieu social d’Augustin et ses ambitions séculières avant
     sa conversion.” In vol. 1 of Congresso internazionale su S. Agostino nel XVI
     centenario della conversione, 99–­117. Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 24.
     Rome: Institutum Pontificium Augustinianum, 1987. Reprinted in Lepelley,


                                           688
                                secondary sources


     Aspects de l’Afrique romaine: Les cités, la vie rurale, le christianisme, 329–­344. Bari:
     Edipuglia, 2001.
Lesne, Émile. Histoire de la propriété ecclésiastique en France. Vol. 1, Époques romaine et
     mérovingienne. Lille: Giard, 1910.
Leveau, Philippe. Caesarea de Maurétanie: Une ville romaine et ses campagnes. Collec-
     tion de l’École française de Rome 70. Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1984.
Leveau, Phillippe, Pierre Sillières, and Jean-­Pierre Valat. Campagnes de la Méditerranée
     romaine: Occident. Paris: Hachette, 1993.
Levison, Wilhelm. “Das Testament des Diakons Adalgisel Grimo vom Jahre 634.”
     Trierer Zeitschrift 7 (1932): 69–­85. Reprinted in Levison, Aus rheinischer und
     fränkischer Frühzeit. Dusseldorf: L. Schwann, 1948.
Lewis, Mark Edward. “Gift Circulation and Charity in the Han and Roman Empires.”
     In Rome and China: Comparative Perspectives on Ancient World Empires, 121–­36.
     Edited by Walter Scheidel. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Lewit, Tamara. “Pigs, Presses and Pastoralism: Farming in the Fifth to Sixth Centuries.”
     Early Medieval Europe 17 (2009): 77–­91.
———. “‘Vanishing Villas’: What Happened to Élite Rural Habitation in the West in
     the 5th–­6th C.?” Journal of Roman Archaeology 16 (2003): 260–­74.
Leyser, Conrad. Authority and Asceticism from Augustine to Gregory the Great. Oxford:
     Clarendon, 2000.
———. “Semi-­Pelagianism.” In Augustine through the Ages: An Encyclopedia, 761–­66.
     Edited by Allan D. Fitzgerald. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1999.
———. “‘This Sainted Isle’: Panegyric, Nostalgia and the Invention of Lerinian
     Monasticism.” In The Limits of Ancient Christianity: Essays on Late Antique
     Thought and Culture in Honor of R. A. Markus, 188–­206. Edited by William E.
     Klingshirn and Mark Vessey. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1999.
Liebeschuetz, J.W.H.G. Barbarians and Bishops: Army, Church, and State in the Age of
     Arcadius and Chrysostom. Oxford: Clarendon, 1990.
———. The Decline and Fall of the Roman City. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
———. Ambrose and John Chrysostom: Clerics between Desert and Empire. Oxford:
     Oxford University Press, 2011.
———, with the assistance of Carole Hill. Ambrose of Milan: Political Letters and
     Speeches. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2006.
Liebs, Detlef. Römische Jurisprudenz in Gallien (2. bis 8. Jahrhundert). Berlin: Duncker
     and Humblot, 2002.
Lieu, Samuel N. C. Manichaeism in the Later Roman Empire and Medieval China. 2nd
     ed. Tübingen: Mohr, 1992.
Lim, Richard. Public Disputation, Power, and Social Order in Late Antiquity. The
     Transformation of the Classical Heritage 23. Berkeley: University of California
     Press, 1995.
———. “The Roman Pantomime Riot of A.D. 509.” In Humana sapit: Études
     d’Antiquité Tardive offeres à Lellia Cracco Ruggini, 35–­42. Edited by Jean-­Michel
     Carrié and Rita Lizzi Testa. Bibliothèque d’Antiquité Tardive 3. Turnhout:
     Brepols, 2002.


                                             689
                                    works cited


Lim, Richard. “Unity and Diversity among the Western Manichaeans: A Reconsidera-
     tion of Mani’s sancta ecclesia.” Revue des études augustiniennes 35 (1989): 231–50.
Linder, Amnon, ed. and trans. The Jews in Roman Imperial Legislation. Detroit: Wayne
     State University Press; Jersusalem: Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities,
     1987.
Liu, Xinru. Silk and Religion: An Exploration of Material Life and the Thought of People,
     AD 600–­1200. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Liverani, Paolo. “Saint Peter’s, Leo the Great and the Leprosy of Constantine.” Papers of
     the British School at Rome 76 (2008): 155–­72.
Lizzi, Rita. “Ambrose’s Contemporaries and the Christianization of Northern Italy.”
     Journal of Roman Studies 80 (1990): 156–­73.
———. “Una società esortata all’ascetismo: Misure legislative e motivazioni economiche
     nel IV–V secolo d.C.” Studi Storici 30 (1989): 129–­53.
———. Vescovi e strutture ecclesiastiche nella città tardoantica (L’Italia annonaria nel
     IV–­V secolo d.C). Biblioteca di Athenaeum 9. Como: New Press, 1989.
Lizzi Testa, Rita. “Alle origini della tradizione pagana su Costantino e il senato
     romano.” In Transformations of Late Antiquity: Essays for Peter Brown, 85–­127.
     Edited by Philip Rousseau and Manolis Papoutsakis. Farnham, UK: Ashgate,
     2009.
———. “Christian Emperor, Vestal Virgins and Priestly Colleges: Reconsidering the
     End of Roman Paganism.” Antiquité tardive 15 (2007): 251–­62.
———. “L’Église, les domini, les païens rustici: Quelques stratégies pour la christianisa-
     tion del’Occident (IVe–­VIe s.).” In Le problème de la christianisation du monde
     antique, 77–­113. Edited by Hervé Inglebert, Sylvain Destephen, and Bruno
     Dumézil. Paris: Picard, 2010.
———. “Insula ipsa Libanus Almae Veneris nuncupatur: Culti, celebrazioni, sacerdoti
     pagani a Roma, tra IV e VI secolo.” In Istituzioni, carismi ed esercizio del potere
     (IV–­VI secolo d.C.), 273–­303. Edited by Giorgio Bonamente and Rita Lizzi Testa.
     Bari: Edipuglia 2010.
———. “Privilegi economici e definizione di status: Il caso del vescovo cristiano.”
     Rendiconti dell’Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei: Classe di scienze morali, storiche e
     filologiche, ser. 9, no. 11 (2000): 55–­103.
———. Senatori, popolo, papi: Il governo di Roma al tempo dei Valentiniani. Bari:
     Edipuglia, 2004.
———. “Vergini di Dio—­Vergini di Vesta: Il sesso negato e la sacralità.” In L’Eros
     difficile: Amore e sessualità nell’antico cristianesimo, 89–­132. Edited by Salvatore
     Pricoco. Catanzaro: Rubettino, 1998.
Llewellyn, P.A.B. “The Roman Church during the Laurentian Schism: Priests and
     Senators.” Church History 45 (1976): 417–­27.
Lo Cascio, Elio. “Canon frumentarius, suarius, vinarius: Stato e privati
     nell’approvvigionamento dell’Vrbs.” In The Transformations of Vrbs Roma in Late
     Antiquity, 163–­82. Edited by W. V. Harris. Journal of Roman Archaeology:
     Supplementary Series 33. Portsmouth, RI: Journal of Roman Archaeology, 1999.



                                          690
                              secondary sources


Loening, Edgar. Geschichte des deutschen Kirchenrechts. Vol. 1, Das Kirchenrecht in
     Gallien von Constantin bis Chlodovech. Strassburg: Trübner, 1878.
The Long Morning of Medieval Europe: New Directions in Early Medieval Studies.
     Edited by Jennifer R. Davis and Michael McCormick. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008.
Lorenz, Rudolf. “Der Augustinismus Prospers von Aquitanien.” Zeitschrift für
     Kirchengeschichte 73 (1962): 217–­52.
Loseby, Simon T. “Arles in Late Antiquity: Gallula Roma Arelas and Urbs Genesii.”
     In Towns in Transition: Urban Evolution in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle
     Ages, 45–­70. Edited by Neil Christie and Simon T. Loseby. Aldershot: Scolar,
     1996.
———. “Bishops and Cathedrals: Order and Diversity in the Fifth-­Century Urban
     Landscape in Gaul.” In Fifth-­Century Gaul: A Crisis of Identity? 144–­55. Edited
     by John Drinkwater and Hugh Elton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
     1992.
———. “Decline and Change in the Cities of Late Antique Gaul.” In Die Stadt in der
     Spätantike—­Niedergang oder Wandel? 67–­104. Edited by Jens-­Uwe Krause and
     Christian Witschel. Historia Einzelschriften 190. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2006.
———. “Marseille: A Late Antique Success Story?” Journal of Roman Studies 82 (1992):
     165–­85.
Lössl, Josef. “Julian of Aeclanum on Pain.” Journal of Early Christian Studies 10 (2002):
     203–­43.
———. Julian von Aeclanum: Studien zu seinem Leben, seinem Werk, seiner Lehre und
     ihrer Überlieferung. Supplements to Vigiliae Christianae 60. Leiden: Brill, 2001.
Lot, Ferdinand. The End of the Ancient World and the Beginnings of the Middle Ages.
     New York: Knopf, 1931.
Lovejoy, Arthur O., and George Boas. Primitivism and Related Ideas in Antiquity. Vol. 1
     of A Documentary History of Primitivism and Related Ideas. Edited by Arthur
     Lovejoy and George Boas. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1935.
Lowden, John. “The Beginnings of Biblical Illustration.” In Imaging the Early Medieval
     Bible, 9–­55. Edited by John Williams. University Park: Pennsylvania State
     University Press, 1999.
Löx, Markus. “Die Kirche San Lorenzo in Mailand: Eine Stiftung des Stilicho?”
     Mitteilungen des deutschen archäologischen Instituts: Römische Abteilung 114
     (2008): 407–­38.
Lugaresi, Leonardo. “Regio aliena: L’atteggiamento della chiesa verso i luoghi di
     spettacolo nelle città tardoantiche.” Antiquité tardive 15 (2007): 21–­34.
Lunn-­Rockliffe, Sophie. Ambrosiaster’s Political Theology. Oxford: Oxford University
     Press, 2007.
———. “A Pragmatic Approach to Poverty and Riches: Ambrosiaster’s Quaestio 124.”
     In Poverty in the Roman World, 115–­29. Edited by Margaret Atkins and Robin
     Osborne. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Luongo, Gennaro. Lo specchio dell’agiografo: San Felice nei carmi XV e XVI di Paolino
     di Nola. Naples: Tempi Moderni, 1992.



                                          691
                                    works cited


Lüthi, Max. The European Folktale: Form and Nature. Translated by John D. Niles.
     Bloomington: University of Indiana Press, 1982.
Lutterbach, Hubertus. Monachus factus est: Die Mönchwerdung im frühen Mittelalter.
     Beiträge zur Geschichte des alten Mönchtums und des Benediktinertums.
     Münster: Aschendorff, 1995.
Maas, Michael. “Ethnicity, Orthodoxy and Community in Salvian of Marseilles.” In
     Fifth-­Century Gaul: A Crisis of Identity? 275–­84. Edited by John Drinkwater and
     Hugh Elton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
MacCormack, Sabine. “Sin, Citizenship and the Salvation of Souls: The Impact of
     Christian Priorities on Late Roman and Post-­Roman Society.” Comparative Studies
     in Society and History 39 (1997): 644–­73.
MacGeorge, Penny. Late Roman Warlords. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.
Machado, Carlos. “Building the Past: Monuments and Memory in the Forum Roma-
     num.” In Social and Political Life in Late Antiquity, 157–­92. Late Antique
     Archaeology 3:1. Edited by Will Bowden, Adam Gutteridge, and Carlos Machado.
     Leiden: Brill, 2006.
———. “The City as Stage: Aristocratic Commemoration in Late Antique Rome.” In
     Les frontières du profane dans l’antiquité tardive, 287–­317. Edited by Éric Rebillard
     and Claire Sotinel. Collection de l’École française de Rome 428. Rome: École
     française de Rome, 2010.
———. “Roman Aristocrats and the Christianization of Rome.” In Pagans and Christians
     in the Roman Empire (IVth–­VIth Century A.D.): The Breaking of a Dialogue,
     493–­513. Proceedings of the International Conference at the Monastery of Bosé,
     October 2008. Edited by Peter Brown and Rita Lizzi Testa. Münster: Lit, 2011.
MacMullen, Ramsay. Changes in the Roman Empire: Essays in the Ordinary. Princeton:
     Princeton University Press, 1990.
———. “The Preacher’s Audience (AD 350–­400).” Journal of Theological Studies 40
     (1989): 503–­11.
———. Roman Social Relations, 50 B.C. to A.D. 284. New Haven, CT: Yale University
     Press, 1974.
———. “Some Pictures in Ammianus Marcellinus.” Art Bulletin 46 (1964): 435–­55.
     Reprinted in Changes in the Roman Empire: Essays in the Ordinary.
———. “What Difference Did Christianity Make?” Historia 35 (1986): 322–­43.
     Reprinted in Changes in the Roman Empire: Essays in the Ordinary.
Madec, Goulven. “Le communisme spirituel.” In Homo Spiritalis: Festgabe für Luc
     Verheijen, 225–­39. Edited by Cornelius Mayer. Würzburg: Augustinus, 1987.
     Reprinted in Madec, Petites Études Augustiniennes, 215–­31. Paris: Institut
     d’Études Augustiniennes, 1994.
Magalhães de Oliveira, Júlio César. “Le ‘pouvoir du peuple’: Une émeute à Hippone
     au début du Ve siècle connue par le sermon 302 de Saint Augustin pour la fête de
     Saint Laurent.” Antiquité tardive 12 (2004): 309–­24.
———. “Vt maiores pagani non sint! Pouvoir, iconoclasme et action populaire à
     Carthage au début du Ve siècle.” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 245–­62.



                                           692
                               secondary sources


Magnani, Eliana. “Almsgiving, donatio pro anima and Eucharistic Offering in the Early
    Middle Ages of Western Europe (4th–­9th Century).” In Charity and Giving in
    Monotheistic Religions, 111–­21. Edited by Miriam Frenkel and Yaacov Lev. Studien
    zur Geschichte und Kultur des islamischen Orients, n. F. 22. Berlin: de Gruyter,
    2009.
———. “Du don aux églises au don pour le salut de l’âme en Occident (IVe–­XIe siècle):
    Le paradigme eucharistique.” In Pratiques de l’eucharistie dans les Églises d’Orient et
    Occident (Antiquité et Moyen Âge), 1021–­42. Edited by Nicole Bériou, Béatrice
    Caseau, and Dominique Rigaux. Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 2009.
Magness, Jodi. “The Date of the Sardis Synagogue in the Light of the Numismatic
    Evidence.” American Journal of Archaeology 109 (2005): 443–­75.
Maguire, Henry. “The Good Life.” In Late Antiquity: A Guide to the Postclassical World,
    238–­57. Edited by G. W. Bowersock, Peter Brown, and Oleg Grabar. Cambridge,
    MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.
Maioli, Maria Grazia. “Il complesso archeologico di Via d’Azeglio a Ravenna: Gli edifici
    di epoca tardoimperiale e bizantina.” Corso di cultura sull’arte ravennate e bizantina
    41 (1994): 45–­61.
Malineau, Violaine. “Le théâtre dans les cités de l’Italie tardo-­antique.” In Les cités de
    l’Italie tardo-­antique (IVe–­VIe siècle): Institutions, économie, société, culture et
    religion, 187–­203. Edited by Massimiliano Ghilardi, Christophe J. Goddard, and
    Pierfrancesco Porena. Collection de l’École française de Rome 369. Rome: École
    française de Rome, 2006.
Mancassola, Nicola, and Fabio Saggioro. “La fine delle ville romane: Il territorio tra
    Adda e Adige.” Archeologia medievale 27 (2000): 315–­31.
Mandouze, André. Saint Augustin: L’aventure de la raison et de la grâce. Paris: Études
    Augustiniennes, 1968.
Mann, J. C. Review of Roman Government’s Response to Crisis, A.D. 235–­337, by
    Ramsay MacMullen. Journal of Roman Studies 69 (1979): 191.
Marazzi, Federico. I “Patrimonia Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae” nel Lazio (secoli IV–­X):
    Struttura amministrativa e prassi gestionali. Istituto storico italiano per il Medioevo:
    Nuovi Studi Storici 31. Rome: Palazzo Borromini, 1998.
———. “Rome in Transition: Economic and Political Change in the Fourth and Fifth
    Centuries.” In Early Medieval Rome and the Christian West: Essays in Honour of
    Donald A. Bullough, 21–­41. Edited by Julia M. H. Smith. Leiden: Brill, 2000.
Marcone, Arnaldo. “L’allestimento dei giochi annuali a Roma nel IV secolo d.C.:
    Aspetti economici e ideologici.” Annali della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa,
    Classe di lettere e filosofia, ser. 3, no. 11 (1981): 105–­22. Reprinted in La parte
    migliore del genere umano: Aristocrazie, potere e ideologia nell’Occidente tardoantico,
    293–­311. Edited by Sergio Roda. Turin: Scriptorium, 1994.
———. “Il mondo di Paolino di Pella.” In Di tarda antichità: Scritti scelti, 87–­96. Milan:
    Mondadori, 2008.
Markus, Robert A. “De civitate Dei: Pride and the Common Good.” In Augustine:
    “Second Founder of the Faith,” 245–­59. Edited by Joseph C. Schnaubelt and



                                           693
                                   works cited


    Frederick Van Fleteren. Collectanea Augustiniana. New York: Peter Lang, 1990.
    Reprinted in Markus, Sacred and Secular. Aldershot: Variorum, 1994.
———. The End of Ancient Christianity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
    1990.
———. “The Legacy of Pelagius: Orthodoxy, Heresy and Conciliation.” In The Making
    of Orthodoxy: Essays in Honour of Henry Chadwick, 214–­34. Edited by Rowan
    Williams. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Marrou, Henri-­Irénée. “Le dossier épigraphique de l’évêque Rusticus de Narbonne.”
    Rivista di archeologia cristiana 3–­4 (1970): 331–­49.
———. Introduction to Clément d’Alexandrie: Le pedagogue. Vol. 1. SC 70. Paris: Le
    Cerf, 1960.
———. “Un lieu dit ‘Cité de Dieu.’” In vol. 1 of Augustinus magister, 101–­10. Paris:
    Études Augustiniennes, 1955.
———. Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique: Retractatio. Bibliothèque de l’École
    française d’Athènes et de Rome 145. Paris: Boccard, 1949.
Martin, Jochen. Der Weg zur Ewigkeit führt über Rom: Die Frühgeschichte des Papsttums
    und die Darstellung der neutestamentlichen Heilsgeschichte im Triumphbogenmosaik
    von Santa Maria Maggiore in Rom. Stuttgart: Steiner, 2010.
Marzano, Annalisa. Roman Villas in Central Italy: A Social and Economic History.
    Columbia Studies in the Classical Tradition 30. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Mastrocinque, Attilio. “Magia agraria nell’impero cristiano.” Mediterraneo antico 7
    (2004): 795–­836.
Mathisen, Ralph W. “The Christianization of the Late Roman Senatorial Order:
    Circumstances and Scholarship.” International Journal of the Classical Tradition 9
    (2002): 257–­78.
———. “The Christianization of the Late Roman Senatorial Order bis: A Response to
    Michele Salzman’s ‘Rejoinder’ to Ralph Mathisen’s Review Article.” International
    Journal of the Classical Tradition 14 (2007): 233–­47.
———. Ecclesiastical Factionalism and Religious Controversy in Fifth-­Century Gaul.
    Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1989.
———. “Episcopal Hierarchy and Tenure of Office in Late Roman Gaul: A Method for
    Establishing Dates of Ordination.” Francia 17 (1990): 125–­39.
———. “Nature or Nurture? Some Perspectives on the Gallic Famine of circa A.D.
    470.” Ancient World 24 (1993): 91–­105.
———. “A New Fragment of Augustine’s De nuptiis et concupiscentia from the Codex
    Sangallensis 190.” Zeitschrift für Antikes Christentum 3 (1999): 165–­83.
———. Roman Aristocrats in Barbarian Gaul: Strategies for Survival in an Age of
    Transition. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1993.
Matthews, John F. “Four Funerals and a Wedding: This World and the Next in
    Fourth-­Century Rome.” In Transformations of Late Antiquity: Essays for Peter
    Brown, 129–­46. Edited by Philip Rousseau and Manolis Papoutsakis. Farnham,
    UK: Ashgate, 2009.
———. “The Letters of Symmachus.” In Latin Literature of the Fourth Century, 58–­99.
    Edited by J. W. Binns. London: Routledge, 1974.


                                          694
                              secondary sources


———. Western Aristocracies and Imperial Court, A.D. 364–­425. Oxford: Clarendon,
    1975.
Mattingly, David. “Being Roman: Expressing Identity in a Provincial Setting.” Journal
    of Roman Archaeology 17 (2004): 5–­25.
Mauné, Stéphane. Les campagnes de la cité de Béziers dans l’Antiquité: Partie nord-­
    orientale (IIe s. av. J.-­C.–­VIe s. ap. J.-­C.). Montagnac: Mergoil, 1998.
Mazza, Roberta. “Tra Oriente e Occidente: La gestione del patrimonium Petri in Italia
    meridionale.” In Paesaggi e insediamenti rurali in Italia meridionale fra tardoantico
    e altomedioevo, 703–­15. Edited by Guiliano Volpe and Maria Turchiano. Bari:
    Edipuglia, 2005.
Mazzarino, Santo. Aspetti sociali del quarto secolo. Rome: Bretschneider, 1951.
———. “La propaganda senatoriale nel tardo imperio.” Review of Andreas Alföldi, Die
    Kontorniaten: Ein verkanntes Propagandamittel der Stadt-­römischen heidnischen
    Aristokratie in ihrem Kampfe gegen das christliche Kaisertum. Doxa 4 (1951): 121–­48.
———. Storia sociale del Vescovo Ambrogio. Rome: Bretschneider, 1989.
Mazzoleni, Danilo. “Il lavoro nell’epigrafia Cristiana.” In Epigrafi del mondo cristiano
    antico, 38–­49. Rome: Lateran University Press, 2002.
McCormick, Michael. “Bateaux de vie, bateaux de mort: Maladie, commerce et le
    passage économique du bas-­empire au moyen-­âge.” In Morfologie sociali e culturali
    in Europa fra Tarda Antichità e Alto Medioevo, 35–­118. Settimane i Studi del
    Centro Italiano di Studi sull’Alto Medioevo 45. Spoleto: Centro di Studi sull’Alto
    Medioevo, 1998.
———. Origins of the European Economy: Communications and Commerce, A.D.
    300–­900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
McKinley, Allan Scott. “The First Two Centuries of Saint Martin of Tours.” Early
    Medieval Europe 14 (2006): 173–­200.
McLynn, Neil B. “Administrator: Augustine in His Diocese.” In Companion to
    Augustine. Edited by Mark Vessey. Oxford: Wiley-­Blackwell, forthcoming.
———. Ambrose of Milan: Church and Court in a Christian Capital. Berkeley: Uni­
    versity of California Press, 1994.
———. “Augustine’s Black Sheep: The Case of Antoninus of Fussala.” In Istituzioni,
    carismi ed esercizio del potere (IV–­VI secolo d.C.), 305–­21. Edited by Giorgio
    Bonamente and Rita Lizzi Testa. Bari: Edipuglia 2010.
———. “Augustine’s Roman Empire.” Augustinian Studies 30 (1999): 29–­44.
———. “Crying Wolf: The Pope and the Lupercalia.” Journal of Roman Studies 98
    (2008): 161–­75.
———. “Paulinus the Impenitent: A Study of the Eucharisticos.” Journal of Early
    Christian Studies 2 (1995): 461–­86.
———. “Poetic Creativity and Political Crisis in Early Fifth-­Century Gaul.” Journal of
    Late Antiquity 2 (2009): 60–­74.
———. “Seeing and Believing: Aspects of Conversion from Antoninus Pius to Louis
    the Pious.” In Conversion in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages: Seeing and
    Believing, 224–­70. Edited by Kenneth Mills and Anthony Grafton. Rochester,
    NY: University of Rochester Press, 2003.


                                          695
                                     works cited


McLynn, Neil B. “The Transformation of Imperial Churchgoing in the Fourth
     Century.” In Approaching Late Antiquity: The Transformation from Early to Late
     Empire, 235–­70. Edited by Simon Swain and Mark Edwards. Oxford: Oxford
     University Press, 2004.
Meneghini, Roberto, and Riccardo Santangeli Valenzani. Roma nell’altomedioevo:
     Topografia e urbanistica della città dal V al X secolo. Rome: Libreria dello Stato,
     2004.
Merrills, Andy, and Richard Miles. The Vandals. Chichester, UK: Wiley-­Blackwell,
     2010.
Meslin, Michel. La fête des kalendes de janvier dans l’empire romain: Étude d’un rituel
     de Nouvel An. Brussels: Latomus, 1970.
Meyer, Ulrich. Soziales Handeln im Zeichen des “Hauses”: Zur Ökonomik in der
     Spätantike und im frühen Mittelalter. Göttingen: Vandenhouck and Ruprecht,
     1998.
Michel, Anne. “Aspects du culte dans les églises de Numidie au temps d’Augustin: Un
     état de question.” In Saint Augustin, la Numidie et la société de son temps, 67–­108.
     Edited by Serge Lancel. Bordeaux: Ausonia; Paris: Boccard, 2005.
Milano: Capitale dell’impero romano, 286–­402 d.C. Milan: Silvana Editoriale, 1991.
Miles, Richard. “The Anthologia Latina and the Creation of Secular Space in Vandal
     Carthage.” Antiquité tardive 13 (2005): 305–­20.
Mittag, Peter Franz. Alte Köpfe in neuen Händen: Urheber und Funktion der Kontorni­
     aten. Antiquitas 3:38. Bonn: Habelt, 1999.
Modéran, Yves. “L’établissment térritorial des Vandales en Afrique.” Antiquité tardive
     10 (2002): 87–­122.
———. “Une guerre de religion: Les deux Églises d’Afrique à l’époque vandale.”
     Antiquité tardive 11 (2003): 21–­44.
Momigliano, Arnaldo D. “Introduction: Christianity and the Decline of the Roman
     Empire.” In The Conflict between Paganism and Christianity in the Fourth Century,
     1–­16. Edited by Arnaldo Momigliano. Oxford: Clarendon, 1963.
Monat, Pierre. “Astrologie et pouvoir: Les subtilités de Firmicus Maternus.” In Pouvoir,
     divination, et prédestination dans le monde antique, 133–­39. Edited by Élisabeth
     Smajda and Evelyne Geny. Besançon: Presses Universitaires Franc-­Comtoises,
     1999.
Moorhead, John. Ambrose: Church and Society in the Late Roman World. London:
     Longman, 1999.
Morelli, Federico. “Tessuti e indumenti nel contesto economico tardoantico: I prezzi.”
     Antiquité tardive 12 (2004): 55–­78.
Morris, John. “Pelagian Literature.” Journal of Theological Studies, n.s., 16 (1965): 26–­60.
I mosaici della basilica di Aquileia. Edited by Graziano Marini. Aquileia: CISCRA
     Edizioni, 2003.
Mratschek, Sigrid. Der Briefwechsel des Paulinus von Nola: Kommunikation und soziale
     Kontakte zwischen christlichen Intellektuellen. Hypomnemata 134. Göttingen:
     Vandenhoek and Ruprecht, 2002.



                                            696
                               secondary sources


———. Divites et praepotentes: Reichtum und soziale Stellung in der Literatur der
     Prinzipatszeit. Historia Einzelschriften 70. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 1993.
———. “Multis enim notissima est sanctitas loci: Paulinus and the Gradual Rise of Nola
     as a Center of Christian Hospitality.” Journal of Early Christian Studies 9 (2001):
     511–­53.
Mrozek, Slawomir. “Les phénomènes économiques dans les métaphores de l’Antiquité
     tardive.” Eos 72 (1984): 393–­407.
Muhlberger, Steven. The Fifth-­Century Chroniclers: Prosper, Hydatius, and the Gallic
     Chronicler of 452. Liverpool: F. Cairns, 1990.
———. “Looking Back from Mid-­Century: The Gallic Chronicler of 452 and the Crisis
     of Honorius’ Reign.” In Fifth-­Century Gaul: A Crisis of Identity? 28–­37. Edited by
     John Drinkwater and Hugh Elton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
La musica ritrovata: Iconografia e cultura musicale a Ravenna e in Romagna dal I al VI
     secolo. Edited by Daniela Castaldo, Maria Grazia Maioli, and Donatella Restani.
     Ravenna: Longo, 1997.
Muth, Susanne. “Bildkomposition und Raumstruktur der ‘Grossen Jagd’ von Piazza
     Armerina in seinem raumfunktionalen Kontext.” Mitteilungen des deutschen
     archäologischen Instituts: Römische Abteilung 106 (1999): 189–­212.
———. Erleben von Raum—­Leben im Raum: Zur Funktion mythologischer Mosaik­
     bilder in der römisch-­kaiserzeitlichen Wohnarchitektur. Archäologie und Geschichte
     10. Heidelberg: Archäologie und Geschichte, 1998.
Näf, Beat. Senatorisches Standesbewusstsein in spätrömischer Zeit. Paradosis 40. Freiburg,
     Switzerland: Universitätsverlag, 1995.
Namier, L. B. The Structure of Politics at the Accession of George III. 2nd ed. London:
     Macmillan, 1957.
Nauroy, Gérard. “L’écriture dans la pastorale d’Ambroise de Milan.” In Le monde latin
     antique et la Bible. Edited by Jacques Fontaine and Charles Pietri. Vol. 2, Bible de
     tous les temps, 371–­408. Paris: Beauchesne, 1985.
———. Exégèse et création littéraire chez Ambroise de Milan: L’exemple du De Ioseph
     Patriarcha. Paris: Institut d’Études Augustiniennes, 2007.
Nautin, Pierre. “L’excommunication de saint Jérôme.” Annuaire de l’École Pratique des
     Hautes Études, Ve section: Sciences religieuses 80–­81 (1972–­73): 7–­37.
Neri, Valerio. I marginali nell’Occidente tardoantico: Poveri, “infames” e criminali nella
     nascente società cristiana. Bari: Edipuglia, 1998.
Newhauser, Richard. The Early History of Greed: The Sin of Avarice in Early Medieval
     Thought and Literature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Newlands, Carole E. Statius’ Silvae and the Poetics of Empire. New York: Cambridge
     University Press, 2002.
Niehoff-­Panagiotidis, Johannes. “Byzantinische Lebenswelt und rabbinische Herme-
     neutik: Die griechischen Juden in der Kairoer Genizah.” Byzantion 74 (2004):
     51–­109.
Niewöhner, Philipp. “Vom Sinnbild zum Abbild: Der justinianische Realismus und die
     Genese der byzantinischen Heiligentypologie.” Millennium 5 (2008): 163–­89.



                                           697
                                   works cited


Niquet, Heike. Monumenta virtutum titulique: Senatorische Selbstdarstellung im
    spätantiken Rom im Spiegel der epigraphischen Denkmäler. Stuttgart: F. Steiner,
    2000.
Noble, Thomas F. X. “Secular Sanctity: Forging an Ethos for the Carolingian Nobility.”
    In Lay Intellectuals in the Carolingian World, 8–­36. Edited by Patrick Wormald
    and Janet L. Nelson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Nock, Arthur Darby. “A diis electa: A Chapter in the Religious History of the Third
    Century.” Harvard Theological Review 23 (1930): 251–­74. Reprinted in Essays on
    Religion and the Ancient World.
———. “The Emperor’s Divine Comes.” Journal of Roman Studies 37 (1947): 102–­16.
    Reprinted in Essays on Religion and the Ancient World.
———. Essays on Religion and the Ancient World. Edited by Zeph Stewart. 2 vols.
    Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1972.
Noethlichs, Karl Leo. “Zur Einflussnahme des Staates auf die Entwicklung eines
    christlichen Klerikerstandes.” Jahrbuch für Antike und Christentum 15 (1972):
    136–­154.
Norton, Peter. Episcopal Elections, 250–­600: Hierarchy and Popular Will in Late
    Antiquity. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Nouhailhat, René. Saints et patrons: Les premiers moines de Lérins. Université de
    Besançon: Centre de Recherches d’Histoire Ancienne 84. Paris: Belles Lettres,
    1988.
Nourrir la plèbe: Actes du colloque tenu à Genève les 28. et 29. IX. 1989 en hommage à
    Denis Van Berchem. Edited by Adalberto Giovannini. Schweizerische Beiträge zur
    Altertumswissenschaft 22. Basel: F. Reinhardt 1991.
O’Donnell, James J. Augustine: A New Biography. New York: Harper Collins, 2005.
———. The Ruin of the Roman Empire: A New History. New York: Harper Collins,
    2008.
Omar, Irfan. “Khidhr in the Islamic Traditions.” The Muslim World 83 (1993):
    279–­94.
Oort, Johannes van. “The Young Augustine’s Knowledge of Manichaeism: An Analy-
    sis of the Confessiones and Some Other Related Texts.” Vigiliae Christianae 62
    (2008): 441–­66.
Orlandi, Silvia. Epigrafia anfiteatrale dell’occidente romano. Vol. 6, Roma. Vetera 15.
    Rome: Quasar, 2004.
Osborne, Robin. “Introduction: Roman Poverty in Context.” In Poverty in the Roman
    World, 1–­20. Edited by Margaret Atkins and Robin Osborne. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2007.
O’Sullivan, Jeremiah F. The Writings of Salvian, the Presbyter. Fathers of the Church 3.
    New York: CIMA, 1947.
Otranto, Giorgio. “Paolino di Nola e il Cristianesimo dell’Italia Meridionale.” In
    Anchora vitae: Atti del II Convegno Paoliniano nel XVI Centenario del Ritiro di
    Paolino a Nola, 35–­58. Edited by Gennaro Luongo. Naples: Redenzione, 1998.
Padovese, Luigi. “Considerazioni sulla dottrina cristologica e soteriologica di Paolino
    di Nola.” In Anchora vitae: Atti del II Convegno Paoliniano nel XVI Centenario del


                                          698
                               secondary sources


     Ritiro di Paolino a Nola, 209–­24. Edited by Gennaro Luongo. Naples: Redenzi-
     one, 1998.
Paesaggi e insediamenti rurali in Italia meridionale fra tardoantico e altomedioevo. Edited
     by Guiliano Volpe and Maria Turchiano. Bari: Edipuglia, 2005.
Pagans and Christians in the Roman Empire (IVth–­VIth Century A.D.): The Breaking
     of a Dialogue. Proceedings of the International Conference at the Monastery of
     Bosé, October 2008. Edited by Peter Brown and Rita Lizzi Testa. Münster: Lit,
     2011.
Panciera, Silvio. “Ancora sulla famiglia senatoria ‘africana’ degli Aradii.” Africa Romana
     2 (1986): 547–­72.
Parkin, Anneliese. “‘You do him no service’: An Exploration of Pagan Almsgiving.”
     In Poverty in the Roman World, 60–­82. Edited by Margaret Atkins and Robin
     Osborne. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Parry, Jonathan. “The Gift, the Indian Gift and the ‘Indian Gift.’” Man, n.s., 21 (1986):
     453–­73.
Patterson, Helen. “The Tiber Valley Project: Archaeology, Comparative Survey and
     History.” In General Issues in the Study of Medieval Logistics: Sources, Problems
     and Methodologies, 93–­117. Edited by John F. Haldon. Leiden: Brill, 2006.
Patzold, Steffen. “Zur Sozialstruktur des Episkopats und zur Ausbildung bischöflicher
     Herrschaft in Gallien zwischen Spätantike und Frühmittelalter.” In Völker, Reiche
     und Namen im frühen Mittelalter, 121–­40. Edited by Matthias Becher and
     Stefanie Dick. Munich: W. Fink, 2010.
Peacock, D.P.S., Féthi Bejaoui, and Nejib Ben Lazreg. “Roman Pottery Production in
     Central Tunisia.” Journal of Roman Archaeology 3 (1990): 59–­84.
Peña, J. Theodore. “The Mobilization of State Olive Oil in Roman Africa: The Evidence
     of the Late Fourth-­Century Ostraca from Carthage.” In Carthage Papers, 117–­238.
     Edited by Peña et al. Journal of Roman Archaeology Supplement 28. Portsmouth,
     RI: Journal of Roman Archaeology, 1998.
Pensabene, Patrizio. “Marmi e reimpiego nel santuario di S. Felice a Cimitile.” In
     Cimitile e Paolino di Nola. La tomba di S. Felice e il centro di pellegrinaggio:
     Trent’anni di ricerche, 129–­207. Edited by Hugo Brandenburg and Letizia
     Ermini Pani. Città del Vaticano: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana,
     2003.
Percival, John. “Desperately Seeking Sidonius: The Realities of Life in Fifth-­Century
     Gaul.” Latomus 56 (1997): 279–­92.
Les Pères de l’Église et la voix des pauvres. Edited by Pascal-Grégoire Delage. La
     Rochelle: Histoire et Culture, 2006.
Pergola, Philippe. “Mensores frumentarii Christiani et annone à la fin de l’Antiquité
     (Relecture d’un cycle de peintures).” Rivista di archeologia cristiana 66 (1990):
     167–­84.
Perler, Othmar. Les voyages de Saint Augustin. Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1969.
Perrin, Michel-­Yves. “Ad implendum caritatis officium: La place des courriers dans
     la correspondance de Paulin de Nole.” Mélanges de l’École française de Rome:
     Antiquité 104 (1992): 1025–­68.


                                           699
                                     works cited


Persic, Alessio. “La Chiesa di Siria e i ‘gradi’ della vita Cristiana.” In Per foramen acus:
     Il cristianesimo antico di fronte alla pericope evangelica del “giovane ricco,” 208–­63.
     Milan: Vita e Pensiero, 1986.
Peyras, Jean. “Le fundus Aufidianus: Étude d’un grand domaine romain de la région de
     Mateur (Tunisie du Nord).” Antiquités Africaines 9 (1975): 181–­222.
Picotti, G. B. “Sulle relazioni fra re Odoacre e il Senato e la chiesa di Roma.” Rivista
     Storica Italiana, ser. 5, no. 4 (1939): 363–­86.
Picturing the Bible: The Earliest Christian Art. Edited by Jeffery Spier. New Haven, CT:
     Yale University Press; in association with Forth Worth, TX: Kimbell Art Museum,
     2007.
Pietri, Charles. “Chiesa e comunità locali nell’Occidente cristiano (IV–­VI d.C.):
     L’esempio della Gallia.” In Società romana e impero tardoantico. Vol. 3, Le merci,
     gli insediamenti, 761–­97. Edited by Andrea Giardina. Bari: Laterza, 1986.
     Reprinted in vol. I of Christiana respublica.
———. Christiana respublica: Éléments d’une enquête sur le christianisme antique. 3 vols.
     Collection de l’École française de Rome 234. Rome: École française de Rome, 1997.
———. “Damase, évêque de Rome.” In Saecularia Damasiana, 31–­58. Studi di
     Antichità Cristiana 39. Vatican: Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana,
     1986. Reprinted in vol. 1 of Christiana respublica.
———. “Donateurs et pieux établissements d’après le légendier romain (Ve–­VIIe s.).” In
     Hagiographie, cultures et sociétés, IVe–­XIIe siècles, 434–­53. Paris: Études Augustini-
     ennes, 1981. Reprinted in vol. 1 of Christiana respublica.
———. “Évergétisme et richesses ecclésiastiques dans l’Italie du IVe à la fin du Ve siècle:
     L’exemple romain.” Ktèma 3 (1978): 317–­37. Reprinted in vol. 2 of Christiana
     respublica.
———. “Recherches sur les domus ecclesiae.” Revue des études augustiniennes 24 (1978):
     3–­21. Reprinted in vol. 1 of Christiana respublica.
———. Roma Christiana: Recherches sur l’Église de Rome, son organisation, sa politique,
     son idéologie de Miltiade à Sixte III (311–­440). Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises
     d’Athènes et de Rome 224. Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1976.
———. “Le Sénat, le peuple chrétien et les partis du cirque sous le pape Symmaque.”
     Mélanges d’archéologie et d’histoire 78 (1966): 123–­39. Reprinted in vol. 2 of
     Christiana respublica.
———. “Le serment du soldat chrétien: Les épisodes de la militia Christi sur les
     sarcophages.” Mélanges d’Archéologie et d’Histoire 74 (1962): 649–­64. Reprinted
     in vol. 2 of Christiana respublica.
Pietri, Luce. “Évergétisme chrétien et fondations privées dans l’Italie de l’Antiquité
     tardive.” In Humana sapit: Études d’Antiquité Tardive offeres à Lellia Cracco
     Ruggini, 253–­63. Edited by Jean-­Michel Carrié and Rita Lizzi Testa. Bibliothèque
     d’Antiquité Tardive 3. Turnhout: Brepols, 2002.
———. “Riches et pauvres dans l’Ad Ecclesiam de Salvien de Marseille.” In Les Pères
     de l’Église et la voix des pauvres, 149–­61. Edited by Pascal Grégoire Delage. La
     Rochelle: Histoire et Culture, 2006.



                                            700
                                 secondary sources


Piganiol, André. L’empire chrétien (325–­395). Histoire romaine 4:2. Paris: Presses
     Universitaires de France, 1947.
Plassmann, Otto. Die Almosen bei Johannes Chrysostomus. Münster: Aschendorff,
     1961.
Plinval, Georges de. Pélage: Ses écrits, sa vie et sa réforme: Étude d’histoire littéraire et
     religieuse. Lausanne: Payot, 1943.
Plumer, Eric. Augustine’s Commentary on Galatians. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
     2003.
Poglio, Federico Alberto. Gruppi di potere nella Roma tardoantica (350–­395 d.C.).
     Turin: Celid, 2007.
Pohl, Walter. “Rome and the Barbarians in the Fifth Century.” Antiquité tardive 16
     (2008): 93–­101.
Polci, Barbara. “Some Aspects of the Transformation of the Roman Domus between
     Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages.” In Theory and Practice in Late Antique
     Archaeology, 79–­109. Edited by Luke Lavan and William Bowden. Late Antique
     Archaeology 1. Leiden: Brill, 2003.
Porena, Pierfranceso. “Trasformazioni istituzionali e assetti sociali: I prefetti del
     Pretorio tra III e IV secolo.” In Le trasformazioni delle “élites” in età tardoantica,
     325–­56. Edited by Rita Lizzi Testa. Rome: Bretschneider, 2006.
Potter, David S. The Roman Empire at Bay, AD 180–395. London: Routledge, 2004.
Pottier, Bruno. “Entre les villes et les campagnes: Le banditisme en Italie du IVe au VIe
     siècle.” In Les cités de l’Italie tardo-­antique (IVe–­VIe siècle): Institutions, économie,
     société, culture et religion, 251–­66. Edited by Massimiliano Ghilardi, Christophe J.
     Goddard, and Pierfrancesco Porena. Collection de l’École française de Rome 369.
     Rome: École française de Rome, 2006.
Poveri ammalati e ammalati poveri: Dinamiche socio-­economiche, trasformazioni
     culturali e misure assistenziali nell’Occidente romano in età tardoantica. Edited by
     Rosalia Marino, Concetta Molè, and Antonino Pinzone, with the collaboration
     of Margherita Cassia. Catania: Edizioni del Prisma, 2006.
Poverty in the Roman World. Edited by Margaret Atkins and Robin Osborne. Cam-
     bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Pricoco, Salvatore. L’isola dei santi: Il cenobio di Lerino e le origini del monachesimo
     gallico. Rome: Edizioni dell’Ateneo e Bizzarri, 1978.
———. “Paolino di Nola e il monachesimo del suo tempo.” In Anchora vitae: Atti del II
     Convegno Paoliniano nel XVI Centenario del Ritiro di Paolino a Nola, 59–­92.
     Edited by Gennaro Luongo. Naples: Redenzione, 1998.
Prinz, Friedrich. Frühes Mönchtum im Frankenreich: Kultur und Gesellschaft in Gallien,
     den Rheinlanden und Bayern am Beispiel der monastischen Entwicklung (4. bis 8.
     Jahrhundert). Vienna: Oldenbourg, 1965.
Le problème de la christianisation du monde antique. Edited by Hervé Inglebert, Sylvain
     Destephen, and Bruno Dumézil. Paris: Picard, 2010.
Property and Power in the Early Middle Ages. Edited by Wendy Davies and Paul
     Fouracre. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.



                                              701
                                    works cited


Prosopographie chrétienne du Bas-­Empire.
     Vol. 1, L’Afrique chrétienne (305–­533). Edited by André Mandouze. Paris: CNRS,
           1982.
     Vol. 2, L’Italie chrétienne (313–­604). Edited by Charles Pietri and Luce Pietri. 2
           vols. Paris: École française de Rome, 2000.
     Vol. 3, Diocèse d’Asie (325–­641). Edited by Sylvain Destephen. Paris: CNRS, 2008.
The Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire. Edited by A.H.M. Jones, John Robert
     Martindale, and John Morris. 3 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
     1971–­92.
Purcell, Nicholas. “The Populace of Rome in Late Antiquity: Problems of Classifica-
     tion and Historical Description.” In The Transformations of Vrbs Roma in Late
     Antiquity, 135–­61. Edited by W. V. Harris. Journal of Roman Archaeology:
     Supplementary Series 33. Portsmouth, RI: Journal of Roman Archaeology, 1999.
———. “Tomb and Suburb.” In Römische Gräberstrasse: Selbstdarstellung, Status,
     Standard, 25–­41. Edited by Henner von Hesberg and Paul Zanker. Bayerische
     Akademie der Wissenschaften: Philologisch-­historische Klasse/Abhandlungen,
     NF 96. Munich: Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1987.
Raeck, Wulf. Modernisierte Mythen: Zum Umgang der Spätantike mit klassischen
     Bildthemen. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 1992.
———. “Publica non despiciens: Ergänzungen zur Interpretation des Dominus-­Julius-­
     Mosaiks aus Karthago.” Mitteilungen des deutschen Archäologischen Instituts:
     Römische Abteilung 94 (1987): 295–­308.
Raimondi, Milena. “Elezione iudicio Dei e turpe convicium: Damaso e Ursino tra storia
     ecclesiastica e amministrazione romana.” Aevum 83 (2009): 169–­208.
Rajak, Tessa. “The Gifts of God at Sardis.” In Jews in a Graeco-­Roman World, 229–­39.
     Edited by Martin Goodman. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Rapp, Claudia. “Charity and Piety as Episcopal and Imperial Virtues in Late Antiquity.”
     In Charity and Giving in Monotheistic Religions, 75–­88. Edited by Miriam Frenkel
     and Yaacov Lev. Studien zur Geschichte und Kultur des islamischen Orients,
     n. F. 22. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2009.
———. Holy Bishops in Late Antiquity: The Nature of Christian Leadership in an Age of
     Transition. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005.
Rebenich, Stefan. Hieronymus und sein Kreis: Prosopographische und sozialgeschichtliche
     Untersuchungen. Historia Einzelschriften 72. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 1992.
Rebillard, Éric. “Augustin et le rituel épistolaire de l’élite sociale et culturelle de son
     temps: Éléments pour une analyse processuelle des relations de l’évêque et de la
     cité dans l’Antiquité tardive.” In L’évêque dans la cité du IVe au Ve siècle: Image et
     autorité, 127–­52. Edited by Éric Rebillard and Claire Sotinel. Collection de
     l’École française de Rome 248. Rome: École française de Rome, 1998.
———. In hora mortis: Évolution de la pastorale chrétienne de la mort aux IVe et Ve siècles
     dans l’Occident latin. Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises d’Athènes et de Rome 283.
     Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1994.
———. “Quasi funambuli: Cassien et la controverse pélagienne sur la perfection.” Revue
     des Études Augustiniennes 40 (1994): 197–­210.


                                           702
                              secondary sources


———. Religion et sépulture: L’Église, les vivants et les morts dans l’Antiquité tardive.
     Paris: Éditions de l’École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, 2003. Translated
     by Elizabeth Trapnell Rawlings and Jeanine Routier-­Pucci, as The Care of the Dead
     in Late Antiquity. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2009.
———. “Sociologie de la déviance et orthodoxie: Le cas de la controverse pélagienne sur
     la grace.” In Orthodoxie, christianisme, histoire, 221–­40. Edited by Susanna Elm,
     Éric Rebillard, and Antonella Romano. Collection de l’École française de Rome
     270. Rome: École française de Rome, 2000.
Rebuffat, René. “Enceintes urbaines et insécurité en Maurétanie tingitaine.” Mélanges
     de l’École française de Rome: Antiquité 86 (1974): 501–­22.
Rees, B. R. Pelagius: A Reluctant Heretic. Woodbridge, UK: Boydell, 1998.
Reinert, François, ed. Moselgold: Der römische Schatz von Machtum. Luxembourg:
     Musée national d’histoire et d’art, 2008.
Religion, Dynasty and Patronage in Early Christian Rome, 300–­900. Edited by
     Kate Cooper and Julia Hillner. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
     2007.
Reutter, Ursula. Damasus, Bischof von Rom (366–­384). Studien und Texte zu Antike
     und Christentum 55. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2009.
Reynolds, Paul. Hispania and the Roman Mediterranean, A.D. 100–­700: Ceramics and
     Trade. London: Duckworth, 2010.
Rilinger, Rolf. Humiliores-­Honestiores: Zu einer sozialen Dichotomie im Strafrecht der
     römischen Kaiserzeit. Munich: Oldbourg, 1988.
Rio, Alice. “High and Low: Ties of Dependence in the Frankish Kingdoms.” Trans­
     actions of the Royal Historical Society, 6th ser., 12 (2008): 43–­68.
Rivière, Yann. “‘Une cruauté digne des féroces barbares?’ À propos du De emerdatione
     servorum (C.Th.IX.12).” In Le Code Théodosien: Diversité des approches et nouvelles
     perspectives, 171–­208. Edited by Sylvie Crogiel-­Pétrequin and Pierre Jaillette.
     Collection de l’École française de Rome 412. Rome: École française de Rome,
     2009.
Robert, Louis, and Jeanne Robert. “Bulletin épigraphique.” Revue des études grecques 97
     (1984): 419–­522.
Roberts, Michael. “Barbarians in Gaul: The Response of the Poets.” In Fifth-­Century
     Gaul: A Crisis of Identity? 97–­106. Edited by John Drinkwater and Hugh Elton.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
———. The Humblest Sparrow: The Poetry of Venantius Fortunatus. Ann Arbor:
     University of Michigan Press, 2009.
Robins, William. “Romance and Renunciation at the Turn of the Fifth Century.”
     Journal of Early Christian Studies 8 (2000): 531–­57.
Rodá, Isabel. “Iconografía y epigrafía en dos mosaicos hispanas: Las villas de Tossa y de
     Dueñas.” In VI Coloquio internacional sobre mosaico antiguo, 35–­42. Palencia/
     Mérida: Associación Español del Mosaico, 1994.
Roda, Sergio. “Fuga nel privato e nostalgia del potere nel IV secolo d.C.: Nuovi accenti
     di un’antica ideologia.” In vol. 1 of Le trasformazioni della cultura nella tarda
     antichità, 95–­108. Rome: Bretschneider, 1985.


                                          703
                                      works cited


Roda, Sergio. “Polifunzionalità della lettera commendaticia: Teoria e prassi
     nell’epistolario simmachiano.” In Colloque genèvois sur Symmaque, 177–­207.
     Edited by François Paschoud. Paris: Belles Lettres, 1986.
Rome and China: Comparative Perspectives on Ancient World Empires. Edited by Walter
     Scheidel. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Rossiter, Jeremy J. “Domus and Villa: Late Antique Housing in Carthage and Its
     Territory.” In Housing in Late Antiquity: From Palaces to Shops, 367–­92. Edited
     by Luke Lavan, Lale Özgenel, and Alexander Sarantis. Late Antique Archaeology
     3.2. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Rostovtzeff, M. The Social and Economic History of the Hellenistic World. 3 vols. Oxford:
     Clarendon, 1941.
———. The Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire. Oxford: Clarendon,
     1926.
Roueché, Charlotte. “Acclamations in the Late Roman Empire: New Evidence from
     Aphrodisias.” Journal of Roman Studies 74 (1984): 181–­99.
———. “The Image of Victory: New Evidence from Ephesus.” Travaux et mémoires
     14: Mélanges Gilbert Dagron, 527–­46. Edited by V. Déroche. Paris: Boccard,
     2002.
Rousseau, Philip. Ascetics, Authority, and the Church in the Age of Jerome and Cassian.
     Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978.
———. “Cassian: Monastery and World.” In The Certainty of Doubt: Tributes to Peter
     Munz, 68–­89. Edited by Miles Fairburn and W. H. Oliver. Wellington, New
     Zealand: Victoria University Press, 1995.
———. “The Preacher’s Audience: A More Optimistic View.” In vol. 2 of Ancient
     History in a Modern University, 371–­408. Edited by T. W. Hillard et al. Grand
     Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1998.
Rousselle, Aline. Porneia: De la maîtrise du corps à la privation sensorielle, IIe–­IVe siècles
     de l’ère chrétienne. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1983.
Rowland, Robert J. “The ‘Very Poor’ and the Grain Dole at Rome and Oxyrhynchus.”
     Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik 21 (1976): 69–­73.
Rubin, Miri. Charity and Community in Medieval Cambridge. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 1987.
Rummel, Philipp von. Habitus barbarus: Kleidung und Repräsentation spätantiker
     Eliten im 4. und 5. Jahrhundert. Reallexikon der germanischen Altertumskunde,
     Ergänzungsband 55. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2007.
———. “Habitus Vandalorum? Zur Frage nach einer gruppen-­spezifischen Kleidung
     der Vandalen in Afrika.” Antiquité tardive 10 (2002): 131–­41.
Ruokanen, Mikka. Theology of Social Life in Augustine’s De civitate Dei. Forschungen
     zur Kirchen-­und Dogmengeschichte 53. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht,
     1993.
Rutgers, L. V., M. van Strydonck, M. Boudin, and C. van der Linde. “Stable Isotope
     Data from the Early Christian Catacombs of Ancient Rome: New Insights into
     the Dietary Habits of Rome’s Early Christians.” Journal of Archaeological Science
     36 (2009): 1127–­34.


                                             704
                               secondary sources


Sabw Kanyang, Jean-­Anatole. Episcopus et plebs: L’évêque et la communauté ecclésiale
     dans les conciles africains (345–­525). European University Studies 701. Bern: Peter
     Lang, 2000.
Saecularia Damasiana. Studi di Antichità Cristiana 39. Vatican: Pontificio Istituto di
     Archeologia Cristiana, 1986.
Sage, Michael M. Cyprian. Patristic Monographs Series 1. Cambridge, MA: Philadel-
     phia Patristic Foundation, 1975.
Saint Augustin, la Numidie et la société de son temps. Edited by Serge Lancel. Bordeaux:
     Ausonia; Paris: Boccard, 2005.
Salamito, Jean-­Marie. “Aspects aristocratiques et aspects populaires de l’être chrétien
     aux IIIe et IVe siècles.” Antiquité tardive 9 (2001): 165–­78.
———. Les virtuoses et la multitude: Aspects sociaux de la controverse entre Augustin et
     les pélagiens. Grenoble: Éditions Jérôme Millon, 2005.
Salomonson, J. W. “Late Roman Earthenware with Relief Decoration Found in
     Northern-­Africa and Egypt.” Oudheidkundige Mededelingen 43 (1962): 53–­95.
———. La mosaïque aux chevaux dans l’antiquarium de Carthage. The Hague:
     Imprimerie Nationale, 1965.
Salona: Recherches archéologiques franco-­croates à Salone. Vol. 3, Manastirine: Établisse­
     ment préromain, nécropole et basilique paléochrétienne. Edited by Noel Duval,
     Emilio Marin, and Catherine Metzger. Collection de l’École française de Rome
     194:3. Rome: École française de Rome; Split: Musée archéologique de Split,
     2000.
Salzman, Michele Renée. “The Making of a Christian Aristocracy: A Response to Ralph
     Mathisen’s Review Article.” International Journal of the Classical Tradition 12
     (2005): 123–­37.
———. The Making of a Christian Aristocracy: Social and Religious Change in the
     Western Roman Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002.
———. On Roman Time: The Codex-­Calendar of 354 and the Rhythms of Urban Life in
     Late Antiquity. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.
———. “Symmachus and the ‘Barbarian’ Generals.” Historia 55 (2006): 352–­67.
———. “Symmachus and His Father: Patriarchy and Patrimony in the Late Roman
     Senatorial Elite.” In Le trasformazioni dell’ “élites” in età tardoantica, 357–­75.
     Edited by Rita Lizzi Testa. Rome: Bretschneider, 2006.
———. “Symmachus’ Ideal of Secular Friendship.” In Les frontières du profane dans
     l’antiquité tardive, 247–­72. Edited by Éric Rebillard and Claire Sotinel. Collection
     de l’École française de Rome 428. Rome: École française de Rome, 2010.
———. “Travel and Communication in The Letters of Symmachus.” In Travel, Commu­
     nication and Geography in Late Antiquity: Sacred and Profane, 81–­94. Edited by
     Linda Ellis and Frank L. Kidner. Aldershot: Variorum, 2004.
Samson, R. “Slavery, the Roman Legacy.” In Fifth-­Century Gaul: A Crisis of Identity?
     218–­27. Edited by John Drinkwater and Hugh Elton. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 1992.
Sánchez León, Juan Carlos. Les sources de l’histoire des Bagaudes. Paris: Belles Lettres,
     1996.


                                           705
                                    works cited


Sanchez Velasco, Jerónimo, Antonio Moreno Rosa, and Guadalupe Gómez Muñoz.
     “Aproximación al estudio de la ciudad de Cabra y su obispado al final de la
     Antigüedad.” Antiquitas 21, 135–­80. Priego de Corboba: Museo Histórico
     Municipal, 2009.
Santilli, Roberto, Jens Ormö, Angelo P. Rossi, and Goro Komatsu. “A Catastrophe
     Remembered: A Meteorite Impact of the Fifth Century AD in the Abruzzo,
     Central Italy.” Antiquity 77 (2003): 313–­20.
Sardella, Teresa. “Continenza e uxorato del clero nell’Africa di Agostino.” In L’adorabile
     vescovo d’Ippona, 183–­226. Edited by Franca Ela Consolino. Soveria Manelli:
     Rubettino, 2001.
———. Società, chiesa e stato nell’età di Teodorico: Papa Simmaco e lo scismo laurenziano.
     Soveria Manelli: Rubettino, 1996.
Sarris, Peter. Economy and Society in the Age of Justinian. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 2006.
Savino, Eliodoro. Campania Tardoantica (284–­604 d.C.). Bari: Edipuglia, 2005.
Savon, Hervé. Saint Ambroise devant l’exégèse de Philon le Juif. 2 vols. Paris: Études
     Augustiniennes, 1977.
Scheidel, Walter C. “Finances, Figures and Fiction.” Classical Quarterly 46 (1996):
     222–­238.
———. “Germs for Rome.” In Rome the Cosmopolis, 159–­76. Edited by Catharine
     Edwards and Greg Woolf. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
———. “Stratification, Deprivation and Quality of Life.” In Poverty in the Roman
     World, 40–­59. Edited by Margaret Atkins and Robin Osborne. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Scheidel, Walter C., and Steven J. Friesen. “The Size of the Economy and the Distri­
     bution of Income in the Roman Empire.” Journal of Roman Studies 99 (2009):
     61–­91.
Schmidt, Manfred. “Ambrosii carmen de obitu Probi: Ein Gedicht des Mailänder
     Bischofs in epigraphischer Überlieferung.” Hermes 127 (1999): 99–­116.
Schmidt-­Hofner, Sebastian. Reagieren und Gestalten: Die Regierungsstil des spätrö­
     mischen Kaisers am Beispiel der Gesetzgebung Valentinians I. Vestigia 58. Munich:
     C. H. Beck, 2008.
Schneider, Lambert. Die Domäne als Weltbild: Wirkungsstrukturen der spätantiken
     Bildersprache. Wiesbaden: F. Steiner, 1983.
Schofield, Malcolm. “Cicero’s Definition of res publica.” In Cicero the Philosopher,
     63–­83. Edited by J.G.F. Powell. Oxford: Clarendon, 1995.
Schöllgen, Georg. Ecclesia Sordida? Zur Frage der sozialen Schichtung frühchristlicher
     Gemeinden am Beispiel Karthagos zur Zeit Tertullians. Jahrbuch für Antike und
     Christentum: Ergänzungsband 12. Münster: Aschendorff, 1984.
Schrüfer-­Kolb, Irene. Roman Iron Production in Britain: Technological and Socio-­
     economic Landscape Development along the Jurassic Ridge. British Archaeological
     Reports 380. Oxford: Archaeopress, 2004.
Schrunk, Ivančica, and Vlasta Begović. “Roman Estates on the Island of Brioni, Istria.”
     Journal of Roman Archaeology 13 (2000): 252–­76.


                                           706
                               secondary sources


Schwartz, Seth. Imperialism and Jewish Society, 200 B.C.E. to 640 C.E. Princeton:
     Princeton University Press, 2001.
———. Were the Jews a Mediterranean Society? Reciprocity and Solidarity in Ancient
     Judaism. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010.
Scogin, Hugh. “Poor Relief in Northern Sung China.” Oriens Extremus 25 (1978):
     30–­45.
Scott, Sarah. Art and Society in Fourth Century Britain: Villa Mosaics in Context.
     Oxford School of Archaeology Monographs 53. Oxford: Oxbow, 2000.
Serfass, Adam. “Slavery and Pope Gregory the Great.” Journal of Early Christian Studies
     14 (2006): 77–­103.
Settipani, Christian. “Ruricius Ier évêque de Limoges et ses relations familiales.”
     Prosopographica X. Francia 18 (1991): 195–­222.
Settis, Salvatore. “Per l’interpretazione di Piazza Armerina.” Mélanges de l’école française
     de Rome: Antiquité 87 (1975): 873–­994.
Shanzer, Danuta. “Arcanum Varronis iter: Licentius’ Verse Epistle to Augustine.” Revue
     des études augustiniennes 37 (1991): 110–­43.
———. “Avulsa a latere meo: Augustine’s Spare Rib—­Confessions 6.15.25.” Journal of
     Roman Studies 92 (2002): 157–­76.
———. “Jerome, Tobit, Alms, and the Vita Aeterna.” In Jerome of Stridon: His Life,
     Writings and Legacy, 87–­103. Edited by Andrew Cain and Josef Lössl. Farnham,
     UK: Ashgate, 2009.
Shaw, Brent D. “African Christianity: Disputes, Definitions and ‘Donatists.’” In
     Orthodoxy and Heresy in Religious Movements: Discipline and Dissent, 5–­34.
     Edited by Malcolm R. Greenshields and Thomas Robinson. Lampeter: Edwin
     Mellen Press, 1992. Reprinted in Rulers, Nomads and Christians.
———. “After Rome: Transformations of the Early Mediterranean World.” New Left
     Review 51 (2008): 89–­114.
———. “Bad Boys: Circumcellions and Fictive Violence.” In Violence in Late Antiquity:
     Perceptions and Practices, 179–­96. Edited by H. A. Drake. Aldershot: Ashgate,
     2006.
———. Bringing in the Sheaves: Economy and Metaphor in the Roman World. Toronto,
     forthcoming.
———. “The Family in Late Antiquity: The Experience of Augustine.” Past and Present
     115 (1987): 3–­51.
———. Rulers, Nomads and Christians in Roman North Africa. Aldershot: Variorum,
     1995.
———. “Rural Markets in North Africa and the Political Economy of the Roman
     Empire.” Antiquités africaines 17 (1981): 37–­83. Reprinted in Rulers, Nomads
     and Christians.
———. Sacred Violence: African Christians and Sectarian Hatred in the Age of Augustine.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011.
———. “War and Violence.” In Late Antiquity: A Guide to the Postclassical World,
     130–­69. Edited by G. W. Bowersock, Peter Brown, and Oleg Grabar. Cambridge,
     MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.


                                           707
                                   works cited


Shaw, Brent D. “Who Were the Circumcellions?” In Vandals, Romans and Berbers:
      New Perspectives on Late Antique North Africa, 227–­58. Edited by A. H. Merrills.
      Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.
———. “‘A Wolf by the Ears’: M. I. Finley’s Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideology in
      Historical Context.” Introduction to Moses I. Finley, Ancient Slavery and Modern
      Ideology, 3–­74. Princeton, NJ: M. Wiener, 1998.
Shaw, Brent, and Richard P. Saller. “Close-­Kin Marriage in Roman Society?” Man, n.s.,
      19 (1984): 432–­44.
Shaw, Teresa M. The Burden of the Flesh: Fasting and Sexuality in Early Christianity.
      Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1998.
Shelton, Kathleen J. The Esquiline Treasure. London: British Museum, 1981.
Shtaerman, E. M., and M. K. Trofimova. La schiavitú nell’Italia imperiale: I–­III secolo.
      Rome: Riuniti, 1975.
Sillières, Pierre. “Approche d’un espace rural antique: L’exemple de Vila de Frades en
      Lusitanie méridionale.” In Du latifundium au latifondo: Un héritage de Rome, une
      création médiévale ou moderne? 21–­29. Publications du Centre Pierre Paris 25.
      Paris: Boccard, 1995.
Simões, Margarida Barahona. Prisciliano e as tensões religiosas do século IV. Lisbon:
      Universidade Lusíada, 2002.
Simonnot, Philippe. Les papes, l’église et l’argent: Histoire économique du christianisme
      des origines à nos jours. Paris: Bayard, 2005.
Sivan, Hagith. Ausonius of Bordeaux: Genesis of a Gallic Aristocracy. London: Routledge,
      1993.
———. “The Death of Paulinus’ Brother.” Rheinisches Museum für Philologie 139
      (1996): 170–­79.
———. “On Hymens and Holiness in Late Antiquity: Opposition to Aristocratic
      Female Asceticism in Rome.” Jahrbuch für Antike und Christentum 36 (1993):
      81–­93.
———. “The Last Gallic Prose Panegyric: Paulinus of Nola on Theodosius I.” In Studies
      in Latin Literature and Roman History, 577–­94. Edited by Carl Deroux. Vol. 7.
      Collection Latomus 227. Brussels: Latomus, 1994.
VI Coloquio internacional sobre mosaico antiguo. Palencia/Mérida: Associación Español
      del Mosaico, 1994.
Skeb, Matthias. Christo vivere: Studien zum literarischen Christusbild des Paulinus von
      Nola. Hereditas 11. Bonn: Borengässer, 1997.
Slootjes, Daniëlle. The Governor and His Subjects in the Later Roman Empire.
      Mnemosyne Supplements 275. Leiden: Brill, 2006.
Smith, J. T. Roman Villas: A Study in Social Structure. London: Routledge, 1997.
Smith, Rowland B. E. “‘Restored Utility, Eternal City’: Patronal Imagery at Rome in
      the Fourth Century AD.” In “Bread and Circuses”: Euergetism and Municipal
      Patronage in Roman Italy, 142–­66. Edited by Kathryn Lomas and Tim Cornell.
      London: Routledge, 2003.
Snyder, Christopher A. An Age of Tyrants: Britain and the Britons, A.D. 400–­600.
      University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1998.


                                          708
                               secondary sources


Social and Political Life in Late Antiquity. Late Antique Archaeology 3:1. Edited by
     Will Bowden, Adam Gutteridge, and Carlos Machado. Leiden: Brill, 2006.
Società romana e impero tardoantico. Edited by Andrea Giardina. 4 vols. Rome: Laterza,
     1986.
Sogno, Cristiana. Q. Aurelius Symmachus: A Political Biography. Ann Arbor: University
     of Michigan Press, 2006.
———. “Roman Matchmaking.” In From the Tetrarchs to the Theodosians: Later Roman
     History and Culture, 284–­450 CE. For John Matthews on the Occasion of His 70th
     Birthday, 51–­71. Edited by Scott McGill, Cristiana Sogno, and Edward Watts.
     Yale Classical Studies 34. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Sotinel, Claire. “Les ambitions d’historien d’Ennode de Pavie: La Vita Epiphanii.” In
     La narrativa cristiana antica: Codici narrative, strutture formali, schemi retorici,
     585–­605. Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 50. Rome: Istituto Patristicum
     Augustinianum, 1995.
———. Church and Society in Late Antique Italy and beyond. Farnham, UK: Ashgate/
     Variorum, 2010.
———. “Le don chrétien et ses retombées sur l’économie dans l’Antiquité tardive.”
     Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 105–­16. Translated by Sotinel as “The Christian Gift
     and Its Economic Impact in Late Antiquity.” In Church and Society, article IX.
———. “Les évêques italiens dans la société de l’Antiquité tardive: L’émergence d’une
     nouvelle élite?” In Le trasformazioni delle “élites” in età tardoantica, 377–­404.
     Edited by Rita Lizzi Testa. Rome: Bretschneider, 2006. Translated by Sotinel as
     “The Bishops of Italy in Late Antique Society: A New Elite?” In Church and
     Society, article VIII.
———. Identité civique et christianisme: Aquilée du IIIe au VIe siècle. Bibliothèque des
     Écoles françaises d’Athènes et de Rome 324. Rome: École française de Rome, 2006.
———. “Le personnel épiscopal: Enquête sur la puissance de l’évêque dans la cite.” In
     L’évêque dans la cité du IVe au Ve siècle: Image et autorité, 105–­26. Edited by Éric
     Rebillard and Claire Sotinel. Collection de l’École française de Rome 248. Rome:
     École française de Rome, 1998. Translated by Sotinel as “The Bishop’s Men:
     Episcopal Power in the City.” In Church and Society, VII.
———. “Le recrutement des évêques en Italie aux IVe et Ve siècles.” In Vescovi e pastori
     in epoca Teodosiana, 193–­204. Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 58. Rome:
     Institutum Pontificium Augustinianum, 1997. Reprinted in Church and Society, VI.
———. “La sphère profane dans l’espace urbain.” In Les frontières du profane dans
     l’antiquité tardive, 319–­349. Edited by Éric Rebillard and Claire Sotinel. Collec-
     tion de l’École française de Rome 428. Rome: École française de Rome, 2010.
Spera, Lucrezia. “Un cubicolo monumentale nella catacomba di Pretestato.” Rivista di
     archeologia cristiana 68 (1992): 279–­307.
———. Il paesaggio suburbano di Roma dall’antichità al medioevo: Il comprensorio tra le
     vie Latina e Ardeatina dalle Mura Aureliane al III miglio. Rome: Bretschneider,
     1999.
Spier, Jeffery. “A Lost Consular Diptych of Anicius Auchenius Bassus (A.D. 408) in the
     Mould for an ARS Plaque.” Journal of Roman Archaeology 16 (2003): 251–­254.


                                           709
                                    works cited


Squatriti, Paolo. “The Floods of 589 and Climate Change at the Beginning of the
      Middle Ages: An Italian Microhistory.” Speculum 85 (2010): 799–­826.
Die Stadt in der Spätantike—­Niedergang oder Wandel? Edited by Jens-­Uwe Krause and
      Christian Witschel. Historia Einzelschriften 190. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2006.
Stancliffe, Clare. St. Martin and His Hagiographer: History and Miracle in Sulpicius
      Severus. Oxford: Clarendon, 1983.
Stanley, David J. “Santa Costanza: History, Archaeology, Function, Patronage and
      Dating.” Arte medievale, n.s., 3 (2004): 119–­40.
Statuen in der Spätantike. Edited by Franz Alto Bauer and Christian Witschel.
      Wiesbaden: Reichert, 2007.
Sternberg, Thomas. Orientalium more secutus: Räume und Institutionen der Caritas
      des 5. bis 7. Jahrhunderts in Gallien. Jahrbuch für Antike und Christentum,
      Ergänzungsband 16. Münster in Wesfalen: Aschendorff, 1991.
Stewart, Columba. Cassian the Monk. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Stickler, Timo. Aëtius: Gestaltungsspielräume eines Heermeisters im ausgehenden
      Weströmischen Reich. Vestigia 54. Munich: C. H. Beck, 2002.
Stirling, Lea M. The Learned Collector: Mythological Statuettes and Classical Taste in
      Late Antique Gaul. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2005.
Strobel, Karl. Das Imperium Romanum im “3. Jahrhundert”: Modell einer historischen
      Krise? Zur Frage mentaler Strukturen breiterer Bevölkerungsschichten in der Zeit
      von Marc Aurel bis zum Ausgang des 3. Jh.n.Chr. Historia Einzelschrift 75.
      Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 1993.
Stroheker, Karl. Der senatorische Adel im spätantiken Gallien. Tübingen: Alma Mater,
      1948.
Strothmann, Jürgen. “Königsherrchaft oder nachantike Staatlichkeit? Merowingische
      Monetarmünzen als Quelle für die politische Ordnung des Frankenreichs.”
      Millennium 5 (2008): 353–­81.
Suburbium: Il suburbio di Roma dalla crisi del sistema delle ville a Gregorio Magno.
      Edited by Phillippe Pergola, Riccardo Santangeli Valenzani, and Rita Volpe.
      Collection de l’École française de Rome 311. Rome: École française de Rome,
      2003.
Syme, Ronald. Ammianus and the Historia Augusta. Oxford: Clarendon, 1968.
———. The Roman Revolution. Oxford: Clarendon, 1939.
Tanguy, Bernard. “De l’origine des évêchés bretons.” In Les débuts de l’organisation
      religieuse en la Bretagne Armoricaine, 6–­33. Brittania Monastica 3. Landevennec:
      Brittania Monastica, 1994.
Tauer, Johann. “Neue Orientierungen zur Paulusexegese des Pelagius.” Augustinianum
      34 (1994): 313–­58.
Tedeschi, Carlo. Congeries lapidum: Iscrizioni Britanniche dei secoli V–­VII. 2 vols. Scuola
      Normale Superiore di Pisa: Centro di Cultura Medievale. Pisa: Scuola Normale
      Superiore, 2005.
Terry, Ann, and Henry Maguire. Dynamic Splendor: The Wall Mosaics in the Cathe-
      dral of Eufrasius at Poreč. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press,
      2007.


                                           710
                               secondary sources


Testard, Maurice. Saint Augustin et Cicéron. 2 vols. Paris: Études Augustiniennes,
     1958.
Thébert, Yvon. “L’évolution urbaine dans les provinces orientales de l’Afrique romaine
     tardive.” Opus 2 (1982): 99–­131.
———. “Private Life and Domestic Architecture in Roman Africa.” In A History of
     Private Life. Edited by Philippe Ariès and Georges Duby. Vol. 1, From Pagan Rome
     to Byzantium, 313–­409. Edited by Paul Veyne. Translated by Arthur Goldhammer.
     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987.
———. Thermes romains d’Afrique du Nord et leur contexte méditerranéen: Études
     d’histoire et d’archéologie. Bibliothèque de l’École française d’Athènes et de Rome
     315. Rome: École française de Rome, 2003.
Theologisches Wörterbuch zum Alten Testament. Edited by G. Johannes Botterweck and
     Helmer Ringgren. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1973. Translated by John T. Willis as
     Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1974.
Thier, Sebastian. Kirche bei Pelagius. Patristische Texte und Studien 50. Berlin: de
     Gruyter, 1999.
Thomas, Yan. “La construction de l’unité civique: Choses publiques, choses communes
     et choses n’appartenant à personne et representation.” Mélanges de l’école française
     de Rome: Moyen Age 114 (2002): 7–­39.
Thompson, E. A. “Peasant Revolts in Late Roman Gaul and Spain.” Past and Present 2
     (1952): 11–­23.
———. The Visigoths in the Time of Ulfila. Oxford: Clarendon, 1966.
Tiersch, Claudia. Johannes Chrysostomus in Konstantinopel (398–­404): Weltsicht und
     Wirken eines Bischofs in der Hauptstadt des Oströmischen Reiches. Studien und
     Texte zu Antike und Christentum 6. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2000.
Tomlin, R.S.O. “The Curse Tablets.” In The Temple of Sulis Minerva at Bath. Vol. 2, The
     Finds from the Sacred Spring, 323–­24. Edited by Barry Cunliffe. Oxford: Oxford
     University Press, 1988.
Toneatto, Valentina. “I linguaggi della ricchezza nella testualità omiletica e monastica
     dal II al IV secolo.” In Economica monastica: Dalla disciplina del desiderio
     all’amministrazione razionale, 1–­88. Edited by Valentina Toneatto, Peter Černic,
     and Susi Paulitti. Spoleto: Centro di Studi sull’Alto Medioevo, 2004.
Topographie chrétienne des cités de la Gaule, des origines au milieu du VIIIe siècle. Edited
     by Nancy Gauthier and Jean-­Charles Picard.
     Vol. 4, Province ecclésiastique de Lyon (Lugdunensis Prima). Edited by Brigitte
           Beaujard. Paris: Boccard, 1989.
     Vol. 5, Province ecclésiastique de Tours (Lugdunensis Tertia). Edited by Luce Pietri.
           Paris: Boccard, 1987.
     Vol. 6, Province ecclésiastique de Bourges (Aquitania Prima). Edited by Françoise
           Prévot. Paris: Boccard, 1989.
     Vol. 7, Province ecclésiastique de Narbonne (Narbonensis Prima). Edited by
           Paul-­Albert Février. Paris: Boccard, 1989.
     Vol. 8, Province ecclésiastique de Sens (Lugdunensis Senonia). Edited by Jean-­
           Charles Picard. Paris: Boccard, 1992.


                                           711
                                      works cited


Topographie chrétienne des cités de la Gaule, des origines au milieu du VIIIe siècle.
     Vol. 10, Province ecclésiastique de Bordeaux (Aquitania Secunda). Edited by Louis
           Maurin. Paris: Boccard, 1998.
Toscano, Santo. Tolle divitem: Etica, società e potere nel De divitiis. Testi e Studi di Storia
     Antica 19. Catania: Edizioni del Prisma, 2006.
The Transformations of Vrbs Roma in Late Antiquity. Edited by W. V. Harris. Journal
     of Roman Archaeology: Supplementary Series 33. Portsmouth, RI: Journal of
     Roman Archaeology, 1999.
Le trasformazioni delle “élites” in età tardoantica. Edited by Rita Lizzi Testa. Rome:
     Bretschneider, 2006.
Trelenberg, Jörg. Augustins Schrift de Ordine. Beiträge zur historischen Theologie 144.
     Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2009.
Troncarelli, Fabio. Il ricordo della sofferenza: Le Confessioni di sant’Agostino e la
     psicoanalisi. Naples: Edizioni scientifiche italiane, 1993.
Trout, Dennis E. “Augustine at Cassiciacum: Otium Honestum and the Social Dimen-
     sions of Conversion.” Vigiliae Christianae 42 (1988): 132–­46.
———. “Christianizing the Nolan Countryside: Animal Sacrifice at the Tomb of St.
     Felix.” Journal of Early Christian Studies 3 (1995): 281–­98.
———. “Lex and iussio: The Feriale Campanum and Christianity in the Theodosian
     Age.” In Law, Society, and Authority in Late Antiquity, 162–­78. Edited by
     Ralph W. Mathisen. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
———. Paulinus of Nola: Life, Letters, and Poems. Berkeley: University of California
     Press, 1999.
Ullmann, Walter. Gelasius I (492–­496): Das Papsttum an der Wende der Spätantike zum
     Mittelalter. Päpste und Papsttum 18. Stuttgart: Hiersemann, 1981.
Van Dam, Raymond. “Bishops and Society.” In The Cambridge History of Christianity.
     Vol. 2, Constantine to c. 600, 343–­66. Edited by Augustine Casiday and Frederick W.
     Norris. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
———. Kingdom of Snow: Roman Rule and Greek Culture in Cappadocia. Philadelphia:
     University of Pennsylvania Press, 2002.
———. Leadership and Community in Late Antique Gaul. Berkeley: University of
     California Press, 1985.
———. The Roman Revolution of Constantine. New York: Cambridge University Press,
     2007.
———. Saints and Their Miracles in Late Antique Gaul. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
     sity Press, 1993.
———. “Self-­Representation in the Will of Gregory Nazianzus.” Journal of Theological
     Studies 46 (1995): 118–­48.
Van Ossel, Paul. “Rural Impoverishment in Northern Gaul at the End of Antiquity:
     The Contribution of Archaeology.” In Social and Political Life in Late Antiquity,
     533–­65. Edited by Will Bowden, Adam Gutteridge, and Carlos Machado. Late
     Antique Archaeology 3:1. Leiden: Brill, 2006.
Vandals, Romans and Berbers: New Perspectives on Late Antique Africa. Edited by
     Andrew H. Merrills. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.


                                             712
                                secondary sources


Vaquerizo Gil, Desiderio, and José Ramón Carillo Díaz-­Pinés. “The Roman Villa of El
     Ruedo (Almedinilla, Córdoba).” Journal of Roman Archaeology 8 (1995): 121–­54.
Vasey, Vincent R. The Social Ideas in the Works of St. Ambrose: A Study on De Nabuthe.
     Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 17. Rome: Institutum Patristicum Augustini-
     anum, 1982.
Vera, Domenico. “L’altra faccia della luna: La società contadina nella Sicilia di Gregorio
     Magno.” Studi Storici 47 (2006): 437–­61.
———. Commento storico alle “Relationes” di Quinto Aurelio Simmaco. Pisa: Giardini,
     1981.
———. “Enfiteusi, colonato e trasformazioni agrarie nell’Africa romana proconsulare
     del tardo impero.” Africa Romana 4 (1987): 267–­93.
———. “Forme e funzioni della rendita fondiaria nella tarda antichità.” In Società
     romana e impero tardoantico, 367–­447. Edited by Andrea Giardina. Vol. 1,
     Istituzioni, ceti, economie. Bari: Laterza, 1986.
———. “Giustiniano, Procopio e l’approvvigionamento di Costantantinopoli.” In
     Politica, retorica e simbolismo del primato: Roma e Costantinopoli (secoli IV–­VII),
     9–­44. Edited by Febronia Elia. Catania: Spazio Libri, 2004.
———. “Massa fundorum.” Mélanges de l’École française de Rome: Antiquité 111 (1999):
     991–­1025.
———. “I paesaggi rurali del Meridione tardoantico: Bilancio consuntivo e preventivo.”
     In Paesaggi e insediamenti rurali in Italia meridionale fra tardoantico e altome­
     dioevo, 23–­38. Edited by Guiliano Volpe and Maria Turchiano. Bari: Edipuglia,
     2005.
———. “Presentazione.” In Eburnea Diptycha: I dittici d’avorio tra Antichità e Medioevo,
     7–­9. Edited by Massimiliano David. Bari: Edipuglia, 2007.
———. “Simmaco e le sue proprietà: Struttura e funzionamento di un patrimonio
     aristocratico del IV secolo d.C.” In Colloque genèvois sur Symmaque, 231–­76.
     Edited by François Paschoud. Paris: Belles Lettres, 1986.
———. “Terra e lavoro nell’Africa romana.” Studi Storici 4 (1988): 967–­92.
Verheijen, Luc. Nouvelle approche de la Règle de Saint Augustin. Vol. 1. Vie Monastique
     8. Bégrolle-­en-­Mauge: Abbaye de la Bellefontaine, 1980.
Vescovi e pastori in epoca Teodosiana. In occasione del XVI centenario della consacrazione
     episcopale di S. Agostino, 396–­1996. XXV Incontro di studiosi dell’antichità cristiana,
     Roma, 8–­11 maggio 1996. Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 58. Rome:
     Institutum Pontificium Augustinianum, 1997.
Vessey, Mark. “Peregrinus against the Heretics: Classicism, Provinciality and the Place
     of the Alien Writer in Late Roman Gaul.” Studia Ephemeridis Augustinianum 46
     (1994): 529–­65. Reprinted in Vessey, Latin Christian Writers in Late Antiquity
     and Their Texts. Ashgate: Variorum, 2005.
Veyne, Paul. “Les cadeaux des colons à leur propriétaire: La neuvième Bucolique et le
     mausolée d’Igel.” Revue archéologique (1981): 245–­52.
———. L’empire gréco-­romain. Paris: Seuil, 2005.
———. Le pain et le cirque: Sociologie historique d’un pluralisme politique. Paris: Le Seuil,
     1976. Translated by Brian Pierce as Bread and Circuses: Historical Sociology and


                                            713
                                    works cited


     Political Pluralism. With an introduction by Oswyn Murray. London: Allen Lane
     Penguin, 1990.
———. Quand notre monde est devenu chrétien (312–­394). Paris: Albin Michel, 2007.
     Translated by Janet Lloyd as When Our World Became Christian, 312–­394.
     Cambridge: Polity Press, 2010.
Vieillard-­Troïekouroff, May. Les monuments religieux de la Gaule d’après les oeuvres de
     Grégoire de Tours. Paris: Champion, 1976.
Vigil-­Escalero Guirado, Alfonso. “Granjas y aldeas altomedievales al Norte de Toledo
     (450–­800 D.C.).” Archivo Español de Arqueología 80 (2007): 239–­84.
Les villas romaines de São Cucufate (Portugal). Edited by Jorge de Alarcão, Robert
     Étienne, and Françoise Mayet. Paris: Boccard, 1990.
Villas Tardoantiguas en el Mediterráneo Occidental. Edited by Alexandra Chavarría,
     Javier Arce, and Gian Pietro Brogiolo. Anejos de Archivo Español de Arqueología
     39. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 2006.
Virlouvet, Catherine. La plèbe frumentaire dans les témoignages épigraphiques: Essai
     d’histoire sociale et administrative du peuple de Rome antique. Collection de l’École
     française de Rome 414. Rome: École française de Rome, 2009.
———. Tessera frumentaria: Les procédés de la distribution du blé public à Rome à la fin
     de la République et au début de l’Empire. Bibliothèque des Écoles françaises
     d’Athènes et de Rome 296. Rome: Palais Farnèse, 1995.
Vogüé, Adalbert de. Histoire littéraire du mouvement monastique dans l’antiquité. 12
     vols. Paris: Le Cerf, 1991–­2008.
Volk, Katharina. “Heavenly Steps: Manilius 4.119–­121 and Its Background.” In
     Heavenly Realms and Earthly Realities in Late Antique Religions, 34–­46. Edited
     by Ra’anan S. Boustan and Annette Yoshiko Reed. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 2004.
Völker, Reiche und Namen im frühen Mittelalter. Edited by Matthias Becher and
     Stefanie Dick. Munich: W. Fink 2010.
Volpe, Giuliano. “Architecture and Church Power in Late Antiquity: Canosa and San
     Giusto (Apulia).” In Housing in Late Antiquity: From Palaces to Shops, 131–­68.
     Edited by Luke Lavan, Lale Özgenel, and Alexander Sarantis. Late Antique
     Archaeology 3.2. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
———. Contadini, pastori e mercanti nell’Apulia tardoantica. Bari: Edipuglia, 1996.
Volpe, Giuliano, Giuliano De Felice, and Maria Turchiano. “Faragola (Ascoli Satriano):
     Una residenza aristocratica tardoantica e un ‘villaggio’ altomedievale nella Valle del
     Carapelle: i primi dati.” In Paesaggi e insediamenti rurali in Italia meridionale fra
     tardoantico e altomedioevo, 265–­97. Edited by Guiliano Volpe and Maria Turchi-
     ano. Bari: Edipuglia, 2005.
———. “La villa tardoantica di Faragola (Ascoli Satriano) in Apulia.” In Villas
     Tardo­antiguas en el Mediterráneo Occidental, 221–­51. Edited by Alexandra
     Chavarría, Javier Arce, and Gian Pietro Brogiolo. Anejos de Archivo Español
     de Arqueología 39. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas,
     2006.



                                           714
                              secondary sources


Volpe, Giuliano, Pasquale Favia, Roberta Giuliani, and Donatella Nuzzi. “Il complesso
    sabiniano di San Pietro a Canosa.” In vol. 2 of La cristianizzazione in Italia tra
    Tardoantico e Altomedioevo, 1113–­65. Edited by Rosa Maria Bonacasa Carra and
    Emma Vitale. Palermo: Carlo Saladino, 2007.
Vuolanto, Ville. “Male and Female Euergetism in Late Antiquity: A Study on Italian
    and Adriatic Church Floor Mosaics.” In Women, Wealth and Power in the Roman
    Empire, 245–­302. Edited by Päivi Setälä et al. Acta Instituti Romani Finlandiae
    25. Rome: Finnish Institute, 2002.
Wacher, John. Roman Britain. 2nd ed. Stroud, UK: Sutton, 1998.
Waddell, Helen. The Wandering Scholars. London: Constable, 1929.
Wallace-­Hadrill, Andrew. Rome’s Cultural Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 2008.
Wallraff, Martin, and Cristina Ricci. Oratio funebris in laudem sancti Iohannis Chry­
    sostomi: Epitaffio attribuito a Martirio di Antiochia 40. Spoleto: Centro Italiano
    di Studi sull’Alto Medioevo, 2007.
Ward-­Perkins, Bryan. “407 and All That: Retrospective.” Journal of Late Antiquity 2
    (2009): 75–­78.
———. The Fall of Rome and the End of Civilization. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    2005.
———. From Classical Antiquity to the Middle Ages: Urban Public Building in Northern
    and Central Italy, 300–­850. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984.
Weaver, Rebecca Harden. Divine Grace and Human Agency: A Study of the Semi-­
    Pelagian Controversy. Patristic Monographs Series 15. Macon, GA: Mercer
    University Press, 1996.
Weidemann, Margarete. Das Testament des Bischofs Bertram von Le Mans vom 27. März
    616: Untersuchungen zu Besitz und Geschichte einer fränkischen Familie im 6. und 7.
    Jahrhundert. Römisch-­germanisches Zentralmuseum, Monographien 9. Mainz:
    R. Habelt, 1986.
Weinfeld, Moshe. Social Justice in Ancient Israel and in the Ancient Near East. Minne-
    apolis: Fortress; Jerusalem: Magnes, 1995.
Weisweiler, John. State Aristocracy: Resident Senators and Absent Emperors in Late
    Antique Rome, c. 320–­400. D. Phil. diss., University of Cambridge, 2011.
Wermelinger, Otto. Rom und Pelagius: Die theologische Position der römischen Bischöfe
    im pelagianischen Streit in den Jahren 411–­432. Päpste und Papsttum 7. Stuttgart:
    A. Hiersemann, 1975.
Wessel, Susan. Leo the Great and the Spiritual Rebuilding of a Universal Rome. Supple-
    ments to Vigiliae Christianae 93. Leiden: Brill, 2008.
Whittaker, C. R. “Circe’s Pigs: From Slavery to Serfdom in the Later Roman World.”
    Slavery and Abolition 8 (1987): 88–­122.
Wickham, Chris. Early Medieval Italy: Central Power and Local Society, 400–­1000.
    London: MacMillan, 1981.
———. Framing the Early Middle Ages: Europe and the Mediterranean, 400–­800.
    Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.



                                         715
                                   works cited


Wickham, Chris. The Inheritance of Rome: A History of Europe from 400 to 1000.
     London: Allen Lane, 2009.
———. “Marx, Sherlock Holmes and Late Roman Commerce.” Journal of Roman
     Studies 78 (1988): 183–­93.
Wiesen, David S. St. Jerome as a Satirist: A Study in Christian Latin Thought and
     Letters. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1964.
Wightman, Edith Mary. Roman Trier and the Treveri. London: Hart-­Davis, 1970.
Wilkinson, Kevin W. “Palladas and the Age of Constantine.” Journal of Roman Studies
     99 (2009): 36–­60.
———­. “Palladas and the Foundation of Constantinople.” Journal of Roman Studies
     100 (2010): 179–­94.
Williams, Daniel H. Ambrose of Milan and the End of the Arian-­Nicene Conflicts.
     Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Williams, Megan Hale. The Monk and the Book: Jerome and the Making of Christian
     Scholarship. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Wilson, Andrew. “Urban Production in the Roman World: The View from North
     Africa.” Papers of the British School at Rome 70 (2002): 231–­73.
Wipszycka, Ewa. “Les aspects économiques de la vie de la communauté des Kellia.”
     In Études sur le christianisme dans l’Égypte de l’antiquité tardive, 337–­62. Studia
     Ephemeridis Augustinianum 52. Rome: Institutum Patristicum Augustinianum,
     1996.
———. “Les formes institutionnelles et les formes d’activité économique du mona­
     chisme égyptien.” In Foundations of Power and Conflicts of Authority in Late
     Antique Monasticism, 109–­54. Edited by A. Camplani and S. Filoramo. Orientalia
     Lovaniensia Analecta 157. Louvain: Peeters, 2007.
———. “Le monachisme égyptien et les villes.” Travaux et mémoires 12 (1994): 1–­44.
Witschel, Christian. Krise-­Rezession-­Stagnation? Der Westen des römischen Reiches im 3.
     Jahrhundert n. Chr. Frankfurt: M. Clauss, 1999.
———. “Re-­Evaluating the Roman West in the 3rd Century A.D.” Journal of Roman
     Archaeology 17 (2004): 251–­81.
———. “Statuen auf spätantike Platzanlagen in Italien und Afrika.” In Statuen in der
     Spätantike, 113–­69. Edited by Franz Alto Bauer and Christian Witschel. Wies-
     baden: Reichert, 2007.
Witschel, Christian, and Barbara Borg. “Veränderungen im Repräsentationsverhalten
     der römischen Eliten während des 3. Jhrdts n. Chr.” In Inschriftliche Denkmäler
     als Medien der Selbstdarstellung in der römischen Welt, 47–­120. Edited by Geza
     Alföldy and Silvio Panciera. Stuttgart: F. Steiner, 2001.
Wood, Ian N. “The Exchange of Gifts among the Late Antique Aristocracy.” In El disco
     de Teodosio, 301–­14. Edited by Martín Almagro-­Gorbea. Estudios del Gabinete
     de Antigüedades 5. Madrid: Real Academia de la Historia, 2000.
———. “Review Article: Landscapes Compared.” Early Medieval Europe 15 (2007):
     223–­37.
Wood, Susan. The Proprietary Church in the Medieval West. Oxford: Oxford University
     Press, 2006.


                                          716
                              secondary sources


Woolf, Greg. “Food, Poverty and Patronage: The Significance of the Epigraphy of the
     Roman Alimentary Schemes in Early Imperial Italy.” Papers of the British School at
     Rome 58 (1990): 197–­228.
———. “Writing Poverty in Rome.” In Poverty in the Roman World, 83–­99. Edited by
     Margaret Atkins and Robin Osborne. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
     2007.
Wrede, Hennig. Senatorische Sarkophage Roms: Der Beitrag des Senatorenstandes zur
     römischen Kunst der höhen und späten Kaiserzeit. Monumenta Artis Romanae 29.
     Mainz: P. Zabern, 2001.
———. Die spätantike Hermengalerie von Welschbillig. Römische-­germanische
     Forschungen 32. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1972.
Yü, Ying-­shih. Trade and Expansion in Han China: A Study in the Structure of Sino-­
     Barbarian Economic Relations. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967.
Zangara, Vincenza. “Una predicazione alla presenza dei principi: La chiesa di Ravenna
     nella prima metà del sec. V.” Antiquité tardive 8 (2000): 265–­304.
Zanker, Paul, and Björn Christian Ewald. Mit Mythen leben: Die Bildwerk der römischen
     Sarkophage. Munich: Hirmer, 2004.
Zettler, Alfons. Offerenteninschriften auf den frühchristlichen Mosaikfußböden Venetiens
     und Istriens. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2001.
Ziche, Hartmut G. “Administrer la propriété de l’église: L’évêque comme clerc et
     comme entrepreneur.” Antiquité tardive 14 (2006): 69–­78.
Zuiderhoek, Arjan. “The Icing on the Cake: Benefactors, Economics and Public
     Building in Roman Asia Minor.” In Patterns in the Economy of Roman Asia Minor,
     167–­86. Edited by Stephen Mitchell and Constantina Kaksari. Swansea: Classical
     Press of Wales, 2005.




                                         717
                                    Index
                                   •••••




Abba Moses, 418                                            in, 288, 320, 322, 329–30, 331, 334–38,
abbots, 412, 416, 420, 421–22, 516–17                      335; church councils of, 326; and churches
Abellinum, bishop of, 81                                   and theology, 369; churches of, xx, 325,
Abelonii, sect of, 342                                     334–36, 355–56, 361, 366; church govern­-
Abraham, 313–14                                            ment in, 333; church of, 380–81, 494; cities
acclamation, 171, 209; and Ambrose, 126;                   of, 6–7, 8, 151, 330, 337; civil religion of
   and Augustine, 171, 324, 341; and church                cities in, 330; clergy of, 301, 307, 381, 519;
   offering ceremonies, 318; and euergetism,               and Constans, 333; conversions in, 46; and
   76; and games, 354; and Jerome, 318; and                country bishoprics of fourth century, 520;
   Magerius, 67; for Pinianus, 324, 342,                   and court of Ravenna, 529; development of
   347, 482; of poor people, 234–35; and                   churches in, 334–36; ecclesiastical govern-
   Proconsuls of Africa, 344; by theater                   ment in, 425; as economic center of gravity,
   crowds, 66                                              65; and economy, 23; and emperor, 366–67,
Achaemenid empire, 83, 85, 86                              381; estates in, 366–67; euergetism in, 64,
Actium, 269                                                65–66, 67–68; farmers of, 367; giving in,
Adalgisel Grimo, 524                                       xx, 357, 363–65; and imperial court, 381;
Adam, 178–79, 180, 181, 255, 368, 474                      and imperial games at Carthage, 353; and
Adeodatus, 168–69                                          imperial system, 368; landholdings of
Adrianople, battle of, 128, 135                            nobility of Rome in, 366–67; landowners of,
Aemilius, bishop of Beneventum, 374                        364; local courts in, 394; Manichaeism in,
Aetius, 394, 447, 454, 461                                 158; mediocritas of churches in, 325; mosaics
Africa, xix, 118; and Ambrose, 148; and                    of, 206; paganism in, 329; and Pelagius, xx;
   annona civica, 73, 110, 471; and aristocrati-           poor people in, 342; Proconsularis, 400, 401;
   zation of church, 494; and Augustine, 149,              Proconsulship of, 95; Proconsuls of, 344;
   167, 322–31; and barbarian invasions, 360;              provincial society of, 366–67; refugees from
   baths of, 200; bishops of, 330, 336–37, 344,            Rome in, 288, 300–301, 323, 330, 359–60;
   357, 366, 371, 382, 529; building in, 65;               regions of, 326–28; reputation for novelty
   Byzacena, 400, 401, 484; Catholic Church                in, 369; role of populus in, 357; and Rome,
   in, 170; Catholics and Donatists in, 328–36,            288; rural settlements in, 10; and Septimius
   348, 349, 364, 382, 483; celibacy of clergy in,         Severus, 95; and taxation, 344, 381, 382,
   519; ceramics of, 28–29, 401; Christianity              383; tenants in, 367; theology in, 369; town



                                                     719
                                               index


Africa (continued )                                       135; and ancient cults, 129; appeal of
  councils in, 330, 381; trade associations in,           amnesty for nobleman by, 145; and
  38, 381; urban congregations of, 341; urban             Arianism, 121, 122–23, 125–26, 212; and
  vs. rural, 337; Vandals in, 389, 400–402,               aristocracy, 123; and Augustine, 121, 145,
  434, 453; and wealth and churches in, 325;              146, 148, 150, 155, 162, 165, 328, 339, 341,
  wealthy people and populus in, 344; wines of,           348, 518; and aura of senatorial governor-
  401                                                     ship, 123; and aurum utile, 128; and avarice,
agriculture, 19, 23, 242, 296, 459, 460, 468; and         131, 132, 134, 135, 141, 145–46, 155, 268;
  Christianity, 470–73; and climate, 12; and              background of, 146; and Basil of Caesarea,
  climate change, 481; and mobilization of                141; and benevolence, 130, 132, 133; and
  labor, 499. See also annona civica; estates;            Bible, 138, 139; as bishop of Milan, 31, 45,
  farmers; grain; harvest; labor/laborers;                119, 120, 121, 122, 209, 211; and bishop of
  landowners                                              Pavia, 128; and bishops, 127, 174, 209; and
Alamans, 444                                              bishops’ court, 137; building projects of,
Alans, 387, 388, 389                                      123; burial place of, 123; and Calligonus,
Alaric, 119, 287, 298; and Faltonia Anicia                142; and Catholic Church, 147; and
  Proba, 303; and Pelagian Controversy, 300;              celibacy, 123, 127, 518; character of, 124;
  and Pinianus and Melania, 300; and sack of              as Christian, 124; and Christian benevo-
  Rome, 294–95, 300, 302, 350; and slaves,                lence, 155; and Christian community, 141,
  297; and Stilicho, 298                                  146–47; and Christian thought, 130; and
Albina, 323, 325, 342, 359                                Church of Milan, 123, 124–26; and Cicero,
Album of Timgad, 24–25, 152                               120, 127, 129–30, 131, 132, 155, 178, 180;
Alexander, bishop of Tipasa, 336, 365                     as civic benefactor, 123; and class difference,
Alexander, Saint, shrine of, 88                           176; and clergy of Milan, 127; and cohesion
Alexandria, 158                                           and militancy of Catholic Church, 130;
Algeria, 13, 24                                           as consularis, 122; coyness of, on wealth
almsgiving. See giving                                    of clergy, 127; and “Dalmatics of Saint
Alpes Maritimes, 420                                      Ambrose,” 123; and Damasus, 251, 252, 256;
Alypius of Thagaste: and Anicia Juliana,                  death of, 146, 148; De Nabuthae, 138–41;
  305–6; and Augustine, 326; Augustine’s                  De officiis, 126–34, 135, 137, 138, 145, 146,
  letter of 420 to, 381; and Caelestius, 317;             178; and Diocletian’s Price Edict, 144; and
  as Catholic bishop of Thagaste, 170; and                discourse on decline, 137; and Donatus, 333;
  Donatist schism, 328; and emperor, 170; and             dramatic impulse of, 140–41; and eating,
  imperial court, 380, 381–82; and imperial               351; and emperors, 121; and euergetism, 68;
  service, 167; and Manichaeism, 160; and                 family of, 123–24; father of, 123–24; and
  patronage, 26; and Pelagius, 371; and                   Gaudentius of Brescia, 142; and giving, 123,
  Pinianus and Melania the Younger, 323, 324,             133–34; and God, 128; and gold coins for
  325; and Salvian, 451; travels to Holy Land,            poor, 123, 126, figure 1; and Golden Age,
  170; and Valerius, 376; wealth of, 170                  131, 132, 134; and grain dealers, 138; and
amator patriae (lover of homeland), 64, 108;              Gratian, 56, 104, 108; and Gregory VII, 251;
  aristocracy as, 112; bishops as, 503–4;                 and history, 131; hymns of, 126, 165; image
  emperor as, 111; landowners as, 114;                    of, 121; and imperial court, 56, 122, 165;
  Romanianus as, 153; Symmachus as, 97,                   and imperial power, 238; and imperial
  100, 106. See also euergetism                           service, 123–24; and imperial tax system,
Ambrose, xix, xxiii, 31, 52, 188, 311, 325, 455;          346; and Israel, 141; and Italy, 140; and
  and abundance of nature, 198; and Adam                  Jerome, 261; and Jesus Christ, 222; and John
  and Eve, 132, 133; and Africa, 148; and                 Chrysostom, 138; on Joseph and Pharaoh,
  Altar of Victory, 107; and Ambrosiana, 123,             142; and Jovinian, 285; and justice, 80, 128,


                                                    720
                                            index


131, 133, 136; and laborers, 140; and land-              268, 316, 348, 351, 378, 418; writings
owners, xxvii, 136, 140, 316; and latifundia,            of, 133
140; learning of, 124; and Leo the Great,              Ambrosiana, 123, 135
467; letters of, 124; letter to bishop of              Ambrosiaster, 255–56, 257, 262, 268, 283;
Claterna, 140; lobbying of, 145; on love of              Answers to Questions on the Old and New
neighbor, 137; and Marcellina, 123, 283;                 Testaments, 255; commentaries on Paul’s
and marriage, 271; and middling congrega-                Epistles, 255
tion, 122; and Milan, 45, 122, 141, 146–47,            Ammianus Marcellinus, 17, 44, 57–58, 59, 70,
171, 256; and ministerial theory of imperial             111, 113, 254, 345
power, 238; mother of, 124; and nature, 131,           amor civicus (love of the city), 63–65
132; as nobleman, 123; and Optatus, 335;               Amphiclea, 273
and paganism, 104; and Palladius, 123;                 amphitheater, 66, 108–9, 116, 142, 335, 353,
patronage by, 144–45; and Paulinus of                    357
Milan, 145–46; and Paulinus of Nola, 185,              Anatolia, 12
210, 217; and people of Milan, 122, 124–26,            Angers, 395
143, 147, 225, 256; and people of Rome,                Anician family, 94, 271, 286, 287, 317, 366;
138; and Petronius Probus, 51; and plati-                and church, 303; and Demetrias, 302; and
tudes, 141; and poor people, 78–79, 80, 123,             Innocent, 370; and nobility, 307; and
126, 128–29, 133–34, 138, 141, 147, 155;                 Pelagius, 287, 301, 372; and sack of Rome,
populism of, 141; power base of, 120, 122;               373; suspicion of treason of, 303; and veiling
preaching of, 122, 124, 135; and primitiv-               of Demetrias, 302–3; and Visigoths,
ism, 312; and Priscillian, 212, 215; and                 298–99, 303
property, 131–32, 181, 312; as prophet, 139;           Anicius Auchenius Bassus, 286
and prophets of Israel, 141; and Psalms, 126;          Annaba (Hippo), 13
and public policy, 129; ransom by, 128, 129,           Annia Aelia Restituta, 64
226; and reality effect, 140; religious rivals         Annianus, son of Matutina, 34
of, 129; robes of, 123; and Roman famine of            annona civica, 110–13, 401, 457, 460–61; and
384, 137–38; and Roman Senate, 138, 185;                 Africa, 73, 110; after Gothic invasions, 372;
and Roman state, 146; and Salvian, 438, 448;             after Gothic sack of Rome, 459; and ancient
and Satyrus, 123; self-portrait of, 128; as              religiosity, 110–11; and Augustine, 73;
senator and governor, 45, 212; and Seneca,               collection and transport of, 112; and
131; sermons of, 133, 135, 138, 141, 142,                Cubiculum Leonis, 250; in fifth century,
165, 195, 339, 341; and sixth-century                    462, 463; in fourth and early fifth centuries,
church, 482; and society, 120, 129–30, 131,              459–60; and Hippo, 326; loss of African,
136, 137, 138–41, 144, 147; and solidarity,              471; market rates for, 114; pigs for, 111,
129, 133; and Symmachus, 93, 100, 104–8,                 227, 459, 460, 462, 463; and popes of Rome,
119, 121, 122, 124, 125, 126, 129, 134,                  468; and populus Romanus, 69–70; and
137, 145, 146; and taxation, 145, 146; and               Prefect of Rome and Senate, 110; and
theaters, 126; and Theodosius, 121; and                  Symmachus, 112–13, 137, 250; and Vandal
town councils, 127; and ultra-Nicene party,              conquest of Carthage, 459; and Vestal
122, 211; unable to protect political suspect,           Virgins, 104, 105–6. See also agriculture;
146; upperclass background of, 122; and                  harvest
urban community, 81; and Valentinian I, 56;            Anthemius, 466–67
and Valentinian II, 104, 121, 125–26; and              Antichrist, 332
Vestal Virgins, 137; and violence, 268; and            Antioch, 158, 235, 261, 262, 276
wealth, 127, 128, 135, 528; wealth of, 123,            Antoninus, bishop of Fussala, 337–38, 344,
212; and wealthy people, 56, 78–79, 120,                 380
129, 134, 135, 138, 139–41, 142–44, 147,               Aphrodisias, 40


                                                 721
                                               index


apocalypticism, 293–94. See also Last                     123; of Aquitaine, 195; and astrology, 203;
   Judgment                                               and Augustine, 164; and Ausonius of
Apollinaris, 406                                          Bordeaux, 191; and barbarian invasions of
Apostles, xxv, 159                                        Gaul and Spain, 398; and Cassian, 417;
Appian Way, 241                                           characteristics of, 94–96; and Christian
Apulia, 471                                               court, 45–50; and Christianity, 102, 122; in
Aquileia, xxvi, 127; basilica at, 39–40, 41,              churches, 122; churches as inheriting wealth
   figure 6; mosaics at, 39–40                            of, 494; and churches of Rome, 248; and
Aquilius Aper, 63                                         Cicero, 179; and clergy, 285, 356–57, 475;
Aquilius Nestorius, 63, 64                                clients and tenants of, 113; collapse of
Aquinum, bishop of, 493                                   traditional, 530; and Constantine, 94; and
Aquitaine, 196, 198; and aristocracy, 195; and            countryside, 20; created by Roman state,
   Ausonius of Bordeaux, 189; barbarians in,              393; culture of, 171; and Damasus, 251–52,
   388; and Constantinople, 210; and Goths,               456; and deacon Tigridas, 258; and duty to
   389; and imperial system, 195; and land-               city, 103; endowments by minor, xxvii;
   owners, 195; and mosaics, 206; and Paulinus            factionalism of Christian, 372, 373; families
   of Nola, 209, 210, 219; supplies for Rhine             of, 95; and family of Marcella, 269–70; and
   frontier from, 195; villas of, 192, 208, 237;          family of Paula, 269–70; and fears of genteel
   and villas of Britain, 196; Visigoths in, 472          poverty, 124; in fifth century, 460–61; and
Arcadius, 407                                             food supply in Rome, 125; and games, 115,
archaeology, xxii, xxviii, 140; and barbarian             116, 458; and games at Carthage, 353; of
   invasions, 397, 398–400; of Bordeaux, 188;             Gaul, 421–23; and generosity to cities and
   of catacombs of Rome, 250; and Catholic-               citizens, 527; and imperial bureaucracy, 124;
   Donatist competition, 334; of Christian                and imperial honors, 248; and imperial
   quarter of Hippo, 171; and churches of                 system, 55–56; impoverishment of, 467–68;
   Gaul, 500; and Cimitile and Felix of Nola,             and intellectualism, 273–74, 287; and
   228; and landowners, 19; and new aris-                 Jerome, 284, 287, 372; and land given to
   tocracy, 249; of Sbeitla (Tunisia), 521–22; in         church, 475; lesser, 242, 251, 253–54, 284,
   southern Etruria, 459; of southern Italy, 471;         287, 456; and local churches, 286; and
   in suburbium of Rome, 459; of villas, 21,              marriage, 95, 150, 269; and Martin of Tours,
   192; of villas of Spain and Portugal, 213. See         51; and Milan, 125; and Milanese imperial
   also catacombs; mosaics; sarcophagi                    court, 135; and monks of Lérins, 421–23,
architecture, 29, 193; and basilica and shrine of         428; new, 248–50, 251, 273; and new men,
   Saint Crispina, 335; civic, 28; and imperial           98; as nobilissimi humani generis, 96; and
   court, 29; of Roman churches, 242; of shrine           nobilitas as term, 94–95; and old money, 95;
   of Felix of Nola, 228–29, 235; of town                 and paganism, 23, 251; palaces of, 41, 94,
   houses of new aristocracy, 249                         249, 264; and patronage, 113–14; as patrons
Argentarius, Julianus, 500                                of intellectuals, 301; and Paulinus of Nola,
Arianism, 222, 476; and Ambrose, 121,                     224, 226, 266; and Pelagius, 287–88, 317,
   122–23, 125–26, 212; and barbarians,                   372; and people of Rome, 124–25, 265; and
   445; and Catholicism, 122, 125–26; and                 Petronius Probus, 94; and popes, 251; and
   Catholics, 401; and Constantius II, 122;               Priscillian, 51, 215; prosperity of, 23; and
   Controversy over, 50–51; and Valens, 261;              Provence, 412; of provinces, 448; provincial,
   and Valentinian I, 122; and Valentinian II,            94, 96, 393, 422; and provincial competitors,
   125–26; of Vandals, 400–401                            22–23; and public office, 95–96; as refugees
aristocracy/nobility, 109; African landholdings           from sack of Rome, 300–301, 323, 325;
   of Roman, 366–67; after Gothic invasions,              rental properties of, 113; and Rufinus, 372;
   372; as amator patriae, 112; and Ambrose,              and rule of Rome, 111–12; as ruralized, 20;


                                                    722
                                               index


   sale of ancestral properties by, 287; and              150, 155, 162, 165, 328, 339, 341, 348, 518;
   Salvian, 448, 449; sanctuary sought by,                and Anicia Juliana, 305–6; and annona
   285–86; sarcophagi of, 250; senatorial, xxvii,         civica, 73; and Antoninus, 337–38; and
   249, 460, 467–68; and service, 191, 273,               aristocracy, 164; and astrology, 203;
   286, 393; of Spain, 212–13; spiritual guides           audience of, 344–45, 347; and Ausonius
   of, 372; and status, 3; and Symmachus, 97,             of Bordeaux, 188; and avarice, 54, 351;
   306–7; urban, 21; and Ursinus, 252; and                background of, 146; and Beauty, 165–66;
   verecundia, 229; and villas, 194; wealth of,           becomes priest, 324; as bishop, 154, 320;
   95; women of, 27–28; worldly vs. Christian,            as bishop in Africa, 322–31; as bishop of
   306. See also senators                                 Hippo, 13–14, 160, 174, 279; bishops
Aristotle, 55                                             chosen by, 174; and Boniface, 377, 483; and
Arles, 8, 48, 411–12, 413, 420, 423, 424, 434,            books, 170; career of, 148; and Carthage,
   485                                                    73, 148, 149, 154, 158, 160, 326, 327, 337,
Arnobius, 458                                             353–54; and Carthage council, 371; and
asceticism, xxiv, xxv, 287, 295; and Christians,          Cassian, 484; at Cassiciacum, 163–64, 167,
   214–15; cost of, 272; critics of, 214–15; and          172, 182, 242; Catholic baptism for, 163;
   Gaulish clergy, 520; and giving, 272; and              and Catholic Church, 157, 163, 170, 279,
   Jerome, 261, 263, 264, 270, 272, 274,                  328, 329, 348, 377, 379; and Catholic
   282–83, 284; and Jovinian, 284–85; of                  congregation, 348; and celibacy, 163; and
   Lovocatus, 520; and male-female cohabi­                Christian culture, 165; and Christianity,
   tation, 225; and Manichaeism, 158; and                 160, 380–84; and Christianity as majority
   Melania the Younger, 291, 295; and                     religion, 34; and Christian nobility, 306; and
   monasticism in Gaul, 415; and monks of                 Chronicle of 452, 431; and church building,
   Lérins, 428; and Paulinus of Nola, 186, 202,           355–56; and church of sixth century, 482;
   220–21, 223, 225; and Pelagian writers, 309;           and Cicero, 155, 158, 160, 164, 177–80,
   and Pelagius, 302; and Pinianus, 295;                  183; and city buildings, 65–66; and city vs.
   practices of, 214; and Priscillian, 212, 214;          church, 74; on civic generosity vs. giving to
   and property management, 272; and                      poor, 72–73; and class, 175–76; and class
   Provence, 413–14; and renunciation of                  of town councillors, 183; and clergy, 171;
   wealth, 169; and Salvian, 435, 437; and                clergy taught by, 72–73; and common good,
   Syrian ideal of poverty, 266; and wealth sent          177–80, 181, 183; and common search for
   to Holy Land, 281; and wealthy people,                 wisdom, 156; and community, 155, 167;
   214–15, 240                                            and concordia ordinum, 349; conversion of,
Asella, 271                                               165; and councils of African church, 326;
Asterius, 404, 405                                        cousins of, 164; and Crispinus, 367; and
astrology, 203                                            daily expiation, 365; and Damasus, 252;
Ataulph, 295                                              and Dardanus, 378; death of, 149; and De
Athanasius, Life of Anthony, 260                          divitiis, 320, 361; and Demetrias, 302; and
Attalus, 391                                              democratization of ideas, 165; distortions of,
Attila the Hun, 394, 467                                  328; and Donatism, 328–29, 330, 334, 337,
Aufinum, bishop of, 488                                   348, 349; and eating, 351–52; and Ecdicia,
Augentius, Tamesius Olympius, 108                         215; education in Madauros, 152; and
Augustine, xix, xxiii, 31, 188, 265, 311, 514;            euergetism, 68, 72–74; and evil, 178–79; as
   and acclamations, 171, 324, 341; and Adam’s            extempore speaker, 342; and Fabiola, 338;
   fall, 132, 178–79; and Adam’s rebellion, 181;          as faction fighter, 328; and familiaritas, 158,
   and Africa, 149, 167; and Albina, 342; on              159; family of, 174; father of, 151–52;
   alms-begging monks, 214–15; and Alypius,               father’s hopes for, 152; and Firmus, 357, 380;
   255, 326; and Ambrose, 121, 145, 146, 148,             and forgiveness of sins, 515; and free will,


                                                    723
                                               index


Augustine (continued)                                     Paulinus of Nola, 184, 185, 209, 217, 219;
  361, 426, 428–29; and friends/friendship,               and Pelagianism, 291, 349, 359–68; and
  148–49, 155–57, 158–59, 160, 162, 165,                  Pelagius, xx, 288, 301, 305–6, 307, 320, 363,
  169–70, 171, 173, 184, 185; and Gallic                  369, 370, 371, 377, 379; and penance, 362;
  writers, 429; and games, 72–74, 353–54,                 and philosophical community, 162–63, 172,
  356, figure 5; and Gelasius, 474; and                   183; and Pinianus, 324–25, 342, 347, 482;
  generosity, 61, 72–73; and Gerontius, 366;              and Platonic love, 165; and Plotinus, 163,
  and giving, 72–73, 154, 350, 355–58, 361,               165, 166, 180–83; as poor, 151–52; and
  362–63, 379, 440, 495, 522; and God, 164,               poor people, 72–73, 154, 168, 169–70,
  165–66, 183, 201, 350, 429; and grace, 426,             175–77, 322, 342–43, 346, 347, 350–51,
  428, 429; and Harvester of Mactar, 151; and             355, 356, 482–83, figure 5; and populus,
  Hilarius, 320; and Hippo, 73, 171, 185, 326;            339–41, 344–45, 349; and potentia, 346;
  and Hippo-Carthage region, 327, 337; and                and power, 350, 351; and prayer, 362; as
  Hippo congregation, 151; and Hippo’s                    preacher, 72, 326; preaching at Boseth, 34;
  diversity, 327; and Holy Spirit, 414–15;                preaching at Carthage, 340–41, 353;
  and human nature, 363; and imperial court,              preaching by, 321, 339, 342–43, 361;
  371–73, 381–82; and imperial system, 167,               preaching situation of, 340–41; preaching
  329, 346, 347; and inheritance, 439; inner              style of, 341–42, 353; and predestination,
  circle at Hippo, 174, 175; and inner states of          431; and pride, 349–52, 354; and private
  mind, 351; as intellectual, 279; intimate staff         love, 182; and private sphere, 183; and
  (iuvenes) of, 174; and Januarius, 483–84;               private wealth, 185; and private will, 181;
  and Jerome, 260, 279; and Jerusalem Com-                and private will vs. public good, 178–79;
  munity, 168, 414–15; and Jesus Christ, 165;             and privatization and fallen human con-
  and Jews, 342; and Julian of Eclanum, 374,              dition, 181; and property, 150, 162, 168,
  375–76, 379, 382; and landowners, 347; and              169, 170, 174, 175, 176–77, 179–80, 183,
  Leo the Great, 380, 465, 474; and Lord’s                325, 346, 347, 349, 482–85; and Prosper of
  Prayer, 362, 363, 365; and love, 177, 179,              Aquitaine, 426, 430; as provincial, 148; and
  182; as manager of wealth of church,                    rape of nun, 13–14; and religious commu-
  482–83; and Manichaeism, 26, 156–60, 162,               nity, 160; religious perspective of, 328, 330;
  165, 166, 167, 170, 172, 178, 215, 284, 285;            and renunciation of wealth, 184; return from
  marital status of, 150; and marriage, 150,              Carthage, 153; and Romanianus, 153–54,
  161, 162, 174; and material universe, 201;              156, 158–59, 160, 162, 165–66, 167, 170,
  and Melania the Younger, 324–25; and                    188; and Rome, 148, 149, 160; and rule of
  Milan, 119, 148, 151, 160, 161; and                     poverty, 483; and sack of Rome, 359–60;
  monasteries, 484; and monastery as term,                and Salvian, 437, 438, 439, 440, 451; and
  175; monastery of, 171–72, 173–77, 185,                 Satan’s rebellion, 181; and self-advancement,
  279; and monasticism, 149, 155, 168, 174,               161, 162; and self-reliance, 360; and Sevso,
  179–80, 181, 183–84, 348, 414–15, 416,                  205; and sexuality, 158; and shared religious
  437; and monastic life, 173; and monastic               enthusiasms, 155; and silverware, 174, 220;
  poverty, 180; and Monica, 166; and mystical             and sin, 350–52, 361, 362, 364–65, 368,
  experience, 166–67; and Neo-Platonism,                  379, 522; sister of, 174; and slavery, 381,
  163; and nuns, 176; ordination as bishop of             395, 407, 447; and small groups, 155; social
  Hippo, 149; ordination as priest, 171, 173;             context of, 149–53; and social differences
  and original sin, 361; and Ostia vision,                within monastery, 175–76; in social hier-
  166–67, 172; and otium, 164–65, 167, 172;               archy of Milan, 151; and social hierarchy of
  and paganism, 54, 342, 360; as pastor and               Thagaste, 151, 152, 153; and social mobility,
  preacher in Africa, 321; and patronage,                 152–55; and social order, 350; social status
  25–26, 153–54, 164, 168, 170, 279, 346; and             of, 150–51; social views of, 154; social world


                                                    724
                                            index


  of, 148, 149–53, 154; spiritual communism               on wealth of, 194, 391; death of, 209; De
  of, 183; and Symmachus, 26, 93, 119, 149,               herediolo, 190–91, 210, 243; estate revenue
  150, 155, 174; and taxation, 346, 381; as               of, 246; estates of, 190–91; family of, 188;
  teacher, 119, 149, 151, 153, 154, 160; and              and Gaul, 192; and God, 209; grandfather
  Thagaste, 149, 151, 152, 153, 154, 167, 169,            of, 203; and Gratian, 188–89, 202; and
  173, 176; and Thagaste community, 167,                  Hesperius, 198; historical context of,
  168, 169–70, 171; and theater, 73; and town             186–87; and imperial court, 393; and
  councils, 151, 154, 167, 168, 169, 185, 347;            Jerome, 260; and Jesus Christ, 209; and
  and trade associations, 38; and unity, 348,             Jovius, 237; letters of, 189; and marriage,
  378; and virgins, 306; and wealth, 54, 55,              188, 269; and mundus, 202; and Namatius,
  152, 167–69, 179, 183, 185, 322–23,                     405; and noble class, 191; and old nobility
  377–80, 415, 482–85, 528; and wealth as                 of Bordeaux, 252; and otium, 189–90;
  pooled, 162–63, 167–68, 169; and wealthy                Parentalia, 189; and Paulinus of Nola, 186,
  people, 72–74, 175–77, 342, 345, 346–52,                189, 209–10, 217, 232, 239; and Paulinus of
  354, 361–62, 365, 378; and will, 426,                   Pella, 390; poetic letters of, 209–10; poetry
  428–29; and wisdom, 156, 158, 162, 164,                 of, 189, 229; power of, 195; as Prefect of the
  166, 171, 182; woman of, 161–62; and                    Gauls, 188; and robes of Constantius II,
  women, 163, 175, 176; works: Cassiciacum                188; and Sevso, 205; social position and
  Dialogues, 163–65, 178; City of God, 179,               success of, 188–89; and Symmachus, 93,
  348, 357, 359–60, 362–63, 368, 458;                     100, 187, 188, 191; and Trier court, 208;
  Confessions, 119, 149, 151, 156, 163, 166,              and Valentinian I, 188; and Venantius
  174; Contra academicos, 164, 165–66; De                 Fortunatus, 218; and villas, 100, 197, 208;
  beata vita, 164, 165; De opere monachorum,              and wealth, 189–91, 314
  215; De ordine, 164; Divjak Letters, 380–82,         avarice, 312, 313, 314, 378; and Ambrose, 131,
  383; Dolbeau Sermons, 339, 340, 353, 356;               132, 134, 135, 141, 145–46, 155, 268; and
  Letter 209, 338; letters of, 101, 239, 377,             Augustine, 54, 351; of bishops, 488; and
  378, 380–82, 383; letters to Alypius, 325,              Cassian, 418; and De divitiis, 311; denounced
  381; letter to Albina, 325; New Letter 2*,              by pagans, 137; denunciation of, 58; and
  357; New Letter 20*, 338; Ordo monasterii               Diocletian, 144; and Salvian of Merseilles,
  (Regulations for the Monastery), 173, 174,              438; and Symmachus, 138; wealthy people
  175, 348; parents as honesti, 151; and                  as monsters of, 56
  populus, 339–41, 344–45, 349; and potentia,          Axido, 328, 333
  346; Praeceptum, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176,
  177, 178, 348, 351; and Respublica, 181;             Bacaudae, 403, 424, 431, 434, 446
  Sermon 355, 484; Sermon 356, 484–85;                 Badel, Christophe, 94
  sermon of January 22, 404 (On Obedience),            Bailey, Lisa, 396
  340–41; sermon on avarice, 54; sermon on             Bakhtin, Mikhail, 134
  Christian gifts, 61; sermons of, 339–58,             Balkans, 46, 196
  361–68, 380; Soliloquia, 182                         Balmelle, Catherine, 208
Augustus, 22, 55, 111                                  baptism, 285, 286, 361, 369, 474
Aurelius, bishop of Carthage, 302, 326, 340,           barbarian invasions, xxvi, 285, 387–89, 390;
  347–48, 349, 355, 371                                  and age of gold, 30; and Augustine on
Aurelius Victor, History of the Caesars, 146             wealth, 378; crisis from, 346; and Gaul and
Ausonius of Bordeaux, xix, 387, 412, 522; and            Spain, 208; and landowners, 20, 208, 297;
  Aquitaine, 189, 208; and Augustine, 188;               and refugees from Rome, 359–60
  and Bordeaux, 191, 208, 269; and Chris-              barbarians, 301, 392; and Arianism, 445; and
  tianity, 186, 202–3, 207; and civil war in             Cassian, 416, 417; collaboration with, 395;
  Gaul, 208; and consulship, 96, 188; coyness            courts of, 392–93, 398, 405–6; and dress, 27,


                                                 725
                                              index


barbarians (continued)                                      292, 298, 319, 351, 419, 515; meditation on,
  28; in Gaul, 422; gifts of land to, 395; and              264–65, 273; New Testament, xxiv; Old
  Gregory the Great, 468; at Hippo, 384; and                Testament, 79–80, 83, 318, 508–9; and
  imperial taxes, 447; kingdoms of, 434, 495;               Origen, 279; Paulinus’s citations from, 236;
  and local Romanness, 394; and local state                 Paul’s Epistles, 308; Proverbs, 315, 318, 441;
  power, 393; and Milan, 120; and need for                  Psalms, 431, 450, 508; reading of, 274–75;
  war, 395; non-Christan, 444; in northern                  Romans, 282, 465; and Rufinus of Aquileia,
  Italy, 455; pagan, 452; raids of, 11, 19; and             276; 1 Timothy, 311, 352; translation of,
  regionalism of empire, 393; and Salvian, 433,             274; Vulgate, 261; Wisdom literature, 86.
  434, 444–46, 449, 450; and Symmachus,                     See also Dives and Lazarus; Lord’s Prayer;
  100, 113                                                  Rich Young Man; Widow’s Mite, story of
Barcelona, 8, 21; Paulinus of Nola at, 209, 225,         Bickerman, Elias, 59
  262, 324                                               Bir Ftouha (pilgrimage church complex at
Barcelona, bishop of, 39                                    Carthage), figure 18
Barnish, Sam, 460                                        Bischofsherrschaft, 494, 506
Basilica Constantia, Arles, 423                          bishop of Rome: and emperor, 373; of fifth
Basilica Nova (New Basilica), Milan, 228, 231,              century, 462; and Senate, 455, 456; and
  501                                                       titular churches, 247. See also popes
Basilica Portiana, Milan, 125, 126                       bishops, xxii, xxiv; administrators of, 496–97;
Basil of Caesarea, 129, 141, 175; Homilies, 276;            of Africa, 330, 336–37, 344, 357, 366, 371,
  Rule, 276                                                 382; as amator patriae, 503–4; and Ambrose,
Bath, 34                                                    127; Ambrose as, 209; Ambrose’s choice of,
baths, 35, 62–63, 192, 199–200, 220–21, 405                 174; and Ambrosiaster, 255; Ammianus
Bazas, 191, 395                                             Marcellinus on splendor of, 44; and Arian
Bede the Venerable, 278                                     Controversy, 50–51; Augustine’s choice of,
Bellerophon, 206                                            174; avarice of, 488; and barbarian invasions,
benefactions, 70; and baths, 200; for citizens,             397; and Bischofsherrschaften, 494, 506; body
  68–69; for citizen vs. non-citizen poor, 70;              as untouchable, 337; bribery in elections of,
  diverted from circus to church, 82; and                   491; building by, 500; and care for poor,
  Paulinus of Nola, 219, 227; and titular                   81; Catholic, 332; and celibacy, 127; and
  churches, 247; by wealthy people, 75. See                 Chilperic, 495; and churches founded by
  also giving                                               landowners, 475; and civic duties, 38; and
Beneventum, 99, 227                                         civic elites, 356; and clergy, 489–92; clergy
benevolence, 59, 62, 257. See also generosity;              as watchdogs of, 488; from clergy ranks,
  giving                                                    425–26, 428; and compassion, 53; con-
Benivolus, 143                                              solidation of power of, 49; Constantine’s
Berbers, 43                                                 policy toward, 31–32; constraints on,
Bertram of Le Mans, 512, 515, 524, 525                      487–88; control of wealth by, 491; at council
Bethlehem, 272, 276                                         of Saragossa, 213; country, 336–37, 344,
Béziers, 399                                                357; and courtiers, 493; and curial class, 44;
Bible: Acts of the Apostles, 168, 172, 236, 414,            denunciations of, 488; disputed elections
  437; 1 Chronicles, 40; 1 Corinthians, 377;                of, 491; as distant figures, 489; as dominant
  and cost of copies of Gospels, 275; Daniel,               players in Rome, 456; Donatist, 331, 332;
  361; Ecclesiastes, 236; Hebrew Scriptures,                as drawn from local clergy, 490–91; and
  79–80, 85, 86; Hosea, 442; illuminated, 267;              ecclesiastical autonomy, 456; election of,
  Isaiah, 41, 79, 223, 355, 430; and Jerome,                426; and euergetism, 62, 68; of Ferentis, 493;
  273, 274; 2 Kings, 423; Luke, 84, 86, 236,                and foundation of churches, 472; frugality
  282; Mark, 84, 86; Matthew, xxiv, 168, 217,               of, 44; games by sons of, 75; giving to,


                                                   726
                                               index


  332–34; and giving to church, 487; and holy               microcosm-macrocosm, 199; and poverty as
  people of God, 337; and Holy Spirit, 333;                 anti-wealth, 220; and wealthy people, 205,
  and household-based Christianity, 49;                     221
  landed wealth of, 456, 506–7; and land-                 Bône (Hippo), 13
  owners, 482–83, 493–94; and land tax, 36;               Boniface, Count of Africa, 377, 389, 483
  lawyers of, 496; leisure of, 35; and literary           books, 170, 272, 275, 277, 279. See also
  sources, 506; as local figures and patrons,               libraries
  226; as lords of wealth, 487–88; and love               Bordeaux, 8, 188, 198, 248, 398; and Ausonius,
  for clergy, 510, 511; love of, 504–5; from                191, 208, 269; Gothic court at, 392, 393;
  lower-class backgrounds, 338; as managers,                and Goths, 400; governmental and com-
  483, 485, 487, 496–98, 530; of Membressa,                 mercial center of, 195; and Paulinus of Pella,
  336; as middling men, 127; and militias,                  391, 392; and Visigoths, 396
  506; and monk-bishops trained in Lérins,                Borges, Jorge Luis, 16
  491; monks as, 423–26, 427; and monks of                Bowes, Kimberly, 49, 82–83, 193, 194, 212,
  Lérins, 420–22, 423–26, 427; of Narni, 497;               229
  and other pressure groups, 383; outsiders               Bransbourg, Gilles, 496
  chosen as, 491; pastoral power of, 504–5,               Braudel, Fernand, 394
  506, 507, 523; and Paulinus of Nola, 230;               Brioude, 406
  persuasion by, 57; and plebs as poor of Israel,         Britain, 29, 402, 403, 503, figure 3; and
  81; and poor and citizens, 81; and poor and               Christianity, 46; Christians in, 34; cities of,
  populus, 82; and poor people, 43–44, 81,                  7; civil war in, 389; and De divitiis, 310;
  504, 508, 509–10, 511–12; and populus,                    harvest in, 11; local elites in, 29; mosaics of,
  341; prayer for empire by, 44; as preachers,              206, 250; and Pelagian tracts, 317; post-
  339; priests as equivalent of, 520; and priests           imperial power blocs in, 393; provincial
  traveling with women companions, 519–20;                  landowners of, 250; regionalism of, 393; and
  and privilege and care of poor, 43–44;                    Roman empire, 29–30; trade with Bordeaux,
  privileges granted to, 35; provincial, 51; as             188; villas of, 20, 21, 192, 196–97, 250
  replacing town council, 82; rise of status of,          Brittany, 519–20
  xxvii; role as undisputed leader, 489; role of,         Bronze Age, 14
  337; and Roman state, 382–84, 529; and                  Bruttium, 471
  Salvian, 439; as seminator Verbi, 339;                  Buddhism, 75, 89–90, 462–63, 523
  senators as, 494; as similar to principales,            Bulla Regia, 360
  490; social background of, 343–44, 357;                 Burgundians, 393
  social horizons of, xxvii; Spanish, 213, 214;           Bury, James, 33
  and Sulpicius Severus, 230; and taxes, 506;
  and town council, 344, 507; and trade and               Caelestius, 317, 370–71, 372, 373
  business, 127; and urban community, 81;                 Caesarius, bishop of Arles, 485, 512
  and Valentinian I, 50; and verecundia,                  Calama, 64
  44–45; as vir venerabilis, 337; and wealth              Calendar of 354, 25, 56, 259, 265, 465
  and power in Gaul, 494; wealthlessness of,              Calligonus, 142
  485; wealth of, 512; and wealth of church,              Cameron, Alan, 98, 259
  485, 506–7; wealth of churches of, 493; and             Cameron, Averil, 72
  wealthy people, 347; wealthy people as, 45,             Campania, 99–100, 108–9, 374; and Paulinus
  528; and worldly power, 506. See also clergy;             of Nola, 184, 209, 235, 294, 374; poor
  priests                                                   people in, 235; and Symmachus, 99–100,
Bodel, John, 48                                             108–9, 119, 189, 235, 405
body: care of, 199–201; denial of, 282; humors            Canusium, 501
  of, 200; and Jerome, 263–64, 274; and                   Cappadocia, 175


                                                    727
                                                index


Capraria, 214, 223, 299                                    Catholicism, xxi; and Arianism, 122, 125–26;
captives, ransom of, 226, 395–96                              and Augustine, 157, 328, 329; and Damasus,
Carlo Borromeo, Saint, 135                                    251
Carranque (villa), 21, 193                                 Cecconi, Giovanni, 65
Carrié, Jean-Michel, 19, 37, 403–4                         Celestine, 338, 374, 426
Carthage, 6, 8, 118, 167, 333; and annona                  celibacy, 76; and Ambrose, 123, 127, 518; and
   civica, 73; aristocracy’s withdrawal to,                   Augustine, 163; and bishops, 127; of clergy,
   300–301; and Augustine, 73, 148, 149, 153,                 76, 127, 518–20, 521; post-marital, 518;
   154, 158, 160, 326, 327, 337, 353–54; Bir                  superior status of, 285. See also marriage;
   Ftouha pilgrimage church complex at,                       virginity
   figure 18; Christian congregation of, 344;              Chadwick, Henry, 489
   conference of 411, 330–31, 334; council of              Champlin, Edward, 439
   416, 369, 370; council of 417, 357; council             Charlemagne, 350
   of 418, 371; falls to Vandals, 384; and games,          Childebert I, 513
   73, 343, 353–54; poor people in, 342;                   Chilperic of Neustria, 495
   Punic, 401; and refugees from Rome, 288,                Christianity, 76; in Africa, 288, 320, 322,
   300–301, 330, 359; and Rome, 360; as                       329–30, 331, 334–38; and agriculture in
   Rome in exile, 360; social hierarchy in, 151;              Italy, 470–73; and almsgiving, 42; and
   Vandal conquest of, 389, 445, 454, 459;                    Ambrose, 130; and aristocratic Roman
   Vandal kingdom of, 400–402, 403; villas                    values, 455–56; and Augustine, 160; and
   of, 20; wealth of, 43                                      Ausonius of Bordeaux, 186, 202–3, 207; and
Cassian, John, xxi, 414–19, 424, 436, 516; and                barbarian invasions of Gaul, 396; changes in
   Augustine, 484; Collationes, 414, 415, 419,                sixth century, 514–15; charitable attitudes
   426; De Institutis Coenobiorum, 414, 415;                  toward poor in, 59–60; and cities, 46,
   and Prosper, 426–28, 429; and Salvian,                     81–83; and classical myths, 204; and
   437                                                        Constantine, 207; as continuous with
Cassiciacum, 163–64, 172                                      Roman world, 82–83; and death-bed gifts
Cassiodorus, 278, 459, 463                                    for soul, 527; and elites, 45–46; and
Castile, 521                                                  euergetism, 103; history of, 430–31, 443;
Castor and Pollux, temple of, 110, 111                        history of recruitment to, xxvii; horizons
Castor of Apt, 414                                            opened by, 76; household-based, 49; and
catacombs, 272; at church of Saint Agnes, 283;                human condition, 76; and imperial court,
   of clergy, 256–58; and Damasus, 252; of                    45, 46; imperial definition of, 333; and
   Domitilla, 250; and fifth-century nobility,                Judaism, 528; Latin, 31; as majority re-
   461; of Priscilla, Bottai cubiculum, figure                ligion, 34; and Manichaeism, 158, 159;
   14a; of Rome, 37–38, 250, 269; of San                      and middling and lower classes, 81; and
   Sebastiano, 241; of Santa Cristina at Volsinii,            ministerial theory of imperial power, 238;
   Bolsena, 62, 75; and sarcophagi, 269; and                  and mundus, 202; and new god and visible
   social boundaries, 48                                      universe, 202; other-worldliness of, 523; and
Catholic Church: and Ambrose, 147; and                        paganism, 136–37, 138, 201, 204, 207; and
   Arians, 401; and Augustine, 157, 163, 170,                 Paulinus of Nola, 186; and plebs, 36–39;
   279, 328, 329, 330, 348, 377, 379; and                     private cult of, 49–50; as privileged, 35–36;
   classical heritage of Rome, 251; and                       and Prosper, 443; of Provence, 413; and
   Donatist laypersons, 331; and Donatists,                   religion of friendship, 101; resilience of,
   328–38, 348, 349, 364, 382, 483; and                       81; and Roman nobility, 102; and Roman
   Salvian, 445; success of, 171; and Vandal                  society, 75–76; and Roman state, 382–84;
   kingdom of Carthage, 401; and wealth, 378;                 rural, 520–21; and Salvian, 434, 451; social
   wealth of, 171                                             niche of, 32; and Symmachus, 102, 103,


                                                     728
                                               index


  104–9; and taxation, 145; traditions of                   pious gifts to, 71; and pagan priesthoods,
  classical Rome in, 455–56; transcendental-                129; pastoral image of, 523; payment for
  ism of, 202; as transforming Roman world,                 expense of building, 41; and People of
  82–83; as universal religion, 34; and upper               Rome, 462; property of, 475, 476–77,
  classes, 122; and villas of Spain and Portugal,           482–87, 491–92, 495–97, 498, 507–8, 524;
  213–14, 520–21; and Volusianus, 359, 360,                 and public vs. private unchurched forms of
  458; votive giving in, 227; and wealth, 207;              Christianity, 50; and rights of poor people,
  wealth as altering, xxi; wealthy and poor                 124, 507, 508; sacral character of wealth of,
  people included in, 78; wealthy people as                 530; and Salvian, 435, 436–41, 451; as single
  supporting, xxvii; and wealthy people vs.                 community of saints, 285; social mission of,
  poor people, 169                                          129; as society within society, 43; as sole
Christians: and asceticism, 214–15; average,                great landowner, 469; and state, 505; as
  88–89; in Britain, 34; and Constantine, 30,               substitute for civic life, 81–82; and subur-
  33–34; and Damasus, 253; and euergetism,                  bium of Rome, 458; unity with empire, 383;
  62–63; and giving, xxv; God’s protection                  and Valentinian I, 104; and wealth, 119;
  of, 33; and harvests, 12; and hidden saviors              wealth as gifts to poor of, 169; wealth of, 43,
  among poor, 510; and Israel, 467; and new                 128, 469–70, 476, 482–86, 506–7; wealthy
  aristocracy, 251; occupations of, 37–38;                  donors to, 88
  and paganism, 102–9; and pagans, 103–9;                 churches, 367; adjacent to villas, 212;
  persecution of, 33, 37; and pious giving, 226;            administration and deployment of wealth by,
  as privileged minority, 34; ransom of, 43;                xxi; aesthetics of light in, 501, 525; in Africa,
  as refugees from Rome, 359; in Rome vs.                   325, 334–36, 341, 355–56, 366, 369; and
  Africa, 288; and Salvian, 445; sermons of,                barbarian invasions, 396, 397; of Castile,
  72; as single holy people, 253, 265, 272, 283,            521; changing ceremonials of offering in,
  284, 287; as soldiers, 253; and taxation, 146;            524–25; charismatic fund-raisers in, 280; as
  and violence in Numidia, 328; and votive                  conscious of own wealth, xxii; and counter-
  virginity, 271                                            culture, 47–49; and cultural resources in
Chrodinus, 497                                              sixth century, 482; daily offerings in, xxv;
Chronicle of 452, 403, 431, 450                             differing constituencies within, 89; in
church: administrators of, 496–97, 499; of                  distinctive regions of Roman empire,
  Africa, 371, 380–81; and Anician family,                  xxii–xxiii; distribution of wealth among,
  303; aristocratization of, 494; benefactions              493; economic upsurge of, 84; entry of rich
  diverted to, 82; bequests to, 438–41, 495;                into, xix; on estates, 20, 471–75; founded
  ceremonies of offering in, 317–18; and city,              by landowners, 475; gains of wealth and
  74; civil personality of, 486; collective                 standing in Rome, xx; in Gaul, 500; glory to
  wealth of, 530; and Constantinian system,                 local, 379; growth of wealth in, xxii; imperial
  50; and Damasus, 250; as dominating society               funds for, 333; imperial grants to, 50;
  and economy of western Europe, 522;                       imperial privileges of, 496; and imperial
  donations to, xxv; of Durobrivae, 42; estates             system, 253; as inheriting wealth of secular
  of, xxi, 507, 511; as family, 49; fourfold                aristocracy, 494; inscriptions on pavements
  Roman division of revenues of, 488; giving                of, 41; jewels for foundation of, 271; lay
  to, xix, 53, 530; history of, 430–31; lands of,           founders of, 472–75; mediocres in, 425; as
  496; legacies to, 486; legal vulnerability of             meeting place for different classes, 124–25;
  gifts to, 495; as little heaven, 525; medi-               mingling of aristocrats and plebeians in, 283;
  ocritas of, 51, 81, 245, 325; and Melania the             mosaic floors of, 87–88; and new aristocracy,
  Younger and Pinianus, 299; and model of                   249, 250; offerings ceremony in, 324; pace
  imperial bureaucracy, 256; mosaic pave-                   and impact of entry by wealthy people into,
  ments of, 525–26; otherworldly efficacy of                32; patronage of local, 286; as places of


                                                    729
                                                 index


churches (continued)                                           defensor of, 507; delegation of authority to,
   relief, 47; privately founded, 472; as product              4–5, 35; as depleted, 20; diversity of, 6; and
   of local conditions, xxii–xxiii; and pro-                   estates, 195; and games, 118; generosity to,
   prietary rights, 489; of Provence, 420;                     53; giving to, 61–65; lay power in, 506; love
   provincial, 425; qualifications for leadership              for, 68, 69, 73–74, 354, 356; middling classes
   in, 411; of Ravenna, 500; role of wealthy in                in, xxvii; nobles’ duty to, 103; and pagans
   Spanish, 211; in Rome, xx; of Rome, 460;                    and Christians, 103; physical presence of
   sanctuary in, 381; as sedes iustitiae, aula                 past in, 65; and populus, 66; of Provence,
   pudoris, 46; silk veils and altar coverings for,            411–12; public appearances of leaders of, 28;
   28; social classes in, 46; social composition               relative density of, 6–7; as res publicae, 66;
   of, 32; social standing of, xix; in Spain,                  and restructuring of society, 24; and rise of
   211–15, 216; spiritual autonomy of, 332;                    Christianity, 7–8; social hierarchies of, 151;
   support for, 272; tax exemptions of, 50; and                in Spain, 212–13; strangers and non-citizen
   theology, 369; titular (in Rome), 245–48,                   poor of, 69; Symmachus on cults of, 106; tax
   249, 257, 287, 370, 457, 466; and upper                     collection by, 11; and taxes and harvests, 13;
   classes, 122; upper nobility and, 286; urban,               traditional ideal of giving to, xix; and villas,
   425; and wealth, xxv; wealth of, xxii, 492–96;              196, 212–13; villas as, 194; wealth for wor-
   and wealth sent to Holy Land, 281; wealthy                  ship in protection of, 105–6; wealth of, 493;
   and poor people in, 45, 46–47, 124–25, 142,                 wealthy vs. poor people in, 37. See also
   265; of wealthy people, 469–70; wealthy                     amator patriae (lover of homeland)
   people in, 32, 45–50, 211; and wealthy                   citizens, 53, 59; and annona civica, 69–70, 111;
   plebians, 343; in wood, 521                                 attitude toward, 66–71; and Augustine, 73;
Church of Milan, 123, 124–26                                   and Cicero, 130; generosity toward, 66–68;
Church of Rome, 248, 253, 467                                  love for, 68; and non-citizens, 68–69; rights
Cicero, 99, 118; and Ambrose, 120, 127,                        of residents, 68–69
   129–30, 132, 155, 178, 180; and aristocracy,             civic love, 64, 68. See also amator patriae (lover
   179; and Augustine, 155, 158, 160, 164,                     of homeland); cities; euergetism
   177–80, 183; and common good, 178; De                    civil war, xxvi, 10, 11, 19, 20, 378, 386–89; and
   officiis, 127, 129–30, 155; and friendship,                 Cassian, 416, 417; and factionalism, 390,
   155; Hortensius, 158; and Jerome, 277; and                  392; in Gaul, 208, 422, 423; and landowners,
   Julian, bishop of Eclanum, 375; Laelius, 155;               208; and Paulinus of Nola, 210, 392; and
   and loyalty, 179; and property, 179, 180; and               Paulinus of Pella, 391–92; and wealthy
   public vs. private good, 178; and res publica,              people, 210–11
   178; and Roman society, 178; and social                  Clamosus, 526
   cohesion, 177–78; and Symmachus, 130;                    Claterna, bishop of, 140
   and tenuis, 151; and wealth, 179                         Clemens, 102
Circe, 421, 449                                             clergy: of Africa, 301, 307, 381; and Ambrosia-
Circumcelliones (Circumcellions), 328                          ster, 255–56; and aristocracy, 285, 356–57;
circus, 66, 80, 82, 103, 116, 117, 353, 354,                   Augustine on, 171; Augustine’s teach-ins to,
   452–53, figures 4, 5. See also games                        72–73; benevolence of, 257; and bishops,
Circus Maximus, 103, 116, 458, 461, 465,                       488, 489–92; bishops from ranks of,
   figure 9                                                    425–26, 428; bishops’ love for, 510, 511; of
Cirencester, 196                                               Bruttium, 518–19; and celibacy, 76, 127,
cities: in Africa, 6–7, 8, 151, 330, 337, 341;                 518–20, 521; and churches on estates,
   of Alpes Maritimes, 412; and Augustine,                     473–74; and civic duties, 38; Constantine’s
   74; and bishops, 81, 356; of Britain, 196;                  policy toward, 31–32, 33; and curial class,
   Christian communities in, 171; and Chris-                   44; and Damasus, 255, 256; as distinguished,
   tianity, 46, 81–83; classical model of, 71;                 36; as dominant players in Rome, 456; and


                                                      730
                                                index


   ecclesiastical government in Gaul, 425–26;              commercium, 230–32, 233, 234, 315
   epitaphs of, 256–58; and farmers, 473; of               Complutum, 209
   fifth century Rome, 462; and food supply of             Conditaria (Spice Girl), 511
   Rome, 256; as holy poor, 257, 438; and                  conference, of Carthage (411), 330–31, 334
   household-based Christianity, 49; and im-               Constans, 333
   perial bureaucracy of Gaul, 425; and inter-             Constantine, 14, 29, 102, 104, 269, 323, 331,
   cession of sins, 520; as intercessors, 516; and           404; and age of consensus in churches, 211;
   Jerome, 262; and laity, 49, 517, 519; and                 aims of, 32–33; and Ammianus Marcellinus
   laity bequests, 475–77; and landowners,                   on sobria vetustas, 58; and Arian Contro-
   473–74, 475; and land tax, 36; lawyers as                 versy, 51; and barbarian states, 393–94;
   members of, 496; and lesser aristocracy,                  Christian endowments of, 242–45; and
   253–54; as lesser town councillors, 490;                  Christianity, 207; and Christianity as
   and local lay of Aquileia, 40; and loss of                majority religion, 32–34; and Christians, 30;
   inheritance, 439; and marriage, 174; and                  and churches, xx; and churches of Africa,
   Maximus Basilius in Rome, 476; members                    325; and church of John the Evangelist, 383;
   of senatorial order as, 209; from middling                and Church of the Holy Apostles, 214; and
   and lower classes, 81, 171; as middling men,              clergy, 33; conversion of, xix, xxii, xxvii, 23,
   127; as militia of God, 257–58; and minor                 30, 31, 32–33, 37, 39, 42, 120, 242, 528;
   nobility, xxvii; monasticization of, 522; as              empire of, 95; endowment of churches by,
   monks, 174; as more holy others, 285; as                  242–45; and giving at death, 486; giving by,
   new men, 36; and nobles, 475; othering                    59; and God, 33; and gold, 15; and Jesus
   of, 517–22; patronage for, 489, 490; and                  Christ, 202; and Lactantius, 46; and local
   pauperes, 343; and peasants, 474; as peni-                churches, 286; and new aristocracy, 248; and
   tents, 439; and personal taxes, 35; and poor              non-Christians, 33; pagan critics of apostasy
   people, 257, 507, 510; and popes, 510–11;                 of, 137; and Petronius Probus, 103; and
   and Pope Symmachus, 511; and populus/                     pious givers to poor, 43; policy toward
   plebs, 341, 425; prayer for empire by, 44; and            bishops and clergy, 31–32; policy toward
   privilege and care of poor, 43–44; as                     paganism, 45; and privilege and care of poor,
   privileged, 33, 35–36, 473; professional                  43–45; privileges granted to bishops and
   persona as, 257; and property, 174; and                   clergymen by, 35–36; and provincial society,
   protection and donations from emperor,                    22; reforms of, 94; Roman palace of, 243; and
   50; as replacing town council, 82; Roman,                 senatorial order, 98; shrines and mausolea of,
   256–58, 262; as sacral class, 517; and                    242; sons of, 124; and Symmachus, 106; and
   sacrifice of Mass, 524; and Salvian, 438, 451;            taxation, 146; and town councils, 22; and
   senators as, 494; as separate and superior                Trier, 187; and wealth of churches, 493
   caste of sacred persons, 522; and slaves, 473,          Constantine III, 388, 423
   474, 511; social background of, 343–44;                 Constantinian system, 50–52, 251, 335
   social horizons of, xxvii; social origins of,           Constantinople, 33, 161, 210, 235
   36–39; as Third Estate, 252, 253–54, 262,               Constantius (head of armed forces for court
   285, 374, 456; and tied farmers, 511; and                 of Ravenna), 423
   tonsure, 517; and trade associations, 38;               Constantius (retired vicarius), 317
   urban, 51; as watchdogs of bishops, 488;                Constantius II, 22, 33, 104, 188, 269, 445,
   and wealthy plebians, 38; wives of, 518; and              figure 1; and age of consensus in churches,
   women’s display of wealth, 28. See also priests           211; and Arianism, 50, 51, 122; and
Clermont, 405, 406, 463; basilica of, 443, 500               cathedral of Milan, 125; and church of Saint
clients, 59, 60, 193, 449–50. See also patronage             Peter’s in Rome, 244; and clerical exemp-
Clovis, sons of, 407                                         tions, 35, 36; as scattering gold coins as
Colosseum, 103, 116, 117, 458, 461–62, 476                   consul, 56


                                                     731
                                                index


Constantius III, 452                                          congregation, 256; and upper nobility, 251;
Conybeare, Catherine, 224, 232, 239                           and Valentinian I, 280; and verses for tombs
Cooper, Kate, 49, 378–79                                      of martyrs in catacombs, 259; and wealth,
corn dole, 68                                                 254, 280
corpora, 35                                                Danube region, 7, 196, 447
councils: of Carthage (416), 369, 370; of                  Dardanus, 378, 399, 420
   Carthage (417), 357; of Carthage (418),                 David, 40
   371; of Diospolis (415), 370; of Elvira, 61; of         Davidson, Ivor, 131
   Mâcon (585), 499, 519; of Mâcon (second),               deacons, 256, 489
   509; of Milevis (416), 370; of Nicaea, 51,              dead, the, xxviii, 234, 241, 252–53, 398–99,
   122; of Saragossa, 213; of Serdica (Sofia), 45;            424
   of sixth-century Gaul, 519; of Toledo (633),            death, 221, 440
   499; of Tours (567), 508, 512, 519                      Decius Marius Venantius Basilius, 476
Creobulus of Myndos, 194                                   decuriones. See town councillors (curiales)
Crispinus, bishop of Calama, 367                           De divitiis (On Riches), 307, 319, 320, 358,
Cubiculum Leonis, 250                                         417, 418, 522; and Augustine, 361; and
Cuicul, basilica at, 367–68                                   Salvian of Merseilles, 438; scholarship on,
Curran, John, 272                                             310; and wealth, 310–17, 364; and wealthy
curse tablets, 34                                             people, 310–17, 318, 361, 378; and will,
Cynics, 266                                                   311, 312, 313, 316. See also Pelagianism;
Cyprian of Carthage, 42, 43, 46, 332, 333, 357,               Pelagius
   528                                                     defensor, 381, 383, 496, 507
                                                           Delage, Pascal-Grégoire, 423
daemones, 201                                              Demetrias Anicia, 287, 302–7, 308, 317, 320,
Dalmatia, 6, 299                                              358, 463–65
Damasus, 248, 425, 470, figure 12; age of,                 De rebus bellicis, 15, 23–24
  250–54; and Ambrose, 251, 252, 256;                      De vita christiana, 317, 318, 418
  Ammianus Marcellinus on, 254; and                        Diana, Mons Tifata temple of, 109
  aristocracy, 251–52; and Augustine, 252;                 Didymus the Blind, 261
  as auriscalpius matronarum, 254, 280; and                Diem, Albrecht, 516
  catacombs, 252; and Catholicism, 251; and                Dill, Samuel, 433
  Christians as single holy people, 253, 265,              Diocletian, 144, 146
  283, 287; church founded by, 251; and                    Dionysius (deacon), 257
  church of Rome, 253; and clergy, 255, 256;               Dionysos, 196, 237
  and clergy as Third Estate, 252, 262, 285;               Dives and Lazarus, 236, 267, 315, 467
  clerical family of, 251; death of, 262;                  Divjak, Johannes, 338, 357, 380
  disputed election of, 44, 251–52, 254, 280;              doctors, 35, 60, 263, 301
  and family piety focused on dead, 252–53;                Dolbeau, François, 339, 353
  generation of, 252; and giving, 254, 280; and            Donatists: absorption of estates of, 371; and
  God, 253; and inscriptions, 252–53; and                     Augustine, 328–29, 330, 334, 337, 348,
  Jerome, 258, 260, 261, 262, 276, 279; and                   349; bishops of, 400–401; and Catholics,
  marble, 252; and martyrs, 252; and minor                    328–38, 348, 349, 364, 382, 483; clergy
  nobility, 456; and monks, 280; and pagans,                  of, 331; confiscated estates of, 483; and
  254; patronage of, 262; as patron of arts,                  Crispinus, bishop of Calama, 367; outlawed,
  259; and Paulinus, 252; as pope, 251–53;                    331; at Timgad, 335
  and Proiecta, 252; and Roman church, 250;                Donatus, 329, 333–34
  and Roman people, 256; and Senate, 253;                  Dorchester, 196
  and silverware, 251; and unified Christian               Dossey, Leslie, 336–37


                                                     732
                                                index


dress, 116, 220; and abjectio of Jesus Christ,               178; love of vs. love of city, 65; and Milan,
  figure 13; of Ambrose, 123; of Asterius, 405;              135; and missorium of Theodosius I, 96; as
  and Augustine’s monastery, 175–77; of                      ordinary human being, 238; and paganus,
  Ausonius of Bordeaux, 188; of clergy vs.                   102; persuasion of, 57; protection and
  laity, 517; of consul, 96; on Esquiline                    donations from, 50; public appearances of,
  Casket, figure 2; as gifts at Carthage games,              28; public office from, 95, 96; residence at
  353; of Jesus Christ, 222–23; of Masona’s                  Ravenna, 372, 456; residence at Rome,
  clergy, 511; and Melania the Younger,                      456–57; residence away from Rome, 111;
  292–93, 300, 319; of monks, 176–77; and                    and Santa Maria Maggiore (Rome), 457; and
  nobility, 27–28; and nobility of Arles, 412;               social hierarchy, 23; and social order, 350;
  of Paulinus of Nola, 220; and Pinianus,                    Sulpicius Severus on, 387; and Symmachus,
  292–93, 319; for poor people, 235; as prizes               100, 101, 106–7, 118, 119; and taxation,
  at games, 354; and social status, 176; wealth              145; and taxes and harvests, 13; and torture
  in, 246                                                    of slaves, 61; and Victory, 107–8; wealth
Duero valley, 399                                            from, 333; western, 50. See also imperial
Dura Europos, 41                                             court; imperial government; imperial
Durobrivae (Water Newton, UK), 41–42, 196                    privileges
                                                           empire, xxi; advocacy revolution of, 144; age
Ebanista, Carlo, 228                                         of, 30; alternatives to, 393; as ancien régime,
Ecclesius, 502                                               434; as bipolar society, 34; and Britain,
Ecdicia, 215                                                 29–30; Christian princes as rulers of,
Eclanum, 374                                                 382–83; and Chronicle of 452, 431; and
economy, 8–10, 23, 40                                        church of Africa, 380; consolidation of,
Egypt, 158, 159, 326, 412; ascetic settlements               9; crisis of, xx–xxi, 148, 385; decline of,
   of, 240; grain levy from, 14; and harvests, 11,           136–37, 378, 384, 411; and delegation of
   12; monasticism of, 170, 226, 272, 277, 414,              government, 4–5, 6, 35; demographic
   415, 417–18, 419, 424, 437; and monastic                  downturn in, 9; distinctive regions of, xxii;
   rules, 175, 176                                           division of, 50; eastern provinces of, 33; as
Eiriksson, Thorstein, 527, 530                               empire of gifts, 58–59; fall of, 393, 394; as
Ellis, Simon, 193                                            federation of regions, 393; formal cessation
Elvin, Mark, 141                                             of, xxii; as Israel, 442, 443; legitimacy of,
emperors, 11; absent, 116; African landhold-                 xxiv; limitations of, 9–10; loyalty to, 11; as
   ings of, 366–67; after Gothic sack of Rome,               minimal state, 4–5, 35; pagans in armies of,
   455; and Alypius, 170; as amator patriae,                 452; population of, 8; prayer for, 44; profane
   111; and Ambrose, 121; and Ambrosiaster,                  elements of, 452–53; and Prosper of
   255; and annona civica, 73, 111, 112; and                 Aquitaine, 430–32, 443; regions of, xxi;
   appeals and denunciations, 144; and aris-                 and Salvian, 433–35, 441, 442, 443–44, 451,
   tocratic Christian factionalism, 372, 373;                453; second century overbuilding in, 9;
   and barbarian migrations, 387, 388, 390; and              second vs. fourth century economy of, 8–10;
   bishop of Rome, 373; and Christianity, 333;               sixth century replacement of, 481; size and
   and church of Africa, 381; condemnation of                diversity of, 10; standard of living in, 8;
   Pelagianism, 382; of Constantinople, 14;                  survival in enclaves, 402, 411, 434; survival
   cult of, 103, 368; and De divitiis, 316; and              of, 10–11, 385; tax losses of, 389; unity with
   Donatism, 331; dress of, 28; family of, 95;               church, 383; wealth as danger to, 57. See also
   favor of, 30; and funds for churches, 333;                Respublica
   and funds for games, 112; and games, 116,               Ennodius, 498
   117, 118; and games at Carthage, 353; and               epigraphy, 250, 379
   gold, 15, 23; and Jesus Christ, 202; law of,            Epiphanius, bishop of Pavia, 497–98


                                                     733
                                              index


Eric the Red, 527                                        farmers, 4, 5, 6; and clergy, 473, 511; emi-
Escribano, Victoria, 212                                    gration of, 19; and landowners, 19–20; and
Esquiline Casket, 206, 252, 304, figures 2, 12              markets, 14; of provincial Africa, 367; rent
estates, 7; absentee owners of, 367; administra-            and taxes of, 13; and Salvian, 449–50, 451;
   tors of, 13–14; in Africa, 366–67; after                 and taxes and harvests, 13; tenant, 19–20;
   Gothic invasions, 372; and annona civica,                tied, 473, 474, 511. See also agriculture
   461; of Ausonius of Bordeaux, 190–91; as              Fasir, 328, 333
   autonomous units, 195; of church, 499, 507,           Faustus, bishop of Riez, 421, 474; On Grace,
   511; churches on, 20, 471–75; and cities,                429
   195; control of labor force of, 19, 20,               feast days, 244
   296–97; of Donatist church, 371; enforced             Federico Borromeo, archbishop of Milan
   residence on, 19; and Goths, 389; and Liber              (1595-1631), 136
   Pontificalis, 492; of Melania the Younger and         Felix (Roman commander), 466
   Pinianus, 295, 296, 323; and monasticism              Felix, Saint, of Nola, 209, 218, 219, 220, 221,
   in Gaul, 415; of Paulinus of Nola, 217–18,               385, 501; and Gothic invasion, 225; graffiti
   219, 226; regna as hereditary, 209–10;                   at shrine of, 227–28; and localization of
   Rostovtzeff on, 18; slaves and semi-servile              poor people, 512; Paulinus’s poems for, 224;
   peasants on, 499; of Symmachus, 97, 99,                  shrine at Cimitile, xx, 209, 218, 219, 220,
   100; of Vestina, 246. See also landowners;               224, 226–30, 235–36, 280, 282, 293–94,
   property; villas                                         314, 323, 335, 364, 383, 501. See also
Etruria, 459                                                Paulinus of Nola
Eucharist, 42, 362, 516, 518, 519, 524, 526              Felix III, 488
Eucherius, 406                                           Felix of Nantes, 518
Eucherius, bishop of Lyons, 421, 436, 441                Finn, Richard, 342
euergetism, 62–68; Augustine on, 68, 72–74;              Firmicus Maternus, 199; Mathesis, 203
   and Beneventum, 99; and bishops, 62; and              Firmus of Carthage, 357, 380
   Christianity, 103; and churches of Rome,              Flavius Caecina Decius Maximus Basilius, 476
   248; in fourth-century, 65; otherworldly              Flavius Felix, 368
   motives for, 89–90; and pious giving, 87, 88;         Flavius Junius Quartus Palladius, 373
   supposed collapse of, 74, 75; and Symma-              Flavius Nuvel, 364
   chus, 99, 117. See also amator patriae (lover         Flavius Paulus, 368, 461–62
   of homeland)                                          Flavius Turcius Rufius Apronianus Asterius,
Eugenia, 396                                                458
Eugenius, 285, 387                                       Florus, 252
Euphrasian Basilica, 193, 525, 526, figures 7,           food, 15, 69–70, 111, 125, 198. See also
   10, 19                                                   annona civica
Euphrasius, bishop of Poreč, 501–2, 525, 526,            fortune, 197, 199, 203, 204, 237
   figure 19                                             Forum, 103, 461
Euric, 405, 406                                          forum, 66, 82
Eusebius of Bologna, 145                                 Foucault, Michel, 504, 505, 523
Eusebius of Vercelli, 260                                Frankish Gaul, 495
Evagrius of Antioch, 260, 261, 276                       Frankish kingdoms, 495
                                                         Frankish kings, 491, 494, 499, 506, 517
Fabiola, 338                                             Frankish nobility, 517
Faltonia Anicia Proba, 267, 298, 302, 303, 313,          Frankish royal family, 500
  373                                                    Franks, 393, 396, 435, 444, 453, 481
Faltonia Betitia Proba: Cento, 313                       Fredegund, 498
Faragola, villa at, 471, figure 11                       frescoes, 28, 228–29, 230, 500, figure 14


                                                   734
                                               index


Freu, Christel, 77, 80, 133                                 church in, 494; and Ausonius of Bordeaux,
friends/friendship, 47; and Augustine, 148–49,              192; barbarians in, 208, 360, 387–89, 390,
   155–57, 158–59, 160, 162, 165, 169–70,                   394, 396, 397, 422; burial in, 399; cathedrals
   171, 173, 184, 185; classical ideal of, 155;             of, 443; and Christianity, 46, 396; churches
   and exchange of favors, 100; and patronage,              in, 397, 500; cities of, 7; civil wars in, 208,
   155–56; and religio amicitiae, 101; spiritual,           422, 423; collapse of Rhine frontier in, 360,
   171; and Symmachus, 97, 100–101, 102,                    368; crisis of empire in, 386; ecclesiastical
   117–18                                                   government in, 424–26; and economy, 23;
Fundi, 282; basilica of, 294                                Frankish, 495; and Franks, 481; games in,
Furia, 257, 270                                             453; Hilary’s charismatic dominance in, 424;
Furius Dionysius Filocalus, 260; Calendar of                imperial administration in, 422; landowners
   354, 259, 265                                            of, 195, 430; landscape of, 192; local courts
Fussala, village of, 337, 338                               in, 394; local Romanness of, 400; and Martin
                                                            of Tours, 51; monasticism in, 415; and
Gafsa, mosaic of, figure 5                                  Patricius, 395–96; poor people of, 508, 509;
Galla Placidia, 383, 407                                    post-imperial power blocs in, 393; priests
games, 53, 62, 65–68; and Augustine, 72–74,                 in, 520; regionalism of, 393; Respublica as
  353–54, 356, figure 5; at Carthage, 73, 343,              ancien régime in, 403–4; and Respublica of
  353–54; chariot races at, 353, 354; and                   5th century, 400; rural Christianity in,
  Christian noble class, 103, 458; at Circus                520–21; Salvian’s moral map of, 444–45;
  Maximus, figure 9; and competition between                and Sidonius Apollinaris, 404–6; sixth-
  families, 86–87; cost of, 16, 74–75, 115,                 century councils of, 519; taxes in, 447; and
  116, 294, 353, 453; as counterchurch, 74;                 testamentary bequests to church, 439; and
  depicted in palace of Junius Bassus, figure 4;            Theodosius I, 210; usurpation and civil war
  and emperors, 112, 116, 117, 118; end of,                 in, 386–89; villas of, 21, 192, 196–97;
  356; events of, 116; in fifth century, 462;               wealth and power of bishops in, 494; and
  funds for, 112; gifts at, 302; and giving, 73;            wealth sent to Holy Land, 281; wealthy laity
  gladiators at, 117; imaginative range of, 118;            of, 519
  and Leo the Great, 465–66; mime dances at,              Geertz, Clifford, 55
  353; on mosaics, 118; and nobility, 115, 116;           Gelasius, Pope, 456, 458; and Augustine, 474;
  and people of Rome, 116; and philosophers,                and landowners, 474; and lawyers, 496;
  73; and populus, 354; and Porphyrius of                   and lay founders of churches, 472–75;
  Lepcis Magna, 504; of praetor, 115, 116;                  letters of, 472–73; as lover of poor and
  of quaestor, 115; and religion, 103; and                  clergy, 511; and Pelagianism, 474; and
  Romanianus, 153; and Salvian, 452–53; in                  slavery, 475
  Saragossa, 453; social bonding at, 74; and              Gemina (daughter), 273
  sons of bishops, 75, 357; in Spain, 453; and            Gemina (mother), 273
  Symmachus, 115–18, 134, 198, 217, 228,                  generosity, 57; and Augustine, 61, 72–73;
  234, 302, 353, 354, 371, 461; and triumph of              euergetism as model form of, 65; and games,
  civilization, 117; and veiling of Demetrias,              66–67; how and to whom shown, 59;
  302; venatores of, 67, 116, 118, 145, 353,                inscriptions for, 10; and Magerius, 67;
  354; and wealthy people, 73, 349, 354; in                 motives for, 59; non-Christian and Christian
  western Mediterranean cities, 118; and wild               attitudes toward, 53; poverty as sole
  beasts, 116–17, 228, 353, 354. See also circus            requirement for, 70; and public buildings,
Garonne valley, 396                                         67; and social position, 60. See also
Gaudentius of Brescia, 142–43                               benevolence; giving
Gaul, xix–xx, xxvi, 6, 161, 187, 402, 434, 515;           Geneva, 436, 443
  aristocracy of, 421–23; aristocratization of            Genius of Carthage, 353


                                                    735
                                              index


Gennadius of Marseilles, Catalogue of                    of local church, 440; to God, 41, 42; as good
   Illustrious Authors, 435                              habit, 88; and good works, 285; imaginative
Genseric, 389, 407                                       content of, xxv; and inheritance, 439; as
Gepids, 444                                              inviolable, 470, 476–77; by Januarius,
Germanus, 414                                            483–84; Jerome on, 76; to Jesus Christ, 487;
Gernet, Louis, xxiv                                      of jewels for foundation of churches, 271; by
Gerona, 118                                              Jews and Christians, xxv–xxvi; as joining
Gerontius, 292, 295; Life of Melania the                 heaven and earth, xxv, 84–85, 86, 88, 524,
   Younger, 292–93, 296, 299, 301, 317, 325,             528; and Judaism, 83, 85, 342; and Julian,
   366                                                   bishop of Eclanum, 375; of land to church,
Gervasius, 246                                           475; and Last Judgment, 440–41, 515; and
Gessios, 238                                             Leo the Great, 465–68; by lesser aristocracy,
Giardina, Andrea, 20                                     254; as loan to God, 85; for local churches,
Gibbon, Edward, 121, 136                                 285; and low-profile styles of leadership,
Gillett, Andrew, 457                                     528–29; and Mass, 340, 472, 524; by Melania
giving, xxiv, 42–43; in Africa, xx, 357, 363–65;         the Elder, 260–61, 276–77, 299–300; by
   by all classes, 528; and Ambrose, 123,                Melania the Younger, 299–300; on modest
   133–34; by aristocracy of Constantinople,             scale, xxvi; to monasteries, 299; and monas-
   457; by aristocracy of Rome, 457; and                 ticism, 516–17; and monk-bishops, 424; to
   asceticism, 272; and Augustine, 154, 350,             monks as holy poor, 282; and mosaic church
   355–58, 361, 362–63, 379, 440, 495, 522;              pavements, 525–26; motivations of, 83;
   to basilica at Cuicul, 367–68; and bequests,          and names carved on churches, 88; non-
   xxiv, 438–41, 475–77, 495; and bishop as              Christian and Christian attitudes toward,
   representative for church, 487; to bishop,            53–54; non-reciprocated, 76; in Numidia,
   332–34; to build churches, 355–56; for care           336; and Optatus, 335; and other world,
   of average citizens, 530; and Carthage games,         440–41, 530; outside Christian churches,
   353; to Catholic Church, 486; and Catholics           52; by pagans, 342; and Paulinus of Nola,
   vs. Donatists, 332–33; and changing cere-             219, 226, 232, 236, 363, 379; and personal
   monials of offering in churches, 524–25;              ties, 59; by Pinianus, 299–300; and poor
   within Christian churches, 52; in Christian-          people, xix, xxv, 42, 356, 358, 486–87, 527,
   ity and Judaism, 528; to church, xix, 486,            528, 530; and pride, 364; to prophets and
   527, 530; church as deserving, 514; for               diviners, 513–14; purchase of paradise
   church infrastructure, 42; to cities, 61–65,          through, 438; as pure altruism, 76; and
   528; and civic giving, 356; to clergymen and          renunciation of wealth, xxiv–xxv; by Roman
   monks as forbidden, 280; and commercium,              Christians, 495; to Roman churches, 245–48,
   232; and Constantine, 486; in courtyard of            272; and Roman law, 486–87; for salvation
   Saint Peter’s, 466; and Cyprian of Carthage,          of soul, 315, 440; and Salvian, 438–41,
   332; and Damasus, 254, 280; at death, 440,            486–87, 495; and sexual renunciation, 285;
   486–87, 527; and De divitiis, 310; and                at shrine of Felix, 227; and sins, 43, 361,
   development of Latin Christianity, 54;                362–65, 368, 419, 440, 514, 515–16, 522;
   different meanings of, 88, 89; to Donatist            social diversity in, 87–88; and soul’s journey,
   church, 331; empire of, 58–59; and euer-              526; supernatural efficacy of, 83; to support
   getism, 88; exchanged between equals, 60;             clergy, 355; and titular churches, 245–48; as
   and expectation of reward, 85; in fifth-              treasure in heaven, xix, 54, 83–88; urged in
   century Rome, 462–63; by Flavius Valila,              inscriptions, 513; value of individual, 87–88;
   469–70, 475; and games, 73; and Gelasius              wealth as sacralized through, 364; wealth as
   as pope, 472; and gifts to church as gifts to         transmuted through, 231; and wealth of
   poor, 169; and glory of heaven, 87; for glory         churches, 39–42; and wealth sent to Holy


                                                   736
                                              index


   Land, 281, 282; by wealthy people, 75, 315,              323; and noble class, 317; and Pinianus and
   358. See also benefactions; generosity;                  Melania the Younger, 366; and priests of
   wealth                                                   imperial cult, 353; and Roman society, 16;
glassware, 192, 194                                         and Santa Maria in Cornuta, 470; and Santa
Gnosticism, 212, 215                                        Maria Maggiore, 457; and Silvester, 245
God: and abjectio, 319; and Ambrose, 128; and            gold cloth, 286, 412
   Ambrosiaster, 255; and astrology, 203; and            gold coins, 22, 30, figure 1
   Augustine, 164, 165–66, 183, 201, 350, 429;           gold thread, 293
   and Ausonius of Bordeaux, 209; clerical               Goodrich, Richard, 415
   worship of, 35; and commercial images,                Gothic court, 393
   85–86; as common good, 179; and Con-                  Goths, 119, 125, 128, 388–89, 393; of
   stantine, 33; correct worship of, 33; and                Bordeaux and Toulouse, 400; as Christians,
   Damasus, 253; dependence on, 429, 430,                   445; courts of, 392; invasion by, 225, 291;
   474; and Firmicus Maternus, 203; gifts to,               and Namatius, 405–6; and Paulinus of Pella,
   41, 42; grace of, 305, 361, 369, 377, 426,               392; raids into Italy, 287; and Rome, 372;
   427–28, 429, 430–31, 443; and harvests,                  and Rufinus of Aquileia, 276, 278; sack of
   239; and imperial system, 49; and Jesus                  Rome by, xx, 9, 11, 16, 17, 148, 257, 288,
   Christ, 222, 223, 232; and judgment,                     291, 294–95, 300, 302, 307, 309, 320, 323,
   441–42, 443, 445; justice of, 450; as                    342, 350, 359, 368, 372, 373–74, 381, 388,
   landowner, 239; law of, 178, 441–42,                     455, 458, 459; and Sidonius Apollinaris,
   443, 444, 451; and nature, 239; in Neo-­                 405–6
   Platonism, 165; as patron, 429–30, 449,               Grado, cathedral church of, 525
   474–75; and Paulinus of Nola, 229, 230,               Grafton, Anthony, 275
   236, 238; and Pelagius, 304, 305, 361;                grain, 11, 14, 17, 463, 471. See also agriculture;
   people of, 80, 125, 177, 256, 317, 337, 341,             annona civica
   457, 466; and poor people, 76; and Prosper            granaries, 14, 463, 466
   of Aquitaine, 443; providence of, 237, 238,           Gratian, emperor, 104, 161, 188–89, 208; and
   315, 377, 443; rebellion against, 181, 441;              Altar of Victory, 107; and Ambrose, 56, 104,
   and Salvian, 441–47, 450, 451; as Supreme                108; and Ausonius of Bordeaux, 202; death
   Beauty, 165–66; thanks to, 88; and wealth,               of, 189; and Symmachus, 107; and Valen-
   226, 227, 237, 314, 315, 316, 377, 464, 465;             tinian I, 188; and Vestal Virgins, 105
   and wealthy people, 204; wrath of, 446                Gregory I, xxii, 468, 469, 499, 514
Goddard, Christophe, 103                                 Gregory of Tours, 495, 499, 500, 503, 506,
gods: and astrology, 203; and fertility, 199;               509–10, 513–14, 518, 530; Book of Histories,
   flight of, 136; and harvests, 12; imaginative            491–92, 494; Books of Miracles, 494; and
   appeal of, 205; and Jovius, 238; neglect of,             Last Judgment, 515; and Latin Fathers,
   201; respect for, 237; and sublunary world,              482; and managerial bishops, 497, 498;
   237; and wealthy people, 205. See also                   and Victorius, 406
   paganism                                              Gregory VII, 251, 473
Goffart, Walter, 521                                     Grey, Cam, 449
gold, 192; age of, 14–18, 24, 30, 58, 135, 181,          Gudrid, 527
   312–13, 378, 393, 398, 417, 457, 481; and             Gundileva, 520
   Alaric’s sack of Rome, 294–95; and Am-
   brose, 123, 126, 128; and basilica and shrine         Hadrumentum, 67
   of Saint Crispina, 335; eery glow of, 17,             Hagia Sophia, 193
   292; and emperors, 23; and farmers, 20;               hagiography, 397, 506, 512. See also saints
   and liturgical plate, 457; and mausoleum of           Halsall, Guy, 393, 394, 447
   Helena, 244; and Melania the Younger, 292,            Harper, Kyle, xxviii


                                                   737
                                              index


Harries, Jill, 144, 389, 405                             Honorius, emperor, 297, 303, 371, 372, 373
harvest, 11–13, 69, 201; and fertility and               Hortensius, 99
  annona for Vestal Virgins, 106; and God,               hospitals, 226, 257, 516
  239; in Numidia, 327–28; and poor people,              Hoxne, East Anglia, 29
  342; and prices, 14; storage of, 14; and               Hugoniot, Christophe, 64
  theme of wealth, xxiv. See also agriculture;           humanitas, 61, 62
  annona civica; grain; granaries                        Huns, 394, 444
Harvester of Mactar, 3–4, 5, 6, 8, 22, 24, 38,           Hydatius, bishop of Chaves, 403
  151, 327
Head, Tom, 516                                           Iles d’Hyeres, 414
health, 199–200, 204                                     imperial court: and Ambrose, 56, 122, 165;
Heather, Peter, 394, 434                                    and appeals and denunciations, 144; and
Heinzelmann, Martin, 494, 498                               architectural styles, 29; and Ausonius of
Henchir Guesseria, 336                                      Bordeaux, 393; as Christian, 45, 46; and
Heraclianus, 303                                            church of Africa, 381; and local elites, 29;
Herbert de la Portbarré-Viard, Gaëlle, 230                  and Melania the Younger and Pinianus,
Hesiod, 14                                                  297–98; and Milan, 125, 127; and Ravenna,
Hesperius, 198                                              371–73, 381; and service aristocracy, 393;
Hilarius, Pope, 320                                         and Symmachus, 149; at Trier, 196; wealth
Hilarus, 460                                                through, 394. See also emperors
Hilary of Arles, 84, 412–13, 420, 422, 423,              imperial government: and African local hier-
  424–25, 438, 440, 451, 485                                archies, 368; and appeals and denunciations,
Hildebrand (Gregory VII). See Gregory VII                   144; and Aquitaine, 195; and aristocracy,
Hillner, Julia, 247, 249                                    55–56; and Augustine, 329, 346, 347; and
Himmelfarb, Gertrude, 77                                    Britain, 30; and churches, 253; church
Hippo, 13, 167; and annona civica, 73; and                  modeled on, 256; and civic improvements,
  Augustine, 73, 151, 171, 185, 327, 337;                   65; and civil wars, 10; collapse of, 323; for
  basilica of, 324; diversity of, 327; Donatists            defense and extension of Christian faith,
  and Catholics in, 330; monastery and                      238; demands for labor by, 35; and father
  Christian quarter, 171, 172; monastery in,                of Ambrose, 123–24; in fifth century, 529;
  173, 174; Pinianus at, 439; poor people in,               and friends of Augustine, 167; in Gaul, 422;
  342; as port, 184, 326; Vandal army at walls              and gold, 15; and Gothic courts, 392; and
  of, 384                                                   harvests, 13; lack of questioning about,
Holy Apostles, Church of, 214                               55–56; and lesser aristocracy, 253; and
Holy Land: ascetic settlements of, 240; Melania             market rates for annona civica, 114; and
  the Elder in, 276–77; and monasticism, 226,               marriage, 269; and mausolea, 250; minis-
  272, 277; and Rome, 276; wealth sent to,                  terial theory of, 238; and new aristocracy,
  272, 280, 281, 282. See also Jerusalem                    248; and nobility, 95, 124; non-nobles in,
Holy Places, 282, 300                                       124; and paganus, 102; and Paulinus of Pella,
Holy Spirit, 159, 168, 171, 209; and almsgiv-               391; power derived from, 346; as power of
  ing, 42; and Augustine on monasticism,                    this world, 49; and provicial elites, 46; and
  414–15; and bishops, 333; and Catholic-                   regional elites, 393; and Senate, 22; and
  Donatist competition, 332, 334; and                       Siricius and urban clergy, 225; and social
  Crispinus, 367; and rural Africa, 337                     hierarchy, 23; social mobility through, 153;
honestus, as term, 151                                      and Symmachus, 100; and taxes, xxiv, 5, 13,
honor, 24, 58, 76                                           346, 447; and town councilors, 24–25; and
Honoratus, abbot of Lérins, 412, 414, 419, 420,             town government, 5; and villas, 195–96;
  422, 423, 424, 435, 451                                   wealth through, 135, 317. See also emperors


                                                   738
                                                 index


Imperial Granary, 14                                           500–501; taxes in, 447; villas of, 21; and
imperial law, 316; and Ambrosiaster, 255;                      warfare in northern, 454–55
   and care for poor, 43–44; and Cicero and                 Iulia Eustochium, 263–65, 268, 270, 283
   Augustine, 178; and Donatists vs. Catholics,             Iulius Adeodatus, 368
   367; and heresy, 377; and Julian, bishop of              ivory diptychs, 452
   Eclanum, 375; and Pelagian controversy,                  ivory plaques, 29
   377; and private property, 180; and taxes,
   377                                                      Januarinus (consul), 48
imperial privileges, 23, 24, 25, 30, 35, 43, 44,            Januarius (priest), 483–84
   46, 346, 496                                             Januarius of Aquileia, 40
Inglebert, Hervé, 451, 482                                  Jerome, 31, 240; and acclamations at church
inheritance, 486; and Augustine, 439; and                      offering ceremonies, 318; and Alypius, 170;
   clergy, 439; and legacy hunting, 438–39; of                 and Ambrose, 261; and Anicia Demetrias,
   Marcella, 271; and monks, 439; of Paula,                    464; and anti-Arian dissidence, 260; and
   271; of Pinianus and Melania the Younger,                   Antioch, 260, 262, 276; and Apostles, 267;
   295–300, 309; and renunciation of wealth                    and aristocracy, 284; and asceticism, xxv,
   and marriage, 295                                           261, 263, 264, 265, 270, 272, 274, 282–83,
Innocent, 246, 370                                             284; and Asella, 271; and Augustine, 260,
inscriptions, xxviii, 10, 88, 96, 229, 247;                    279; and Ausonius, 260; background of,
   African, 368; of Alexander, bishop of Tipasa,               146; in Bethlehem, 276; and Bible, 274; and
   365; and Anician palace, 94; of basilica at                 body, 263, 274, 282; and Christians as single
   Cuicul, 367–68; at basilica at Timgad, 335;                 holy people, 283; and Cicero, 277; and
   on catacombs of Roman clergy, 256–58;                       Damasus, 258, 260, 261, 262, 276, 279; and
   from church at Tigzirt, 365; and Damasus,                   Demetrias, 303–4; early career of, 260–61;
   252–53; and Dardanus, 399; and Esquiline                    and Evagrius, 260, 261, 276; and Fabiola,
   Casket, 206; and euergetism, 64; and giving,                338; and Faltonia Betitia Proba, 313; family
   63; and Hilary of Arles, 84; and Karissimus,                of, 260; freedom of, 279; fund raising by,
   89; from Mactar, 3; and Magerius, 67;                       278; and giving, 76; and holy poor, 355, 438;
   mosaic, 40; and palace of Theodoric, 199; of                and intellectualism, 273–74; on Isaiah, 79;
   Paulinus, 236; for public buildings, 10; and                and Iulia Eustochium, 267, 268, 270; and
   Sevso, 204; and Sidi Ghrib bathhouse, 200;                  Jesus Christ, 267, 509; and Jewish Patriarchs,
   and social virtues, 61; and Symmachus, 97;                  267; and Jovinian, 284–85; and Julian,
   and Tamesius Olympius Augentius, 108; and                   bishop of Eclanum, 375; and Latin version
   Theodorus, 39, 41; and Timgad, 24, 25;                      of Gospels, 261; and lesser aristocracy, 287;
   tomb, 37–38; of Umbrius Felix, 365; and                     Letter 22, 263–65, 267, 268, 270; letters of,
   Victory, 107; at villa-monastery at                         242, 272; letters to Marcella, 263; letters to
   Primuliacum, 521; and Vitalis, 21                           Paula, 267; letter to Furia, 270; and libraries,
intellectuals, 153, 273–74, 278–79, 287, 301,                  275–76, 279; and Manichaeism, 284; and
   411, 412                                                    Marcella, 263, 268, 303; and Marcellina,
Investiture Contest, 473                                       283; and marriage strategies, 268–70; and
Israel, 79–81, 141, 239, 442, 443, 467                         Martial, 267; and martyrs, 265; and medi-
Italy, xxvi, 93–94; and Ambrose, 140; and                      tation on Scriptures, 264–65, 273; melo-
   barbarian invasions, 360; barbarian kingdom                 drama of, 272; monastery of, 276, 278, 279;
   of, 469; cities of, 6; ecclesiastical government            and monasticism, 261, 273; and monks as
   in, 425; euergetism in, 65; fifth-century,                  holy poor, 299; and monks of Syria, 266–67;
   454–55; paganism in, 136; and Respublica of                 and mysticism, 274; and nobility, 372; and
   5th century, 400; rural Christianity in, 520;               noblewomen of Rome, 262–65; and Origen,
   security of, 454; sixth-century churches of,                264, 274, 277; and Origenist Controversy,


                                                      739
                                               index


Jerome (continued )                                          221–23, 224, 233–34, 266, 509; in Pelagian
   287; and otium, 261; as out of date, 286–87;              writings, 319; as poor, 222, 319; and poor
   and pagan literature, 277, 278; and Pam-                  people, 266, 267, 319, 509–10; and promise
   machius, 257, 268; and patronage, 272, 276,               of heaven for giving, 86; and Rich Young
   277–78, 279, 280, 285; and Paula, 262,                    Man, xxiv, xxv, 313; and sacrifice of Mass,
   263–65, 267, 268, 270, 272, 276, 277, 278,                524; and sarcophagi, 222–23, 253; self-
   279, 280, 287, 295; and Pelagius, 370; and                effacement of, 222; and titulus of San
   pious women of Rome, 215; and Plotinus,                   Clemente, 257; and treasure in heaven,
   273–74; and poor people, 76, 265–68, 276,                 84; and Venus, 206; and wealth, 222; and
   319, 509; and Provence, 413; and public life              wealthy people, 319; and widow’s
   of churches, 265; resources of, 277–78; rivals            contribution, 86
   of, 261–62; and Roman clergy, 262; and                 jewels/jewelry, 27, 28, 29, 218, 244, 246, 271,
   Rome, xx; and Rufinus, 276, 277–80, 287,                  figure 2
   370; satire of, 267–68, 303, 304; as scholar,          Jewish New Year, 13
   261, 274, 277; and sexuality, 262–63, 267,             Jewish synagogues, xxv, 35, 40, 41
   270; and Siricius, 225, 262, 285; and sixth            Jews: and Augustine, 342; at Dura Europos,
   century church, 482; and spiritual strati-                41; giving by, 41, 342; and harvests, 12, 13;
   fication in Christian community, 282–83;                  and hidden savior living among poor, 510;
   and Symmachus, 260; and Syria, 265–66;                    in Palestine, 13; and Paulinus of Nola, 226;
   translation by, 274; at Trier, 260; and upper-            and pious giving, 226; and religious giving,
   class Roman society, 267; and Vigilantius,                xxv–xxvi; and students of Torah, 282
   281, 282; and virginity, 76, 267, 270,                 Johannites, 300
   282–83; Vita Pauli, 266–67; and wealth,                John Chrysostom, 129, 138, 142, 168, 235,
   265–68, 315, 528, 529; and wealthy people,                300
   263, 318; and widowhood, 270, 282–83;                  John the Evangelist, church of, at Ravenna, 383
   and women, 274; and worldly vs. Christian              Jones, A. H. M., 36
   nobility, 306                                          Jordan, 239
Jerusalem, 277, 281, 366. See also Holy Land              Joseph and his brothers, tale of, 231
Jerusalem Community: and Cassian, 414;                    Jovinian, 284–85
   and monasticism, 168, 172, 300, 414–15,                Jovius, 237–39
   437–38; and Salvian, 437–38, 440                       Judaism, 85; charitable attitudes toward poor
Jesus Christ: abjectio of, 222, 224, 266, 319,               in, 59–60; and Christianity, 528; and giving,
   417, figure 13; and Ambrose of Milan, 222;                83; giving in, 528; votive giving in, 227
   and Augustine, 165; and Ausonius of                    judices/judges, 316, 317
   Bordeaux, 209; Christogram (XP mono-                   Julian, bishop of Eclanum, 312, 374–76, 377,
   gram) of, 63, 89, 204–5, 206, 257; and                    379, 382
   Constantine, 202; and De divitiis, 319;                Julian, Saint, shrine of at Brioude, 406
   dress of, 222–23; and emperors, 202; and               Juliana Anicia, 302, 305–6, 317
   Esquiline Casket, 206; giving to, 487; and             Julian the Apostate, 45, 50, 145, 146, 214
   God, 222, 223, 232; as high god, 202; as               Julianus, bishop of Cingulum, 497
   humble, 222, 319; imitation of, 221;                   Jullien, Camille, 195
   Incarnation of, 232; joining of heaven and             Junius Bassus, palace of, 469–70, figure 4
   earth by, 232; and Last Judgment, 515; late            Jupiter, 209
   Roman image of, 222; and Manichaeism,                  justice, 79, 80, 128, 131, 133, 136, 393, 509. See
   158, 159; marriage to, 302; medieval image                also God, and judgment; imperial law; Last
   of, 222; and Melania the Younger and                      Judgment
   Pinianus, 298; mercy of, 515; and Nicene               Justina, 125
   Christians, 221–22; and Paulinus of Nola,              Justinian, 469, 481, 487


                                                    740
                                                index


Kalends, Feast of, 12–13, 96                                  140, 473–74; and Martin of Tours, 51;
Karissimus, 89                                                and microfundium vs. latifundium, 19; as
Kessler, Andreas, 310                                         middling persons, 39; and Milan, 125; and
Kiely, Maria, 230                                             monasticism in Gaul, 415; mosaic floors of,
Krause, Jens-Uwe, 346, 450                                    250; and payment of debts, 60; and peas-
Krautheimer, Richard, 456                                     ­antry, 13, 19, 20; power of, 195; as pressure
                                                              group, 383; and Priscillian, 214; provincial,
la Bonnardière, Anne-Marie de, 362                            20, 21, 22; rent rebates by, 60; rents of, 13;
labor/laborers, 3–4; and agriculture, 499; and                Rostovtzeff on, 18, 19, 20; senators and
   Ambrose, 140; corvée, 35, 38, 496; demands                 curial class as, 36; solidarity of, 208–9; of
   for, 5; on estates, 19, 20, 296–97; imperial               southern Italy, 470–74; of Spain, 212–13;
   demands for, 35; on land, 11; and land-                    super-rich, 21, 22; tenants of, 13; town
   owners, 20, 140, 473–74; by monks, 417,                    councillors as, 20; and Vandal kingdom of
   420; and Numidian grain production,                        Carthage, 400; villas of, 194; Vitalis of
   327–28; and population, 11; and villas, 18,                Turissa as, 21; and wealth, 20, 114, 237–40;
   19; and wealth, 11, 399. See also agriculture              and wealth of church, 469–70. See also
Lactantius, 46, 76, 77                                        estates; villas
laity, 517; of Aquileia, 40; and barbarian                 Laniado, Avshalom, 383
   invasions, 397; and clergy, 49, 519, 522;               Last Judgment, 294, 515. See also
   and clerical celibacy, 519; elite, 401, 462; as            apocalypticism
   founders of churches, 472–75; and good vs.              Lateran Basilica, 242–44, 295, 466
   bad wealth, 419; and holy poor, 438; letters            latifondistas, 367
   and treatises of advice to, 379; and Pelagian           latifundia, 19, 140, 208, 316, 366, 398
   Controversy, 376, 377; as penitents, 439; as            Laurentius, 489–90, 492, 511
   pressure group, 383; in Provence, 413, 422;             Lawless, George, 173
   of Rome of fifth century, 462; and spread               Lawrence, Saint, 77, 406, 460
   of rural churches, 520; and testamentary                Lazarus. See Dives and Lazarus
   bequests to church, 439; and titular                    Leda, 209
   churches, 246; and Vandal kingdom of                    Lehmann, Tomas, 228
   Carthage, 401; wealthy, 45                              Leone, Anna, 200, 343
Lambert, David, 442                                        Leontius, bishop of Bordeaux, 218, 500, 505
Lampadius, 70                                              Leo the Great, 374, 380, 424, 425, 457, 463,
landowners, 12, 25, 347; absentee, 20, 21, 296,               464; and Ambrose, 467; and Augustine,
   297, 367, 378; administrators of, 13, 367; of              380, 465, 474; sermons of, 465–68
   Africa, 364; agents of, 296, 297; as amatores           Lepcis Magna, 504–5
   patriae, 114; and Ambrose, xxvii, 136, 140,             Lepelley, Claude, 64
   316; and Ammianus Marcellinus, 58; and                  Leporius, 484–85
   ancient cultic landscape, 473; of Aquitaine,            Lérins, island monastery of, xxi, 299, 385, 411,
   195; and Augustine, 347; and barbarian                     412–13, 415, 419–23, 427, 437; Rule of the
   invasions, 397–98, 399; and bishops,                       Four Fathers, 420
   482–83, 493–94; and Christianity and                    Lero, 419
   wealth, 237–40; church as sole great, 469;              Liber Pontificalis, 492, 511
   churches founded by, 475; and churches on               libraries, 272, 275–76. See also books
   estates, 471–75; and civil war and barbarian            Licentius, 160, 163–64
   invasions, 208; and clergy, 473–74, 475; and            Liebeschuetz, Wolfgang, 122
   countryside, 20; and farmers, 19–20; food               Lord’s Prayer, 361, 362, 363, 365, 369
   gifts to, 198; of Gaul, 430; and Gelasius, 474;         Loseby, Simon, 506
   generosity of, 60; God as, 239; and labor, 20,          Lovocatus, 520


                                                     741
                                                index


Lucania, 297, 471                                          Marcellina, 123, 271, 283
Ludi Apollinares, 465–66                                   Marcia Romania Celsa, 48
Lunn-Rockcliffe, Sophie, 255                               markets, 11, 14, 15
Lupercalia, 458                                            Markus, Robert, 451, 514
Lyons, 411                                                 Marmoutier, 216
                                                           marriage: and Ambrose, 271; and aristocracy,
Maas, Michael, 444                                           95, 150, 269; and Augustine, 150, 161, 162,
MacMullen, Ramsay, 358, 366                                  174; and Ausonius, 188, 269; and Chris-
Mactar, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10                                    tianity, 283; Christianity and patterns of,
Mactaric the archdeacon, 497                                 495; and clergy, 174; and Demetrias, 303,
Madauros, 152                                                304; endowment of, 272; and Esquiline
Madec, Goulven, 183                                          Casket, figure 2; and imperial system, 269;
Maecius Paternus, 62–63                                      and Jerome, 268–70; to Jesus Christ, 302;
Magerius, 67–68, 73                                          and Julian, bishop of Eclanum, 375, 376;
Magetia, 472                                                 Roman ceremony of, 302; and social
Magnum, 522                                                  mobility, 270–71; and stratification in
Maguire, Henry, 501                                          Christian community, 283; and Symmachus,
Majorian, 439                                                150; and veiling ceremony, 302; and Venus,
Mani, 156–57, 158                                            205–6; and virgins, 270; and wealth,
Manichaeism: and Augustine, 26, 156–60, 162,                 269–70, 271. See also celibacy; sexuality
  165, 166, 167, 170, 172, 178, 215, 284, 285;             Marrou, Henri-Irénée, 90, 141
  beliefs of, 157–60; and Christianity, 158,               Marseilles, 385, 411, 413; as emporium for
  159; Elect and Hearers of, 157, 158, 159,                  foreign goods, 412; as imperial enclave, 434;
  284, 285, 355, 517; and friendship, 159, 160;              and intellectuals, 412; and Paulinus of Pella,
  growth of, 170–71; and Jerome, 284; and                    411; Pelagian tracts known in, 418; and
  Jovinian, 284–85; and Julian, bishop of                    saints, 411; writings from, 415
  Eclanum, 375, 376; and letters from Kellis,              Martial, 267
  159–60; and Light Mind, 159–60; organi-                  Martin of Tours, Saint, 51, 60, 215–17, 230,
  zation of, 158; and Pelagius, 305; and                     379, 415, 420, 421, 496, 510, 513, 516
  Priscillian, 212, 215; tenets of, 165                    martyrs, 244, figure 15; burial sites of, 250; cult
Manzoni, Alessandro, 135–36                                  of, 46–47, 49; and Damasus, 252; festivals
Marazzi, Federico, 456, 469                                  of, 82; and Jerome, 265; mausolea close to,
marble, 48; in aristocratic houses, 460; and                 272; relics of, figure 17; vigils in honor of,
  basilica and shrine of Saint Crispina, 335;                265. See also saints
  and Basilica Nova, 228; burial plaque of                 Masona, bishop of Mérida, 511
  Constantius the groom, figure 14b; cost of,              Mass, 82, 324, 340, 524
  275; and Damasus, 252; and Euphrasian                    matricula (poor rolls), 300, 510
  Basilica, figure 10; and fifth century nobility,         matricularii, 510, 513, 516
  461; inlaid, 119, 193, 469, 471, 526, figures            Matthews, John, 100
  4, 10; in palace of Junius Bassus, 469, figure           mausoleums: adjacent to Spanish villas, 212,
  4; and shrine of Felix of Nola, 119, 229; of               213; and Aquitainian sarcophagi, 396; as
  town houses of new aristocracy, 249; and                   church for neighborhood, 472; of Con-
  villa at Faragola, 471; of villas, 193. See also           stantina, 244; of Helena, 244; of Magetia,
  sarcophagi                                                 472; of Petronius Probus, 233, 286; and
Marcella, 242, 283, 287, 295; inheritance of,                shrine of Felix of Nola, 229; and shrines of
  271; and Jerome, 263, 268; and marriage,                   suburbium, 250, 282; and suburbium of
  268–70; and Pammachius, 268; and                           Rome, 244
  Visigoths, 303; and wealth, 271                          Maxentius, 243


                                                     742
                                              index


Maximianus, 502                                            120, 360, 455; and Catholic social concern,
Maximilla, 283–84                                          135–36; as court city, 56; as dangerous, 142;
Maximin Daia, 12                                           and imperial capital, 135; and imperial
Maximus, 161, 189, 208, 210, 211, 285, 286,                court, 125, 127, 161; incident of basilicas
  387, 388, 392                                            in, 125–26, 141; middling persons of, 125;
Maximus, bishop of Riez, 421                               need for Christian church in, 124; need for
McLynn, Neil, 125                                          foodstuff in, 135; poor people in, 129;
mediocres, 466                                             populus of, 141; and regional economy, 127;
mediocritas, 51, 81, 325                                   social hierarchy in, 151; social makeup of,
Medjerda valley, 73, 360, 366                              125; warehouses of, 135
Melania the Elder, 259, 285, 287, 291, 398;              military, 10, 22, 27, 347
  founds monastery, 276–77; giving by,                   militias, 506
  299–300; in Jerusalem, 277; and Melania                Mithra, 108
  the Younger, 293, 295; and monasteries,                Moghul India, 8
  300; and monasticism, 260–61; and Nicene               Momigliano, Arnaldo, 74
  cause, 261; and Paulinus of Nola, 259, 277,            monasteries: autonomy of, 484; and books,
  279–80; reading of, 274, 275; resources of,              277; as built by vs. for abbot and monks,
  277; and Rufinus, 276–78, 279, 301; wealth               516–17; and City of God, 348; and
  of, 260                                                  economic independence, 417; of Egypt,
Melania the Younger, xx, 17, 20, 21, 278, 280,             170, 226, 300, 414, 415, 417–18, 419, 437;
  291–300, 301, 358, 359, 364, 398, 522; and               as endowed for intercessory prayer, 517;
  acclamation for Pinianus at Hipppo, 324;                 equality in, 418; of Holy Land, 226; at
  and Alaric’s sack of Rome, 294–95; and                   Marmoutier, 216; and Melania the Elder,
  Augustine, 324–25; and De divitiis, 311;                 300; of Provence, 417; society outside, 417;
  and Demetrias, 307; dream of, 291–92; and                as term, 175; and villas, 420; and wealth,
  dress, 319; and Faltonia Betitia Proba, 313;             226, 411, 414–19, 484
  at Hippo, 324; inheritance of, 295–97, 309;            monasticism, 76; and Augustine, 149, 155, 168,
  in Jerusalem, 366; on matricula (poor rolls),            171–72, 173–77, 179–80, 181, 183–84, 348,
  300; and Melania the Elder, 293, 295;                    414–15, 416, 437, 484; based on otium, 299;
  memories of dress, 293; and Paulinus of                  of Cappadocia, 175; and Cassian, 414–19,
  Nola, 293, 294; and Pelagius, 309, 370;                  437, 484; and clergy, 522; cost of, 272, 277;
  reading of, 274–75; renunciation by, 288,                of Egypt, 170, 175, 176, 226, 272, 277, 414,
  319–20, 365–66; and Rufinus of Aquileia,                 415, 417–418, 419, 424, 437; in Gaul, 415;
  276; and sack of Rome, 373; sale of ancestral            and giving, 516–17; and Jerome, 261, 273;
  properties by, 287; and supporters of John               and Jerusalem Community, 168, 172, 300,
  Chrysostom, 300; and Thagaste, 323; and                  414–15, 437–38; and Lérins, 419–23, 437;
  Volusianus, 458; and wealth, 464                         and love, 177; and Martin of Tours, 51; and
Memmius Vitrasius Orfitus, 99                              Melania the Elder, 260–61; and middling
Mérida, 118, 398, 530                                      and lower classes, 176; and Paulinus of Nola,
Merovingian state, 495                                     225; and People of God, 177; and poverty,
Metz, 530                                                  xxi; and prayer, 516; and property, 174, 175,
Mezzogiorno, 471                                           177, 179–80, 181, 183–84, 216, 483, 484;
middling classes, xxvii, 36–39, 124, 125, 127,             and Salvian, 437, 451
  171, 176, 212                                          Monica (Augustine’s mother), 162, 164, 165,
Milan, xix, 8, 187; and Ambrose, 122, 141;                 166, 172
  Ambrose and populus of, 256; Ambrose as                monks: abjectio of, 417; and alms begging,
  bishop of, 45; Ambrose in, 171; and Augus-               214–15; as bishops, 423–26, 427; of
  tine, 119, 148, 151, 160, 161; and barbarians,           Capraria, 214, 223; clergy as, 174; critics


                                                   743
                                                index


monks (continued )                                         Mother of the Gods, 298
 of, 214; and Damasus, 280; in Egypt, 277,                 Mount of Olives, 276, 300
 300; equality of, 416; in Holy Land, 277;                 Mratschek, Sigrid, 224
 of Holy Places, 282; and holy poor, 282,                  mundus, 201, 202, 203, 204, 207
 299, 355, 438, 517; and inheritance, 439;                 Muses, 206, 253
 as intellectuals, 278–79; as intercessors,                Muslims, 510
 516–17; Julian on, 214; labor by, 417, 420;               mystery cults, 471
 and Lérins, 411, 412; and Manichaeaism,                   mysticism, 274
 158; at Marmoutier, 216; and Melania the                  myths, 204–5, 209, 237, 522
 Younger and Pinianus, 299; and off shore
 islands in Mediterranean, 299; and Paulinus               Naeratius Cerealis, 269
 of Nola, 220, 266; and Pelagius, 302; as                  Namatius, 405–6
 penitents, 439; in Provence, 411; self-­                  Namatius, bishop of Clermont, 500
 depletion of, 266; Syrian, 266–67                         Narbonne, cathedral of, 443–44, 500
Moors, 364                                                 Nativola, 520
Morris, John, 310, 317                                     nature: and abundance, 197–99, 201, 204, 207,
mosaics, 399, 525; of Africa, 206; of Aquitaine,             237–38, 239, figures 6, 8; and Ambrose, 131,
 206; and basilica and shrine of Saint                       132; attitudes toward, xx; cosmic force in,
 Crispina, Theveste, 335; of basilica at                     199; effortless renewal of, 237–38; and four
 Cuicul, 367–68; at basilica of Aquileia,                    seasons, 199; and God, 239; and microcosm-
 39–40, 227; and basilica of Fundi, 282, 294;                macrocosm, 199; in mosaics, 239; semi-
 of Britain, 206; of British villas, 196; at Bulla           divine energy of, 239; submission of, 198;
 Regia, 360; of churches, 239; churches                      and wealth, 207
 depicted on, figure 16; and Cimitile, 282;                Navigius, 169
 and Circus Maximus, 118; and classical                    Neo-Platonism, 165, 273, 360
 myth, 204, 205; of Complutum townhouse,                   Nero, 56
 Spain, 209; by donors, 41, 42; erotic, 264;               New Academy, 164
 and Euphrasian Basilica, 501–2, figures 7,                Newhauser, Richard, 135
 10; and Faragola villa, 471; fish on, 198;                Newlands, Carole, 232
 at Gafsa, figure 5; harvesting on, 198; in                Nicene Christians, 221–22
 Henchir Guesseria, 336; Magerius, 67–68;                  Nicene Creed, 50–51, 260
 and myth of Dionysos, 237; and nature, 198,               Nicene party, 50–51, 122, 211, 212, 222, 260,
 239, figure 6; of northern Italy, 48; and                   300
 Paulinus of Nola, 282; philosophical                      Nicetius, bishop of Lyons, 497
 maxims on, 194; play of light on, 501;                    Nicomachus Flavianus, 389, 461
 and Primuliacum basilicas, 229–30; at                     Nola, 209, 218–19, 225, 227
 Primuliacum villa-monastery, 521; and                     Numidia, 327, 328, 333–34, 336, 337, 471
 provincial landowners, 250; provincial life               nundinae, 327
 on, 194; and Rostovtzeff, 18, 20; and Santa
 Maria Maggiore, Rome, 457; seasons on, 39,                obnoxii, 473
 132, 198–99, 452; Seven Sages of Greece on,               Odoacer, 455, 469, 470, 475–76
 194; as sign of wealth, 28, 192, 195; and                 Olybrius, 302
 social boundaries, 48; of Spain, 206; at Thrux-           Olympiodorus, History, 16, 17
 ton, 196; and Via d’Azeglio, Ravenna, 452;                Optatus, bishop of Timgad, 335, 357
 and villas, 39, 118, 140, 193, 196, 264, 471,             Origen, 274, 275, 277, 278; Commentary on the
 521; villas depicted on, 194; and Visigoths                 Song of Songs, 264; On First Principles, 276;
 of Garonne valley, 396; Vitalis on, 21; at                  Hexapla, 279
 Woodchester, 196. See also archaeology                    Origenist Controversy, 278, 280


                                                     744
                                                  index


Orpheus, 196                                               268, 294, 338; and poor people, 232–35,
Ostia, 110                                                 246, 257; and titulus Pammachii, 246–47,
otium: and Augustine, 164–65, 167, 172; and                figure 15
   Ausonius, 189–90; and Ausonius of                     Parabiagio Plate, 132
   Bordeaux, 189–90; and Christian groups,               Parkin, Anneliese, 59
   171; defined, 164; and Jerome, 261;                   Parry, John, 84
   monasticism based on, 299; and monasti-               Patricius (Augustine’s father), 151–52, 153,
   cism in Gaul, 415; and monks at Mar-                    154, 164
   moutier, 216; and monks of Lérins, 421;               Patricius (Augustine’s nephew), 174
   and Spanish villas, 213; spiritual, 242; and          Patricius (St. Patrick), 395–96
   Symmachus, 164                                        patrocinium. See patronage
Oued Siliane, 12                                         Patroclus, bishop of Arles, 423, 466
                                                         patronage, 88; and Alypius, 26; by Ambrose,
Pachomius, 176                                             144–45; and aristocracy, 113–14; and
Padusia, 466                                               Augustine, 25–26, 153–54, 164, 168, 170,
Paestum, 63, 64                                            279, 346; and barbarian courts, 393; for
paganism, 332, 344; in Africa, 329; and                    clergy, 489, 490; and control of populus, 112;
  Ambrose, 104; Ambrosiaster on, 268; and                  and daily receptions, 26; of Damasus, 262;
  annona civica, 111; and Augustine, 54, 360;              and elite, 26; and familiaritas, 156; in fifth
  in Campania, 108–9; and Christianity,                    century, 461; and friendship, 155–56; and
  102–9, 136–37, 138, 201, 204, 207; concern               intellectualism, 301; and Jerome, xx, 272,
  over abandonment of, 136, 137; and                       276, 277–78, 279, 280, 285; and Paulinus
  countryside, 46; and cult of saints, 281–82;             of Nola, 228; and Pelagius, 302; and
  and mausolea and columbaria, 48; neglect                 relationship with God, 429–30; and rich
  of, 201; and nobles, 251; policy of Con-                 and poor, 155; and Rufinus of Aquileia,
  stantine toward, 45; priests of, 35, 104; of             276–78; and Salvian, 449–50; of scholars
  Roman West, 33; and sack of Rome, 359;                   and religious guides, 274; and social
  and sacrifice, 103; and Salvian, 452–53; and             mobility, 25, 154; and Symmachus, 26,
  Serena, 298; and Symmachus, 101, 102,                    154, 155, 174; and titular churches, 247;
  105–9, 114–15, 137, 138; and Volusianus,                 weakness of, 26
  458. See also gods                                     Paul, 257, 286, 352, 355, 377
pagans: and Augustine, 342; and Christians,              Paula: and aristocracy, 269–70; endowments
  103–9; and concern for poor, 59–60; and                  by, 272; and Furia, 270; inheritance of, 271;
  Damasus, 254; as denouncing avarice, 137;                and Jerome, 262, 263–65, 268, 270, 272,
  generosity of, 59–60, 61, 62; giving by, 342;            276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 287, 295; and
  and mausoleums as churches for neighbor-                 marriage, 268–70; resources of, 277; and
  hoods, 472–73; and Paulinus of Nola, 226;                wealth, 271; wealth of, 285; as widow, 283
  and Pelagius, 360; as refugees from Rome,              Paulina, 233, 234, 268
  359; and religious giving, xxv; sages of, 287;         Paulinianus, 260
  social criticism by, 137; as term, 102; and            Paulinus of Milan, Life of Ambrose, 145–46
  votive virginity, 271                                  Paulinus of Nola, xxiii, 31, 325, 398, 422;
palaces, 94, 199–200, 469–70                               abasement of, 227; and abjectio of Jesus
Palestine, 13                                              Christ, 222, 224, 266, 319; and almsgiving,
Palladius, 123                                             236; and Ambrose, 185, 210, 217;
Palladius of Auxerre, 524                                  apocalypticism of, 293–94; and Aquitaine,
Pammachius, 249–50, 287, 338, 364; and                     209, 210, 219; and aristocracy, 224, 226,
  Jerome, 268; and Marcella, 268; and Paulina,             266; and asceticism, 186, 202, 220–21, 223,
  268; and Paulinus of Nola, 232–35, 257,                  225; and Augustine, 184, 185, 209, 217, 219;


                                                   745
                                             index


Paulinus of Nola (continued)                              people, xx, 219, 220–21, 224, 226, 232–36,
  and Ausonius, 186, 189, 209–10, 217, 232,               315; and priesthood, 224–25; and
  239; background of, 146; and basilica at                Primuliacum basilicas, 229–30; and
  Fundi, 219, 294; and Basilica Nova (New                 Priscillian, 211, 215, 216, 225; and Prosper
  Basilica) at Cimitile, 228, 231, 501; as                of Aquitaine, 426; and Provence, 413;
  bishop, 218, 225–26; brother of, 211, 226; as           residence beside shrine of Felix, 224; and
  building for Felix, 230; as building for God,           Rich Young Man, 216, 217, 226, 236; and
  229; and Campania, 184, 209, 224, 235, 294,             Rome, 268; and Rufinus, 293; and Saint
  374; and Cassian, 417; cells of, 220; and               Felix, 220, 221; sale of ancestral properties
  Christianity, 186; and churches of Spain,               by, 287; and salvation economics, 237;
  216; and Cimitile, 335; as civic benefactor,            self-proscription by, 296; and senatorial
  219; and civil war, 210, 392; and commer-               aristocracy, 210; as senatorial governor of
  cium, 230–32, 233, 315; at Complutum,                   Campania, 219; and shrine for Felix of Nola,
  209; conversion of, 185; and Damasus, 252;              219, 226–30, 235–36, 293–94, 314, 383;
  death of, 218, 226; and De divitiis, 311; and           and silverware, 220; and sin, 379; and
  disputed papal election, 225; and Dives and             Siricius, 225, 262; and Spain, 210, 211, 215,
  Lazarus, 236, 315; dress of, 220; Epithala-             242; and spiritual exchange, 232–35; and
  mium, 312, 374; estates of, 217–18, 219,                splendor, 220; and Sulpicius Severus,
  226; and Eucherius, 421; and exchange, 236;             215–16, 217, 220, 223, 229, 231, 387, 420;
  and Faltonia Betitia Proba, 313; family of,             and Symmachus, 93, 100, 119, 184, 185, 210,
  210, 211, 219, 225; and Felix of Nola, 364,             219; and Therasia, 225, 518; travel by, 220;
  383; and Flavius Valila, 470; food of, 220;             and treasure in heaven, 216, 300, 522; and
  friends of, 239; and giving, 219, 232, 236,             urban benefactors, 227; and Vigilantius,
  363, 379; and God, 229, 230, 236, 238; and              281–82; and villas, 197; and wealth, 185–86,
  Golden Age, 312; and Gothic invasion, 225;              207, 266, 528; and wealth as from God, 226,
  as grandee and convert, 224; as humble in               227, 314; and wealth as transferred from
  sight of God, 230; independence of, 224–26;             earth to heaven, 230–32, 233–34, 237;
  and Jesus Christ, 221–23, 224, 233–34, 266,             wealth of, 215–16, 225–30; wealth
  509; and Jews and pagans, 226; and Jovius,              renounced by, 184, 185, 192, 209–10, 211,
  237–39; and Last Judgment, 294; leaves                  216–18, 226–27; and wealth sent to Holy
  Aquitaine, 209, 210, 215, 216; and Leontius,            Land, 281; and wealthy people, 239
  bishop of Bordeaux, 505; letters of, 224,             Paulinus of Pant-y-Polion, 503, 504
  230, 239–40; letter to Jovius, 238; letter            Paulinus of Pella, 390–92, 397, 411, 419, 422,
  to Pammachius, 268; letter to Sulpicius                 435; Thanksgiving to God, 392
  Severus, 221, 223; as manager of wealth,              Pavia, 530
  485; and Martin of Tours, 215–17; and                 peasantry, 24, 140, 198, 220, 231, 239, 337; and
  Melania the Elder, 259, 277, 279–80;                    Abelonii, 342, 344; and Bacaudae, 403; and
  and Melania the Younger, 293, 294; and                  Crispinus, 367; and Dardanus, 399, 420;
  monasticism, 225; and monks, 220, 266; and              and Gelasius, 474; and imperial privileges,
  mystical symbiosis between rich and poor,               496; and landowners, 13, 19, 20, 399, 430,
  235; as nobleman, 224; and Nola, 209,                   433, 474; and managerial bishops, 498–500;
  218–19; ordained as priest, 209, 225, 324;              and Martin of Tours, 216; mobility of, 19;
  and Pammachius, 232–35, 257, 268, 294,                  and Paulinus of Nola, 225; and Paulinus of
  338; and patronage, 228; and Paulina, 268;              Pella, 397; and peasant- priests, 521; and
  and Paulinus of Pella, 392; and Pinianus,               Pope Pelagius I, 497; and Romulus, 348;
  294; and pious giving, 226; poems of, 221,              and Salvian, 433, 448, 450, 451
  224, 225, 227, 230, 239, 379; poem to                 Pelagian Controversy, 288, 291, 300, 301, 320,
  Ausonius, 232; and Pomerius, 485; and poor              361


                                                  746
                                               index


Pelagianism: and asceticism, 309; and                        Israel, 80–81; and poor people, 68–71, 235;
  Augustine, 291, 349, 359–68; and De                        and pride, 364; and rioting, 114; and Roman
  divitiis, 522; and Gelasius, 474; imperial                 church, 462; safety from hunger for, 111;
  condemnation of, 382; and Prosper of                       and Senate, 116; and Symmachus, 109,
  Aquitaine, 426, 431; and Salvian, 441; and                 113–14, 115, 122, 124, 137, 155; and town
  wealth, 323, 350; and wealthy people, 418.                 councillors, 5, 24, 38; urban privilege of, 82;
  See also De divitiis (On Riches); De vita                  violence of, 344; wealth for worship of gods
  christiana                                                 in protection of, 105–6; and wealthy people,
Pelagius, xx, 287–88, 358; and Alypius of                    38, 344, 345
  Thagaste, 371; and Anician family, 287, 301,            Peter, Saint, 286
  372; and asceticism, 302; and Augustine, xx,            Peter Chrysologus, 467
  288, 291, 301, 305–6, 307, 320, 363, 369,               Peter the Iberian, 293
  370, 371, 377, 379; as cleared of heresy, 370;          philosophers, 47, 49, 60, 73, 222, 273, 275, 301
  condemnation of, 323, 371, 372, 373; and                Piazza Armerina (villa), 21, 193
  De divitiis, 311; and Demetrias, 303–4; and             Pietri, Charles, 247, 248
  Faustus of Riez, 429; and free will, 308–9,             Piganiol, André, 251
  361; and God, 304, 305, 361; and habits,                pigs: vowed to Saint Felix, 227. See also annona
  308–9; and Jerome, 370; and Julian, bishop                 civica
  of Eclanum, 374; Letter to Demetrias, 304–7,            pilgrims, 235, 277, 281
  308, 309, 320, 358, 361, 464; and monks,                Pinianus, xx, 301, 358, 359, 364, 522;
  302; and nobility, 287–88, 317, 372;                       acclamation for ordination of, 324, 342, 347,
  opposed by Roman clergy, 374; and original                 482; and Augustine, 324–25, 342, 347, 482;
  sin, 361; and pagans, 360; in Palestine, 370;              baptism of father of, 296; and De divitiis,
  and patronage, 302; and Pinianus and                       311; and Demetrias, 307; and dress, 319;
  Melania the Younger, 370; and Pope                         and followers of Pelagius, 309; at Hippo,
  Innocent I, 370; and Provence, 413; and                    324, 439; income of, 325; inheritance of,
  refugees from Rome, 359, 360; and self-                    295–97, 309; in Jerusalem, 366; and
  reliance, 360; and un-wealth, 308; and                     Paulinus of Nola, 280, 294; and Pelagius,
  wealth, 308, 309, 528, 529; and will, 308–9,               370; as poor of church, 300; renunciation
  361, 429; and worldly vs. Christian nobility,              of wealth by, 288, 319–20, 365–66; and
  306; and Zosimus, 370–71                                   Rufinus, 276, 278, 293; and sack of Rome,
Pelagius I, Pope, 497                                        373; sale of ancestral properties by, 287;
Pentecost, 168. See also Holy Spirit; Jerusalem              self-proscription by, 296; and Thagaste, 323;
  Community                                                  and wealth, 464; wealth of, 439
people (plebs/populus), 36–39, 66, 343, 357;              Pittacus of Lesbos, 194
  and Ambrose, 122, 124–26, 138, 143, 147,                Plato, 264
  225; and annona civica, 111; and Augustine,             Plinval, Georges de, 310
  339–41, 344–45, 349; and bishops, 341;                  Pliny the Elder, 140, 405
  of Carthage, 349; Christian, 332–33; in                 Pliny the Younger, 59
  churches, 45; citizens as, 68; and clergy, 341,         Plotinus, 180–83, 264; and Augustine, 163,
  425; consultation of, 344; control of, 112;                165, 166, 180–83; and fall of soul into
  and Damasus, 256; and games, 116, 354;                     matter, 181; and God, 165; and Jerome,
  and Gregory the Great, 468; of Israel, 141;                273–74; and new aristocracy, 273–74; and
  lack of financial security of, 345; as middling            private sphere and privation of Good, 181
  persons, 39; of Milan, 141; and new aris-               Pomerius, Julianus, On the Contemplative Life,
  tocracy, 249; and nobility, 124–25, 265; and               485–86
  Pammachius, 234; and Pinianus at Hipppo,                Pompeianus, 299
  324; and poor of church, 462; and poor of               poorhouses, 512, 524


                                                    747
                                                index


poor people: in Africa, 342; alms at shrine of                467, 516; and otherworld, 71; and pagan
  Saint Peter for, 511; almsgiving to, 42–43;                 generosity, 59–60; and Pammachius,
  and Ambrose, 78–79, 80, 123, 126, 128–29,                   233–35, 246, 257; para-clerical role of, 510;
  133–34, 138, 141, 147, 155; and annona                      and patronage, 155; and Paulinus of Nola,
  civica, 69–70, 111; attitudes toward, 68–71;                xx, 219, 220–21, 224, 226, 232–36, 315; as
  and Augustine, 72–73, 154, 168, 169–70,                     permanent mass of destitute persons, 235;
  175–77, 322, 342–43, 346, 347, 350–51,                      and Peter Chrysologus, 467; as plaintiffs vs.
  355, 356, 482–83, figure 5; and beggars, 59,                beggars, 79; and plebs Romana, 235; and
  60, 80, 343, 351, 509; begging associations,                poor of Israel, 467; and poor of the church,
  hostels, and food centers for, 512; and                     462; and popes, 235, 510–11; and Pope
  bishops, 81, 504, 508, 509–10, 511–12; and                  Symmachus, 511; in post-imperial kingdoms
  boundaries of society, 75–79, 467, 508; care                of West, 508–9; and potentia of wealthy
  of, 43–45, 507; Christian charity to, 42, 53,               people, 255; and poverty (unwealth) as
  59–60; Christian vs. non-Christian, 43; and                 virtue, 179; and preaching, 71, 76, 77; as
  church, 45, 124–25, 142, 265, 507, 508; and                 refugees, 129; risk of impoverishment of,
  church ceremony, 317–18; and church                         448; and Roman clergy, 257; as ruined by
  property, 507, 508; and clergy, 257, 507,                   crop failure and warfare, 512; and Salvian,
  510; clothes for, 235; as conjunctural poor,                438, 448; in separate islands of settlement in
  512–13; and De divitiis, 319; as destitute,                 Rome, 511; and shrine of Saint Felix, 512;
  342; diminution of image of, 77–78, 80;                     smell of, 220–21; and social boundaries, 46;
  emergence as objects of concern, 75; and                    social profile of, 68; special collection for,
  euergetism, 68; in Gaul, 508, 509; and                      465–66; as suppliant and grateful, 56; and
  giving, xix, xxv, 42, 356, 358, 486–87, 527,                treasure on earth transferred to heaven, 512;
  528, 530; and God, 76; and Gregory the                      as urban vs. rural, 512; as victims, 508, 509;
  Great, 468; and harvests, 12, 13, 342; in                   as wanderers, 513; wealth and needs of, 465;
  Hebrew Scriptures, 79–80; hidden savior                     and wealth of church, 169, 507–8; wealth
  living among, 510; in Hippo and Carthage,                   used for, 512; and wealthy people, 37, 78,
  342; and holy places, 512; and holy poor,                   169, 255; wealthy people as creating, 315;
  257, 282, 438, 517; hostels for, 516; ill health            wealthy people as oppressing, 345–46;
  of, 199; impoverished noblemen and citizens                 wealthy people in churches with, 45, 46–47,
  as, 467, 468; income of, 40; indifference                   124–25, 142, 265
  toward, 58; as intercessors, 516; in Israel,             popes, 385; after Gothic sack of Rome, 455;
  79–81; and Jerome, 76, 265–68, 276, 319,                    and annona civica, 468; and aristocracy, 251;
  509; and Jesus Christ, 266, 267, 319,                       and city of Rome, 251; and clergy, 510–11;
  509–10; jewels sold for, 271; Jewish charity                election of, 476; as lovers of poor people,
  toward, 59–60; and John Chrysostom, 168,                    510–11; and poor people, 235; and Senate,
  235; justice for, 79, 80, 509; and last Senatus             xxi, 251, 476; and wealth of church as
  consultum, 507; and Leo the Great, 465–68;                  inalienable, 477. See also bishop of Rome
  as localized and manageable, 512; love of,               Poreč: Euphrasian Basilica at, 193, 525, 526,
  73–74; as margins of Christian community,                   figures 7, 10, 19
  77; and matricula, 300, 510, 513, 516; and               Porphyrius of Lepcis Magna, 504–5
  Matthew, 168; and mausoleum of Petronius                 Portugal, 6, 14, 29, 192, 213, 520
  Probus, 233; and measure of sufficiency, 315;            Possidius of Calama, 151, 401
  and Melania the Younger and Pinianus, 298,               potentia, 255, 346
  299; in Milan, 125, 129; as mingling with                poverty: and Album of Timgad, 24; as anti-
  rich in churches, 265; miracles for, 512;                   wealth, 220, 221; Cassian on, 415–16; and
  non-citizen, 69; non-reciprocated gifts to,                 crime and political instability, 23–24; danger
  76; as others vs. brothers, 77, 79, 80, 81, 129,            of, 169–70; discourse on, 8; and impoverish-


                                                     748
                                               index


   ment, 23–24; and Jerome, xx, 265–68, 276;                225; and pro-Nicene faction, 212; and
   and Jesus Christ, 266, 319; and Paulinus of              Spanish landowners, 214; and wealth, 529;
   Nola, xx, 219, 220–21, 224, 226, 232–36,                 and wealthy persons, 215
   315; rural and urban, 235; and solidus, 15; as         Probus, Sextus Claudius Petronius: address
   unwealth, 152, 220; and unwealth as virtue,              in praise of, 94; and Ambrose, 51; and
   179                                                      Ammianus Marcellinus, 17, 44, 58; and
Praetextatus (Prefect of the City), 254                     Anicia Demetrias, 287, 464; and Anicia
Praetextatus, bishop of Rouen, 498                          Faltonia Proba, 267, 302; Anician family of,
Praetorian Guard, 111                                       301; as Christian, 103; and Constantine,
Praetorian prefects, 100                                    103; giving by, 59; mausoleum of, 286; and
preaching, 54; of Ambrose, 122, 124, 135; and               new aristocracy, 249; palace of, 94; passing
   Augustine, 34, 72, 321, 326, 339, 340–43,                of world of, 398; and Rostovtzeff, 18, 20, 21;
   353, 361; and circus, 80; and city buildings,            sons of, 298; and Symmachus, 233; wealth
   66; diminution of image of poor in, 77–78;               of, 22, 23, 25, 44, 94, 95
   of Greek East, 129; for outreach to poor,              Proiecta, 269; marriage casket of, 206, 252,
   70; poor in, 71, 77; regularity of, 72; and              304, figure 12
   treasure in heaven, 84. See also Augustine             property: and Ambrose, 131–32, 181, 312; and
Prefect of the City, 110, 111, 299, 317                     Anicii, 271; and aristocratic marriage, 150;
pride, 222; and Augustine, 180, 181, 349–50,                and asceticism, 272; and Augustine, 150,
   354; and Demetrias, 465; and giving, 364;                162, 168, 169, 170, 174, 175, 176–77,
   holy, 270; and social cohesion, 378, 396–97;             179–80, 183, 325, 346, 347, 349, 482–85;
   and wealthy people, 136, 311, 349–50                     and Ausonius, 191; and Cassian, 416; of
priests, 74, 251, 526; and Ambrose, 127; and                church, 475, 476–77, 482–87, 491–92,
   celibacy, 127, 517, 519, 521; and churches               495–97, 498, 507–8, 524; and Cicero, 179,
   on estates, 472, 473; and community,                     180; and clergy, 174; of Crispinus, 367; and
   224–25; in conflict with bishops, 489, 490;              De divitiis, 313, 320; and Demetrias, 464;
   and congregations, 49; conhospitae (women                family claims on, 168; and Felix of Nola,
   companions) of, 519–20; and Constantine,                 221; as given to Christ for poor, 298; and
   35; and Damasus, 251, 280; epitaphs on the               Jerusalem Community, 168; loyalty of men
   tombs of, 256; as equivalent of bishops, 520;            of, 179; and Martin of Tours, 216; and
   in Gaul and Spain, 520; and Gelasius, 472;               Melania the Younger and Pinianus, 287, 295,
   intercession by, 516; leisure of, 35; and                296–99, 323, 366; and monasticism, 174,
   Marseilles, 412; and Mass, 524; of titular               175, 179–80, 181, 183–84, 216, 483, 484;
   churches, 249; and titulus Vestinae, 246;                and monk-bishops, 424; in passage from
   and Zosimus, 374. See also clergy                        one generation to next, 271, 282, 295; and
priests, pagan, 35, 104; and Ambrose, 129;                  Paulinus of Nola, 184, 209, 216, 217, 218,
   and Gratian, 108; and imperial cult, 63, 353             219, 392, 397; and Paulinus of Pella, 391–92;
primitivism, ancient, 131, 312                              and Pelagius, 310; and Salvian, 437, 438;
Primuliacum, 420; basilicas of Sulpicius                    and Sulpicius Severus, 312; and titulus, 245;
   Severus at, 229–30; church at, 379;                      urban rental, 27; and Valentinian I, 218; and
   villa-monastery of, 521                                  Valila, 470; and women, 27. See also estates;
Priscillian, 51, 262, 281, 331, 423; and Am-                wealth
   brose, 212, 215; and aristocracy, 215; and             prophets and diviners, 513–14
   asceticism, 214; as bishop of Avila, 212,              proscription, 218, 296, 297–98, 391
   215; death of, 215; and esotericism, 214;              Prosper of Aquitaine, 426–28, 429, 430–32,
   execution at Trier, 212; and Gnosticism,                 435, 443; Chronicle, 431; Contra Collatorem,
   215; lay patrons of, 212; and Manichaeism,               426; De vera humilitate, 463–65
   215; and Paulinus of Nola, 211, 215, 216,              Protasius, 246


                                                    749
                                               index


Provence, xxi, 12–13, 411; Christianity of,              Rich Young Man, xxiv, xxv, 84, 168, 184, 207,
  413; churches of, 420; cities of, 411–12; as             216, 217, 226, 236, 313
  imperial enclave, 411, 434; Lérins circle as           Ricomer, 112–13
  refugees in, 422; literature of, 412–14;               Riculf, 491–92
  monasteries of, 417; provincial elites of, 412         Rogatus, 269
Prudentius, 77–78                                        Romanianus, 25; as amator patriae, 153; and
Publicola, 260                                             Augustine, 153–54, 156, 158–59, 160, 162,
Punic, 326, 327, 338                                       165–66, 167, 170, 188; and games, 153; and
Punic Wars, 400                                            litigation, 162, 166
Pythagoras, 163                                          Romanness, local vs. central, 392–94, 400, 402,
                                                           434
Quadriga, 86                                             Roman Republic, 22, 57
Quinta das Longas, 398                                   Rome, xix; and Africa, 288; agriculture in
Quintianus, bishop of Rodez, 509–10                        countryside around, 459; and Augustine,
Quodvultdeus, 452                                          148, 149, 160; Caelian Hill, figure 15; and
                                                           Carthage, 360; and Catholic Church, 251;
Ramsay, Boniface, 314                                      of Christian churches, xx; churches and
Ravenna, 383, 515; and African bishops, 529;               shrines of, 242, 457, 460; and church of
   barbarian armies at, 455; churches of, 500;             Africa, 381; and Constantine’s conversion,
   as co-capital with Rome, 372–73; court of,              33; continuation of civic past of, 461;
   529; emperors at, 372; Feast of Kalends in,             conversions in, 46; cost of year’s supply of
   452; and Goths, 389; grain for, 471; imperial           grain to, 17; cults of, 105; as empty of
   court at, 371–73, 381; inventories of, 28;              Christian monuments, 242; famine of 384
   Odoacer at, 475. see of, 488                            in, 137–38; of fifth century, 462; grain for,
Rees, Brinley, 371                                         471; hinterland of, 46; and Holy Land, 276;
refrigerium, 233, 234                                      and Jerome, xx; land given to church in, 475;
rents, 499; and absentee landowners, 296, 367;             as market, 114; and Odoacer, 475; pace of
   and Cassian, 417; to church, 129; collectors            collapse of, 459; paganism in, 136; palaces
   of, xxiv; food sent with, 198; and incomes              of, 249; patrons of lower classes of, xxi;
   of senators, 16; in-kind payment of, 14; of             Paulinus of Nola on, 268; of popes, 462;
   landowners, 13, 60; and Romulus and                     popes and city of, 251; popes in, 455, 456;
   Augustine, 348; from small farms, 5, 19,                population and supply in fifth-century,
   20; system of collection of, 13; and town               459–61; population of, 110, 241; pre-­
   councillors, 5; unraveling of system of, 400;           Christian traditions of, 458; private and
   and urban property, 27; and xenia, 198. See             ecclesiastical endowment in churches of,
   also taxation                                           245–48; public life of, 103; Ravenna as
Respublica, 382, 383, 422; as ancien régime,               co-capital with, 372–73; refugees from, 288,
   403–4; and Arles, 411; and barbarian                    300–301, 323, 325, 330, 359–60; religious
   invasions, 389, 393, 400, 402–4; games in,              and cultural stratification of Christian, 272;
   453; and loss of Carthage, 389; loyalty to,             residential aristocracy of, 241; rule of,
   179; pre-Christian tone of, 453; and Salvian,           111–12; sack of, xx, 9, 11, 16, 17, 148, 257,
   442, 443, 446, 447, 450, 451, 454; and                  288, 291, 294–95, 300, 302, 307, 309, 320,
   Sidonius Apollinaris, 404–6; and wealth,                323, 342, 350, 359, 368, 372, 373–74, 381,
   179. See also empire                                    388, 455, 458, 459; separate islands of
Retitutus, figure 17                                       settlement in, 511; and size of populus
Rhine frontier, 195, 196, 368, 386, 387                    Romanus, 69; social hierarchy in, 151;
Rhineland, 9, 11, 434, 447                                 spiritual stratification within Christian
Rhone valley, 411, 412, 422, 463                           community of, 282–83; as stage set, 461;


                                                   750
                                               index


  suburbium of, 241–42, 244, 250, 252–53,                 Salona (Solin): basilica of, 444; sarcophagi of,
  265, 291, 296, 297, 307, 457–58, 459;                      38
  super-wealthy people of, 16–18; titular                 Salonius, bishop of Geneva, 436, 443
  churches of, 245–48; town houses and new                Salvian of Marseilles, xxi, 385, 411, 414, 432,
  aristocracy of, 249; and Trier, 187; urban life            474, 490, 529; Ad Ecclesiam (On Avarice),
  of fifth century in, 460–62; villas of, 242;               436–40; and Augustine, 437, 438, 439, 440,
  wealth for worship of gods for protection                  451; and barbarians, 433, 434, 444–46, 449,
  of, 105–6; wealth of, 43; wealthy people of,               450; and church, 435, 436–41, 451; De
  240, 241–42. See also annona civica                        gubernatione Dei, 346, 433, 441–42, 443,
Romulus (landowner), 348                                     444, 453; and empire, 433–35, 441, 442,
Romulus Augustulus, 475                                      443–44, 451, 453; and giving, 486–87, 495;
Rosalia, 108–9                                               and imperial administration, 422; and judg-
Rostovtzeff, Mikhail, 18, 19, 195, 316                       ment, 515; and Lérins, 435, 436, 437; and
Rufinus of Aquileia, 276–79, 285, 287; and                   loyalty to Roman state, 402; opinions of
  Jerome, 276, 287, 370; and Julian, bishop of               modern scholars on, 433–34; and Paulinus
  Eclanum, 375; and Melania the Elder, 301;                  of Nola, 379; and Respublica, 442, 443, 446,
  and Melania the Younger and Pinianus, 293;                 447, 450, 451, 454; and Rhineland, 435,
  and nobility, 372; and patronage, 276–78;                  437, 444, 446, 452; and sancti, 434, 436–38;
  and Paulinus of Nola, 293; and Pelagius, 287               and taxation, 346, 433, 447–49, 451; as
Rule of Augustine. See under Augustine                       teacher of bishops, 435–36; and Trier, 435;
Rule of Saint Benedict, 304, 416                             and wealth, 418–19; and wealth of church,
Rusticus, bishop of Narbonne, 443–44, 500                    436–38; and wealthy people, 438–41, 448,
Rutilius Namatianus, 214, 223                                449
                                                          Salzman, Michele, 46, 99
Sabinus, bishop of Canusium, 501                          Samnium, 235, 269, 297
saeculum: beauty and abundance of, 201; and               San Clemente, church of, 257, 370
   wealth, 201, 522                                       sanctuary, 382, 384
Saga of the Greenlanders, 527                             San Damaso in Lucina, Rome, 251
Saint Agnes: church of, 283; tomb of, 244                 San Lorenzo, church of, 125
Saint Chrysogonus (Trastevere), 467                       Santa Costanza, church of, 244
Saint Crispina, basilica and shrine (Theveste),           Santa Croce in Gerusalemme, 243, 460
   334–35                                                 Santa Maria in Cornuta, 470, 472
Saintes, 191                                              Santa Maria Maggiore, 457
Saint Julian, convent of, 524                             Santi Giovanni e Paolo, church of, 246,
Saint Mary, church of (Bordeaux), 500                        figure 15
Saint Peter’s basilica (Rome): and Constantine,           Santi Pietro e Marcellino, church of, 244
   242, 244; latrines at, 511; and localization           San Vitale (Ravenna), 193, 246, 500, 502
   of poor people, 512; mausolea at apse, 286;            Saragossa: council of, 213; games in, 453
   Pammachius’s feast at, 233, 234, 466; and              sarcophagi, 38, 81, 399; of age of Plotinus, 273;
   Paulinus of Nola, 229; Senatus consultum                  Aquitainian, 396; and catacombs of Rome,
   posted at, 507                                            269; cost of, 250, 275; and fifth-century
saints, 506; and Aquitainian sarcophagi, 396;                nobility, 461; of Hilary of Arles, 84; images
   cult of, 281–82; heaven and earth joined at               of court and army on, 253; Jesus Christ
   tombs of, 512; as intercessors, 515, 516; and             depicted on, 222–23, 253; of maker of
   Marseilles, 411; monks of Lérins as, 413. See             textiles, museum of Castello Sforzesco,
   also hagiography; martyrs                                 Milan, 125; Muses on, 253, 273; and new
Saint Stephen, shrine of, 307, 464                           aristocracy, 250; from northern Portugal,
Salamito, Jean-Marie, 306, 310                               206; of Petronius Probus, 286; philosophers


                                                    751
                                               index


sarcophagi (continued)                                   Seneca (bishop), 474
   on, 273, 275; of Salona, 38; of Sidonius              Septimius Severus, 95
   Apollinaris, 406. See also marble                     Serdica (Sofia), council of, 45
Sardis, 40                                               Serena, 297, 298
Satan/Devil, 178, 179, 181                               sermons: of Ambrose, 133, 135, 138, 141, 142,
Satyrus, 123                                                165, 195, 339, 341; audience of, 340; of
Saxons, 117, 444                                            Augustine, 54, 61, 339–58, 361–68, 380,
Sbeitla (Tunisia), 521–22                                   484–85; of Christians, 72; and “Eusebius
Scheidel, Walter, 22                                        Gallicanus,” 396–97; of Leo the Great,
schism, 489                                                 465–68; style and situation of, 340
Schneider, Lambert, 239                                  servator fidei, 504
Schwartz, Seth, 47                                       Seven Sages of Greece, 194
Scipio Africanus, 179–80                                 Severus (Pinianus’s brother), 296
seasons, 39, 132, 198–99, 204                            Sevso, 204–5
Sedulius, 458                                            sexuality, 76, 213, 292–93, 376; and Augustine,
Senate, 6, 107, 385; and Aetius, 454; and                   158; and Jerome, 262–65, 267, 270; and
   Alaric, 298; and Altar of Victory, 107–8;                stratification in Christian community, 283;
   and Ambrose, 138, 185; and annona civica,                and wealth, 285. See also celibacy; marriage;
   110; and bishop of Rome, 455, 456; as                    virginity
   caretaker of Rome, 476; and competition to            Shanzer, Danuta, 150
   fund games, 86–87; and continuity of past,            Shaw, Brent, xxvii–xxviii, 329
   461; and Damasus, 253; and Lupercalia,                Shenoute of Atripe, 238
   458; and Maximus Basilius, 476, 477; new              Sicily, 6, 21, 118, 471
   men of, 115–16; and Odoacer, 475–76;                  Sidi Ghrib, baths at, 200, 405
   pagan and Christian members of, 105; and              Sidonius Apollinaris, 404–7, 412, 422, 448–49,
   Paulinus of Nola, 185; and Pinianus and                  451, 491, 518
   Melania, 299; and plebs, 116; and popes,              Sigismund of Burgundy, 517
   xxi, 251, 476; and provincials, 22; and               silk, 293, 300, 323, 354, 412
   Rome, 111; Senatus consultum of, 507; and             silverware, 192, 195, 196, 204; and African
   Symmachus, 98, 115–16, 454; and Vestal                   ceramics, 29; and Alaric’s sack of Rome,
   Virgins, 105                                             294–95; and Augustine, 174, 220; and
Senate House, 461                                           Damasus, 251; from Hoxne, East Anglia, 29;
senators: and Album of Timgad, 24–25; and                   and mausoleum of Helena, 244; of Melania
   Ammianus Marcellinus on sobria vetustas,                 the Younger, 300, 323; and missorium of
   58; and Aquileia mosaics, 40; and aris-                  Theodosius I, 96; and Parabiagio Plate, 132;
   tocracy, xxvii, 249, 460, 467–68; as bishops,            pastoral vignettes on, 140; and Paulinus
   494; as clergy, 209, 494; and Constantine,               of Nola, 220; of Pinianus, 300; and Pope
   98; differences in wealth among, 78; as                  Silvester, 245; and Santa Maria in Cornuta,
   distinguished and privileged, 36; and gold,              470; of Sevso, 204–5; villas depicted on, 194
   15, 16–17; honorary (vir clarissimi), 22, 48,         Silvester, Pope, 245
   94, 248–49, 250, 347, 357; and imperial               Simplicius, Pope, 456, 469–70, 476, 488
   system, 55–56; incomes of, 16–17, 40;                 sin: and Adam, 368; and Augustine, 350–52,
   Jerome on, 76; and paganism vs. Christian-               361, 362, 364–65, 368, 379; as debt, 85;
   ity, 103, 109; as refugees from Rome, 359;               expiation of, xx, 43, 88, 361, 362–65, 368,
   and Symmachus, 100; and town council                     379, 406, 440; forgiveness of, 46, 47, 419,
   members, 6; and wealth of church, 469.                   514–17; and Gelasius, 474; and giving, 43,
   See also aristocracy/nobility                            361, 362–65, 368, 419, 440, 514, 515–16,
Seneca, 131                                                 522; and God as patron, 429–30; interces-


                                                   752
                                                  index


   sion for, 515–17, 519, 520, 521; and Julian,              Sotinel, Claire, 34, 40, 49, 127
   bishop of Eclanum, 375; and Lord’s Prayer,                Spain, 118, 161, 402, 403, 434; and archae­
   362, 365; nature of, 369; original, 474; and                 ology, 213; aristocracy of, 212–13; and
   Paulinus of Nola, 379; and religious giving,                 aristocratization of church, 494; barbarians
   xx; and Salvian, 441, 444, 446–47, 451; and                  in, 208, 388; charismatic teachers in, 213;
   wealthy people, 349                                          and Christianity, 46; cities in, 6, 212–13;
Siricius, Pope, 225, 262, 285                                   civil war in, 389; ecclesiastical government
Sissinius, 258                                                  in, 425; and economy, 23; games in, 453; and
Sixtus III, 374, 457                                            Goths, 389; landowners of, 212–13; Lenten
slavery, 60–61, 117, 388; and Alaric, 297; and                  season in, 213; local courts in, 394; local
   Augustine, 381, 395, 407, 447; as building                   Romanness of, 400; middling persons of,
   Spanish churches, 521; and Cassian, 416;                     212; mosaics of, 206; power of landowners
   children sold into, 342, 344, 381; Christian                 of, 195; priests in, 520; regionalism of, 393;
   influence on, 382; and clergy, 473, 474, 511;                and Respublica of 5th century, 400; role of
   descendants of, 499; fate of freed, 499; and                 wealthy in churches of, 211–15, 216; rural
   Gelasius, 475; and Gregory the Great, 468;                   Christianity in, 520, 521; silver in, 9; social
   and Lérins, 420; manumission of, 296–97;                     landscape of, 212–13; urban churches of,
   of Melania the Younger and Pinianus,                         212–13; Vandals in, 371; villas of, 21, 192,
   296–97; as protected in times of war, 297;                   196–97, 212–13, 237; and violence after
   sale of, 296, 297; and Salvian, 449–50, 451;                 barbarian invasions, 394; Visigoths in, 371
   as servants, 499; wealth from, 395                        state, 23; and Ambrose, 146; aristocracy
Smirat, 67, 73                                                  created by, 393; and bishops, 382–84; and
sobria vetustas, 57–58                                          Christianity, 382–84; and church, 505; and
society, xix, xxvi; and Album of Timgad,                        Milanese regional economy, 127; oppression
   24–25; and Ambrose, 120, 129–30, 131,                        by, 446–47; and pagans and Christians, 103;
   136, 137, 138–41, 144, 147; and Augustine,                   and private property, 180; as profane, 382,
   148, 149–53, 154; chains of dependence in,                   383; and Salvian, 446, 447–49, 529; and
   56–57; and Christianity, 75–76; and Cicero,                  Symmachus, 108; and taxation, 145; and
   178; city-based nature of, 6; and city vs.                   Vestal Virgins, 104. See also empire;
   church, 74; civic groups of, 71; concern over                Respublica
   ills of, 136–37; criticism of, 56, 57; and De             Statius, Silvae, 232
   divitiis, 312; and dress, 176; and friendship,            statuary, 192, 196, 204, 237; and Alaric, 294;
   156; and games, 74; and gold, 16; and                        and fifth century nobility, 461; in forums
   Golden Age, 131, 132; and harvests, 13;                      and in front of temples, 64; of late Roman
   hierarchy of, 23, 48, 49, 56; and individuals,               villas, 206–7; and Petronius Probus, 286; of
   56; militarization of, 522; mobility in, 25,                 villa of Chiragan, 206; of villa of El Ruedo,
   152–55; order in, 350, 490; personalization                  206; of villa of St. Georges-de-Montagne,
   of, 56; and reciprocal gifts, 76; regionalism                206; of villa of Valtorre de Jarama, 206
   of provincial, 10; resilience of, 10; restruc-            stibadium. See under villas
   turing of, 22–23; and Salvian, 445–47; as                 Stilicho, 297, 298
   simplified in sixth century, 521–22; solidarity           Stoicism, 360
   in, 155, 490; status in upper-class, 3; strati-           Sueves, 387, 388, 393, 395
   fication of, 193; supernatural origin of ills of,         Sulis Minerva, 34
   136–37; and violence, 394–400; wealthy                    Sulpicius Severus, 379, 415; basilicas of,
   people of, 8–11                                              229–30; Chronicle, 312; and crisis in Gaul,
Sogno, Cristiana, 98                                            387; Life of Saint Martin, 215–16, 387; and
solidi (gold pieces), 6, 14–15, 23, 250                         Paulinus of Nola, 215–16, 217, 220, 221,
Solon of Athens, 194                                            223, 229, 231, 387, 420; and Prosper of


                                                       753
                                              index


Sulpicius Severus (continued)                             Pinianus, 296; and populus, 109, 113–14,
  Aquitaine, 426; and Provence, 413; and                  115, 122, 124, 137, 155; and Praetextatus,
  villa-monastery at Primuliacum, 521; villa              254; as Prefect of the City, 97, 103–4, 105,
  of, 420                                                 115, 119, 137, 149, 250; as Proconsul of
Syme, Sir Ronald, 31                                      Africa, 97; Relationes, 97, 104, 105, 106,
Symmachus, Memmius, 97, 115, 117, 118, 126,               137; and religious diversity, 106; and
  234, 461, 466, figure 9                                 Ricomer, 112–13; sanctuary sought by,
Symmachus, Pope, 456, 477, 489–90, 492, 511               285–86; and Satyrus, 123; and Senate, 98,
Symmachus, Quintus Aurelius, xix, xxiii, 16,              115–16, 454; and Sevso, 205; and Sidonius
  90, 96, 317, 331, 338, 452, figure 9; and               Apollinaris, 405; speeches of, 97; and 384
  Altar of Victory, 107; as amator patriae, 97,           famine, 137, 138; and Uranius Satyrus,
  100, 106; and Ambrose, 93, 100, 104–8,                  120–21; and Valentinian I, 187; and Vestal
  119, 121, 122, 124, 125, 126, 129, 134,                 Virgins, 104–8, 114, 121, 137; and villas,
  137, 145, 146; and Ambrosiaster, 256;                   229, 235, 242; and wealth, 93, 97, 100,
  and annona civica, 112–13, 137, 250; and                314
  Augustine, 26, 119, 149, 150, 155, 174; and           Syria, 158, 239, 265–66
  Ausonius of Bordeaux, 93, 100, 187, 188,
  191; and avarice, 138; as avidus civicae              Talmud, Babylonian, 236
  gratiae, 115, 117; and barbarians, 100, 113;          taxation, 400, 451–52; and African populus,
  and Beneventum, 227; and bishops, 102;                   344; and Album of Timgad, 24; and
  and Campania, 99–100, 108–9, 119, 189,                   Ambrose, 145, 146; and Augustine, 346,
  235, 374, 405; and Christianity, 102, 103,               381; and bishops, 506; and bishops of
  104–9; and Cicero, 130; as consul, 97;                   Africa, 382, 383; Christian influence on,
  coyness on wealth of, 229; death of, 119,                384; Christian writers and preachers on,
  146; embassy of, 119; and emperor, 100,                  146; and clergy of Africa, 381; collection of,
  101, 106–7, 118, 119; and emperor                        4–5; collective burden of, 38; and corridors
  Maximus, 211, 286; estates of, 97, 99, 100;              of empire, 187; and crisis of empire, 389;
  and euergetism, 99, 117; and expulsion of                debt for unpaid, 381; and economy, 23; of
  foreigners, 137; father’s house burned, 113,             entire province, 17; exemptions for churches,
  114, 115, 143, 391; and friendship, 97,                  50; and gold, 15; and harvests, 13; and im-
  100–101, 102, 117–18; and games, 115–18,                 perial law, 377; on land, 36; and Numidian
  134, 198, 217, 228, 234, 302, 353, 354, 371,             grain production, 327; personal, 35;
  461; gifts from, 118; as governor of Lucania             rationalization of, 11; and regionalism, 10;
  and Bruttium, 97; and imperial court, 149;               resentment over, 56; and Salvian, 346, 433,
  and imperial system, 100; and Jerome, 260;               447–49, 451; and town councillors, 38, 346;
  and Julian, bishop of Eclanum, 375; letters              and Trier, 187; and Vandal conquest of
  of, 97, 100, 101, 103, 105, 112, 113, 117,               Carthage, 389; and Vestal Virgins, 104.
  119, 137, 239; and Ludi Apollinares,                     See also rents
  465–66; and marriage, 150; as master                  teachers, xxvii, 40
  politician, 100; and new aristocracy, 248,            Temple of Jerusalem, xxv
  249; and new men of Senate, 98, 115–16;               temples, 137, 298, 332
  and Nicomachus Flavianus, 389; as nobilis,            tenants, 13, 198, 367
  101; and nobility, 97, 306–7; and otium,              Terry, Ann, 501
  164; and paganism, 101, 102, 105–9,                   Tertullian, 43
  114–15, 137, 138; palace of, 98; as parens,           Testa, Rita Lizzi, 44, 252
  123; and patronage, 26, 154, 155, 174; and            Thagaste, 323; Alypius as Catholic bishop of,
  Paulinus of Nola, 93, 100, 119, 184, 185,                170; and Augustine, 149, 153, 154, 167, 169,
  210, 219; and Petronius Probus, 233; and                 173, 176; church of, 169; social hierarchy of,


                                                  754
                                               index


   151, 152, 153; town council of, 154, 168,                 replacing, 82; and bishops, 507; collection of
   169                                                       taxes by, 4–5; conflict with, 490; and
Thamugadi. See Timgad                                        Constantine, 22; governance by, 4–5; and
theater, 66, 73, 74, 82, 126, 341                            honors, 4, 6; and middling persons, 39; and
Thébert, Yvon, 200                                           Porphyrius of Lepcis Magna, 504; principales
Theodora, 283                                                of, 490; properties mismanaged by, 496; of
Theodore of Mopsuestia, 375                                  Rhone valley, 422; and Salvian, 346; and
Theodoric, 455, 460, 463, 476                                social mobility, 25; and social order, 490;
Theodorus, bishop of Aquileia, 39, 40, 41, 140               and taxes and harvests, 13; of Thagaste, 168,
Theodosius I, 29, 404; and Ambrose, 121; and                 169
   Augustine, 161; and civil war, 208, 387; and           town halls, 103, 151, 368, 490
   Gaul, 210; and Maximus, 208, 387; and                  town houses, 28, 29, 192, 193, 199, 209, 398
   Milan, 135; missorium of, 96, 132, figure 8;           Toxotius, 271
   and Siricius, 285                                      trade associations (collegia), 35, 37, 38, 60, 343,
Theopolis, 378, 399                                          381, figure 14
Therasia, 209, 215, 220, 225, 226, 280, 293,              treasure in heaven, xix, xx, 15–16, 54, 83–88,
   295, 421, 518                                             207, 216, 300, 438, 512, 522
Thessalonica, 121                                         Trier, 161, 386, 387; and Ausonius of Bor-
Theveste, 334–35                                             deaux, 208; and barbarian invasions, 360,
Tibatto, 403                                                 397; and Constantine, 187; as imperial
Tigridas (deacon), 258                                       capital, 187; imperial court at, 196; Porta
Timgad, 24–25, 152, 248, 335; Album in town                  Nigra of, 187; and Rome, 187; sacking of,
   hall of, 368; basilica at, 335                            435; and Salvian, 452; and taxes, 187; villas
titulus, as term, 245–46                                     of, 196; and villas of Britain, 196; and
Titus (deacon), 466                                          wealth, 187
Tomlin, Roger, 34                                         Trinitarian doctrine, 122
Tor Pignattara, 244                                       Trout, Dennis, 217, 224, 237
Toscano, Santo, 310                                       Tunisia, 4, 12
Tossa de Mar (Gerona, Spain), 21                          Turcii, family of, 269
Toulouse, 198, 392, 396, 398, 400                         Turcius Secundus, 252
Tours, 506                                                Turissa, 21
town councillors (curiales), 4, 5, 7, 66, 70; and         Turnus Rufus, story of, 236
   Album of Timgad, 24; and basilica at Cuicul,           Tyre, 12
   368; and bishops, 344; and bishops and
   clergy, 44; defined, 6; delegation to, 35;             Ucceia, 283–84
   and discourse on wealth and poverty, 8; as             Ultrogotha, 513
   distinguished and privileged, 36; and games            Umbrius Felix, 365
   by sons of bishops, 75; and gold, 15; and              Unjust Steward, parable of, 282
   Julian, bishop of Eclanum, 375; landowners             Uranius Satyrus, 120–21
   as, 20; and Milan, 125; pauperes as, 347; and          Ursinus, 251, 252
   plebs, 38; power of, 346; as pressure group,
   383; and Salvian, 448; and senators, 6; and            Valens, 120, 261, 445
   taxation, 346; and taxes, 15; at Timgad, 335;          Valentinian I, 22, 257, 383, 495; and Ambrose,
   and Vandal kingdom of Carthage, 401                      56; and Arianism, 122; and Attalus, 391;
town councils, 69, 341; in Africa, 330, 381; and            and Ausonius of Bordeaux, 188; and church
   Album of Timgad, 24–25; and Ambrose,                     privileges, 50, 104; and Damasus, 280; and
   127; and Augustine, 151, 152, 154, 167,                  Gratian, 188, 189; and Jerome, 260; and
   168, 169, 185, 347; bishop and clergy as                 proscription, 218; reign of, 387, 389, 403;


                                                    755
                                               index


Valentinian I (continued )                                   on mosaics, 118; and cities, 212–13; as cities,
   and Symmachus, 187; and Trier, 187; and                   194; color of, 192–93; and competitive
   Victory, 107                                              classes, 193–94; of Desenzano (on Lake
Valentinian II, 104, 161; and Altar of Victory,              Garda), 140; dining halls of, 197–98, 218,
   107, 108; and Ambrose, 104, 121, 125–26;                  228, figure 11; distances from each other, 21;
   and Milan, 135; and Symmachus, 107, 108                   and dominance of clients and dependents,
Valentinian III, 389, 425, 448                               193; as economic centers, 197; of El Ruedo,
Valerianus, bishop of Cimiez, 397, 439                       206; erotic mosaics of, 264; of Estramadura,
Valerii family, 295–96                                       229; at Faragola, 471, figure 11; of Gaul,
Valerius, 376                                                192, 196–97; and granaries, 14; of Iberian
Valerius, bishop of Hippo, 171                               peninsula, 192; and imperial court, 127;
Valerius Pinianus, 291–300                                   and imperial system, 195–96; inlaid marble
Valerius Severus, 296                                        in, 193, 471; labor force of, 18, 19; of
Valila, Flavius/Theodobius, 469–70, 472, 475                 landowners, 194; at Mactar, 198; map of
Vandal kingdom of Carthage, 400–402, 403                     distribution of, 190; mausoleum-churches
Vandals, 387, 388, 389, 393; in Africa, 434,                 connected to, 521; of Melania the Younger,
   453; and anti-Donatist laws, 400–401;                     291; and monasteries, 420; and monasticism
   Arianism of, 400–401; as Christians, 445;                 in Gaul, 415; of Montmaurin, 198; as
   conquest of Carthage by, 384, 445, 454,                   monuments, 196–97; on mosaics, 194;
   459; at Hippo, 384; in Spain, 371                         mosaics of, 39, 118, 140, 193, 196, 264, 471,
Vatican, 70                                                  521; new men as owners of, 197; and noble
Venantius Fortunatus, 218, 500, 501, 502, 503,               class, 194; of Palazzo Pignano, 140; of
   504, 505                                                  Paulinus’s ancestor at Burgus, 228; of
Venus, 205–6, 252, figure 12                                 Portugal, 229; and power of landowners,
Vera, Domenico, 19, 471                                      195; provincial, 28; of Rome, 242; of
verecundia, 44–45, 229                                       Rudston, 118; of Sâo Cucufate, 14; and
Vergil, 252, 253; Aeneid, 313; Eclogues, 458;                shrine of Felix of Nola, 228, 229; of Spain,
   Georgics, 131                                             196–97, 212–13, 237; Spanish mausoleums
Verona, 48                                                   adjacent to, 212, 213; splendor of, 192–93;
Verres, 99                                                   statuary of, 206–7; of St. Georges-de-­
Vestal Virgins, 104–8, 114, 121, 137, 271, 298,              Montagne, 206; stibadium of, 197, 218, 471,
   303                                                       figure 11; storage and processing of wine and
Vestina, 246, 249–50, 271                                    oil at, 197; of Sulpicius Severus, 229, 420; of
Veyne, Paul, 34                                              Symmachus, 229, 235, 242; and towns, 20;
Vicenza, 48                                                  of Trier, 196; of urban aristocrats, 21; of
Victorius, 406, 472                                          Valtorre de Jarama, 206; variety of, 193;
Victory (mosaic figure), 39–40                               and Visigoths of Garonne valley, 396; and
Victory, Altar of, 107–8                                     warehouses, 198; of wealthy people, 192–97;
Vigilantius, 281–82                                          of Welschbillig, 206; at Woodchester, 29.
villas: abundance of, 197–99; of Aquitaine,                  See also landowners
   192, 208, 237; archaeology of, 21, 192;                Vindicianus, 203
   architecture of, 29, 193; in Balkans, 196; and         Virgil, Aeneid, 257
   barbarian invasions of Gaul and Spain, 398;            virginity, 76, 272; and Augustine, 306; critics
   and Basilica Nova at Cimitile, 228; baths of,             of, 214; and Cyprian, 43; and Jerome, 76,
   199–200; of Britain, 192, 196–97, 250; at                 267, 270, 282–83; and Jovinian, 284–85;
   Carranque, 214; of Castile, 229, 521; of                  and marriage, 270; and Maximilla, 283, 284;
   Chiragan, 206; and churches, 471; churches                and stratification in Christian community,
   adjacent to, 212, 520; and Circus Maximus                 283; votive, 271. See also celibacy; sexuality


                                                    756
                                             index


Visigoths, 120, 278, 294–95, 389, 391, 423;               163, 168, 169; family vs. new, 314; genera-
  advance on Rome, xx; and Aetius, 394; and               tional flow of, 271, 272; from God, 226, 227,
  Anician family, 298–99, 303; of Aquitaine,              314, 315, 316, 377, 464, 465, 522; from God
  395, 472; and Garonne valley, 396; invasions            vs. fortune, 237; from God vs. nature, 238;
  in Italy, 360; and Julian, bishop of Eclanum,           and Golden Age, 313; as good vs. bad, 311,
  375; sack of Rome, 288; in Spain, 371; of               313, 418, 419; and government injustice,
  Toulouse, 443; and upper nobility, 287                  316, 317; and government service, 317; and
Vitalis (pantomime), 37–38                                Holy Land, 272, 280, 281, 282; and Holy
Vitalis of Turissa, 21, 22                                Spirit, 332–33; horror of, 350; as instrument
Viventius, 283–84                                         of power, 379; inviolability of, 128, 298; and
Vogüé, Adalbert de, 175, 176                              Jesus Christ, 222; in jewelry, 271; of laity,
Volpe, Giuliano, 471                                      493–94; and landowners, 237–40; and Liber
Volusianus, Rufius Agrypnius, 359, 360, 458               Pontificalis, 492; and libraries, 275; and
Voteporix, 503                                            low-profile styles of leadership, 528–29; as
Vuolanto, Ville, 526                                      managed for poor people, 507; management
                                                          vs. ownership of, 483; and marriage, 269–70,
Wales, 503, 504                                           271; and measure of sufficiency, 315–16;
Wallace-Hadrill, Andrew, 249                              and memorialization of family, 379; mem-
walls, 10–11, 35, 175                                     ories of, 292–93; and Milan as imperial
wealth, Christian attitudes toward: active                capital, 135; misuse of, 507–8; and monas-
  pursuit of, 169; and African churches,                  teries, 411, 414–19; monasteries given to,
  xx, 322, 325, 366, 371; and attempted                   226; and monk-bishops, 424; mystical aura
  ordination of Pinianus, 482; and Breton                 as church wealth, 485; and needs of poor
  laity, 520; and captatio (legacy hunting),              people, 465, 507; and other world, 522–26;
  438; and Carthage games, 353–54; and                    as part of vow, 379; polyfocal, 40; for poor
  Catholic Church, 171, 378; and Catholic-                people, 512; from rapine, 318; renunciation
  Donatist competition, 331–34; Christian                 as disrupting estates, 296–97; renunciation
  and non-Christian attitudes toward, 53–54;              of, xxiv–xxv, 17, 168–69, 184, 207, 209–10,
  and Christian ascetics, 207; Christian                  211, 291–300, 309, 311, 319–20, 352, 364,
  bishops’ control of, 487–91, 512; and                   365–66, 379, 414, 418, 436, 437, 464; sacral
  Christian community, 529–30; Christian                  character of, 530; as sacralized through
  corporate, 484, 486, 496; and Christian                 giving, 364; and self, 416; and sexual
  detachment from worldly things, 523; and                renunciation, 285; as shared, 167–68; as
  Christianity, xxi, 207; and church, 119; of             slime, 207; spiritual, 305–6; in transfer from
  church, 128, 469–70, 482–86, 506–7; and                 earth to heaven, xxv, 54, 230–32, 233–34,
  church administration, 476–77; of church as             237; as treasure in heaven, xx, 84–85, 207;
  eternal, 499; church controversies about use            and widows, 270. See also giving; property
  of, 529; and churches (titular), 246, 247; of         wealth, general attitudes toward: and
  churches, xxv, 492–96; churches distributed             abundance of saeculum, 201, 207, 237–38,
  among, 493; churches in Rome as accreting,              522; and barbarian courts, 393; and
  245; of churches of Rome and Ravenna, 493;              barbarian invasions, 395, 396, 398; blaze of,
  of church of Rome, 467; and church of sixth             17; display of, 16, 27–30, 219–20;
  century, 482; and church’s collective good,             gradations of, 23; and harvests, 12; and
  377–78; and church’s poor, 169; and church              honors, 4, 5, 6; and imperial court, 127, 394;
  vs. city, 74; common sense about, 54–55,                and imperial service, 135; instability of, 195;
  311; differences in, 78; discourse on, 8;               from Italian soil, 105–6; and labor on land,
  economic view of, 350; from emperor, 333;               11; and land, 3; of landowners, 20, 114; late
  and expiation of sin, xx; family claims on,             Roman denunciations of, 310; legitimacy of,


                                                  757
                                               index


wealth, general attitudes toward (continued )             wealthy people, Christian perspectives on: and
  xxiv; and loss of Roman virtue, 57; as                    Abraham, 313–14; and ascetics, 214–15,
  maintained by nobility, 95; and marriage, 95,             240; and bishops, 347; as bishops, 528;
  269; mystique of, xx, xxvi, 192, 197, 201;                bishops’ preaching to, 68; and buildings,
  mythologized, 522; and nature, 198, 207;                  349; in Carthage, 43; Christian communities
  and new aristocracy, 248, 249; of pagan                   shielded from, 50; and Christianity, 122;
  temples, 298; and pagan worship for pro-                  and church building, 356; and church
  tection of Rome, 105–6; and power, 5, 17,                 ceremony, 317–18; in churches, xix, 32,
  55; and privileged lifestyle, 220; and ran-               45–50, 75, 211–15, 216, 527–28; churches
  soms, 396; and Respublica, 179; risk of loss              of, 469–70; in churches of Spain, 211–15,
  of, 169–70; Roman discomfort with, 57, 58;                216; and church vs. city, 74; and civic
  roots of, 11; from slave trade, 395; and social           benefactions, 75, 356; civic giving by, 358;
  status, 3; from spoils of office, 95; as theme,           and civil war, 210–11; and Constantinian
  xxiv; and Trier, 187; of villa owners, 192–97;            revolution, 47; and Constantinian state, 394;
  of women in dress and jewels, 27–28, 295                  as creating poor people, 315; as criminals,
wealth, individual perspectives on: and Alaric,             316; and crisis of empire, 385, 389–90;
  295; and Ambrose, 123, 127, 128, 135, 212,                dispute over role in churches, 211; as donors
  528; and Augustine, 54, 55, 152, 162–63,                  to church buildings, 88; as equally wealthy,
  167–69, 179, 183, 185, 322–23, 377–80,                    78; and eye of a needle, xxiv, 217, 292, 319,
  415, 482–85, 528; and Ausonius, 189–91,                   351, 419; and glory of heaven, 87; and God,
  314; and Benivolus, 143; and Cassian,                     204; good vs. bad, 58, 78, 349, 350; in
  414, 415–19, 424; and Cicero, 179; and                    Hebrew Scriptures, 79; historical stereotypes
  Damasus, 254, 280; and De divitiis, 310–17,               concerning, 195; and holy ground, 250; and
  364; and De vera humilitate, 464; and                     Jesus Christ, 319; leaders of churches as,
  Donatus, 333; and Felix of Nola, 221, 229;                530; and Lord’s Prayer, 365; and middling
  and Gregory of Tours, 491, 492; and Hi-                   persons, 39; as mingling with poor in
  larius, 320; and Honoratus, 424; and Jerome,              churches, 45, 46–47, 124–25, 142, 265; as
  xx, 265–68, 315, 528, 529; and Jovinian,                  monsters of avarice and luxury, 56; and
  284–85; and Leo the Great, 380, 465; and                  order, 350; pace and impact of entry into
  Leporius, 484–85; and Marcella, 271; and                  churches, 32; and patronage, 489; and poor
  Martin of Tours, 216; and Maximus Basilius,               people, 37, 78, 169; poor people oppressed
  476–77; of Melania the Elder, 260; and                    by, 345–46; and populus, 344, 345; in
  Melania the Younger, 291–300, 365–66,                     post-imperial kingdoms of West, 508–9;
  464; and Optatus, 335; and Orfitus, 99; and               power of, 350; and ransoms, 43, 128, 396;
  Paul, 352, 377; and Paula, 271; and Paulinus              and Rich Young Man, 84, 313; in Roman
  of Nola, 185–86, 207, 227, 230–32, 233–34,                society, 240, 241–42, 457; and sins, 349;
  237, 266, 281, 528; of Paulinus of Nola,                  and social self-assertion, 229; and social tone
  215–16, 225–30, 295; Paulinus of Nola’s                   of Christian communities, 32; suspicion of,
  rejection of, 184, 192, 209–10, 211, 216–18,              57; taxes on, 447–48; and titular churches,
  226–27; and Pelagian Controversy, 291; and                247–48; and treasure in heaven, 84
  Pelagians, 323, 350; and Pelagius, 308, 309,            wealthy people, general perspectives on: and
  529; and Pelagius’ followers, xx, 291, 528; of            abundance, 204; and art, 204, 205; and
  Petronius Probus, 22, 23, 25, 44, 94, 95; and             barbarian invasions, 397–98, 399; baths of,
  Pinianus, 365–66, 439, 464; and Pinianus at               199–200, 221; and classical myths, 204–5;
  Hippo, 324–25; and Pope Symmachus, 511;                   and cost of games, 74–75; depictions of,
  and Priscillian, 529; and Salvian, 436–38;                56–57, 194; dining by, 193, 194, 197–98,
  and Symmachus, 93, 97, 99, 100, 314; of                   471, figure 11; display by, 53, 67; and
  Vitalis of Turissa, 21                                    euergetism, 62, 63–64, 65; fellow rich as


                                                    758
                                              index


  victims of, 58; and games, 67, 73, 343, 349,           Wickham, Chris, 522
  354, 356; of Gaul, 519; generosity of, 56,             widows, 43, 60, 270, 272, 282–83, 284–85
  352; and gods and goddesses, 205; and gold,            Widow’s Mite, story of, 513
  15; and harvests, 12, 13; health of, 199–200,          will, 369; and Augustine, 426, 428–29; and
  204; hunting by, 194; and inheritance                    Cassian, 427–28; and De divitiis, 311, 312,
  transfers, 295; and intellectualism, 301; and            313, 316; and God as patron, 430; and
  labor force, 399; and libraries, 276; and love           Julian, bishop of Eclanum, 375; and Pelagius,
  for city, 354; and markets, 14; modern                   308–9, 361, 429; and Prosper of Aquitaine,
  descriptions of, 17; and mundus, 204; new,               426, 427–28, 429; and Salvian of Marseilles,
  58; and patronage, 155; and pauperes, 343;               441
  and philanthropy, 59; power of, 255, 345,              Williams, Megan, 261, 275–76, 278
  346, 394, 509; provincial, 18–21, 27–30;               wine, 11, 111, 113, 114
  and public authority, 5; and rents from small          wisdom: and Augustine, 156, 158, 162, 164, 166,
  farms, 19; as resource for regimes, 210–11;              171, 182; common-sense, 55; search for, 47
  in Roman society, 8, 16–18; and sobria                 women: and Augustine, 163, 175, 176; and
  vetustas, 57–58; and town councils, 38;                  catacombs, 37; and clergy, 518–20; and
  villas of, 192–97; and wise people, 169                  display of wealth, 27–28; dress of upper-
wealthy people, individual perspectives on: and            class, 27; forced to become nuns, 439;
  Ambrose, 56, 78–79, 120, 129, 134, 135,                  freedom of older, 272; and Jerome, 262–65,
  138, 139–41, 142–44, 147, 268, 316, 348,                 268, 274; noble, 27–28; and philosophy,
  351, 378, 418; and Augustine, 72–74,                     273–74; separate church door for, 347–48;
  175–77, 342, 345, 346–52, 354, 361–62,                   and Spanish churches, 213; wealth in dress
  365, 378; and De divitiis, 310–17, 318, 361,             and jewels, 246; and wealth in jewelry, 271
  378; and Jerome, 242, 263, 318; and John               Wood, Ian, 522
  Chrysostom, 142, 235; and Paulinus of                  Woodchester villa, 29
  Nola, 239; and Pelagian writers, 418; and              Woolf, Greg, 267
  Priscillian, 215; and Quintianus, 510; and
  Salvian, 438–41, 448, 449                              Zeno, 406
Wessel, Susan, 428                                       Zosimus, 370–71, 372, 373, 374




                                                   759
                                   Figure 1. Profusio
The emperor Constantius II (337–­361), dressed in the heavy embroidered robes of a consul,
scatters gold coins among the people. Ambrose, bishop of Milan (374–­397), was accused of
      usurping an imperial privilege by scattering gold coins to the poor of his church.
   From Andre Grabar, Early Christian Art: From the Rise of Christianity to the Death of
                      Theodosius, Odyssey Press, 1968, page xxx.




                                Figure 2. New Clothing
A married couple on the lid of a great silver casket found on the Esquiline Hill in Rome. The
 man wears the heavy cloak and Germanic-­style fibula brooch of an imperial servant. The
 woman’s neck and hairdo are heavy with jewelry. As we will see (figure 12), the casket was
              made for the marriage of the daughter of a successful courtier.
  Courtesy of Art Resource/The British Museum, © The Trustees of the British Museum/
                                   Art Resource, NY
     Figure 3. The Touch of Empire
        The Empress as a pepper pot.
     Part of the treasure found at Hoxne
           in East Anglia (Britain).
   Courtesy of Art Resource/The British
   Museum, © The Trustees of the British
       Museum/Art Resource, NY




                           Figure 4. The Giver of the Games
 Inlaid in marble on the walls of the Roman palace of Junius Bassus, the consul for the year
331, this panel shows him leading a circus procession, accompanied by grooms riding chariot
  horses. In around 470, the palace was in the hands of a general of barbarian background,
 who donated it to the pope to be made into a church. The church lasted until the end of the
       seventeenth century, with this exuberantly secular panel preserved on its walls.
Courtesy of Art Resource/Museo Nazionale Romano (Palazzo Massimo alle Terme), Rome,
                         Italy. Photo: Vanni/Art Resource, NY
                                   Figure 5. Populus
 This mosaic from Gafsa (Tunisia), a city close to the Sahara, shows circus races witnessed
 by citizens massed in a hippodrome. Rather than representing a local circus, this may be a
folkloristic echo of the circus in Carthage, where the games were challenged in the sermons
  of Augustine, bishop of Hippo (396–­430), who complained that the populus acclaimed
             those who gave money to the games, not those who gave to the poor.
   Courtesy of Art Resource/Musee National du Bardo, Tunis, Tunisia. Photo © Gilles
                             Mermet/Art Resource NY




                                                                   Figure 6.
                                                               From the Gifts of God
                                                          From the mosaic floor of the large
                                                          basilica of Aquileia (Italy) around
                                                            320, this pastoral vignette of a
                                                           serving girl carrying large grapes
                                                           communicates the abundance of
                                                              nature offered up to God.
                                                             Courtesy of Art Resource/
                                                            Basilica Patriarcale, Aquileia,
                                                          Italy. Photo: Scala/Art Resource
                                                                         NY
                            Figure 7. A Collective Venture
A detail from a mosaic floor of the original Euphrasian Basilica, Poreč, Croatia (late fourth
 century). The legend records that Clamosus, a schoolteacher, and his wife donated funds
for 100 square feet of the mosaic; the same panel also records that another family donated
  400 square feet, and another, 100 square feet. This amounted to 580 square feet of mosaic
    at a total cost for all three families of 18 gold solidi—­a quarter of a pound of gold.
             Courtesy of The Bridgeman Art Library. Nationality, Croatian;
                           copyright status: out of copyright
   Figure 8. Honor from on High
      Seated in majesty, the emperor
Theodosius I (379–­395) places a diploma
of appointment in the veiled hands of an
 official. Beneath, the reclining figure of
 Mother Earth communicates a message
         of unstinting abundance.
  Courtesy of Art Resource/Academia
  de la Historia, Madrid, Spain. Photo:
         Scala/Art Resource NY




         Figure 9. A Moment
            of Family Glory
 Seated in a box at the races in the Circus
 Maximus in Rome, an entire family (the
  Lampadii) is grouped around the giver
  of the games. Symmachus sat with his
      son Memmius in this manner.
 Courtesy of Art Resource/Museo Civico
 dell’Eta Cristiana, Brescia. Photo: Scala/
             Art Resource NY
                                 Figure 10. Splendor
          Detail of apse paneling, c.540, Euphrasian Basilica, Poreč, Croatia.
Encrusted marble walls were the glory of late Roman buildings. Unlike their floor mosaics
(which were considerably less expensive), few such walls have survived. The sixth-­century
    marble work in the apse of the basilica still gives an idea of their sumptuousness.
             Courtesy of The Bridgeman Art Library. Nationality, Croatian;
                           copyright status/out of copyright
                             Figure 11. Late Roman Dining
   This reconstruction of the newly-­discovered villa at Faragola in southern Italy shows a
combination of intimacy and grandeur. The guests recline on the half-­circle stibadium couch
in the apse of a hall, where the floor is cooled by a shallow film of water. Lamps cast pools of
                  light, as they would have done also in a Christian basilica.
                    Courtesy of Giuliano Volpe. Photo © Giuliano Volpe
                        Figure 12. The Goddess and the Bride
  The bride, Projecta, arranges her hair in a mirror directly beneath the figure of Venus,
who echoes her gesture. The daughter of a successful imperial servant, Projecta was marrying
       into an old Roman family. She died soon after. Her epitaph was written by
                        none other than Pope Damasus (366–­384).
             Courtesy of Art Resource/Musee de l’Arles antique, Arles, France.
                         Photo: Erich Lessing/Art Resource NY
                    Figure 13. Abjectio: Christ before Pilate
Dressed in a simple robe devoid of all grandeur, Christ confronts a Pilate dressed with
imperial splendor. The idea of a God who veiled his majesty by “dressing down” in this
     manner haunted the imagination of such well-­to-­do Christians as Paulinus.
          Courtesy of Art Resource/Musee de l’Arles antique, Arles, France.
                      Photo: Erich Lessing/Art Resource NY
                                  Figure 14. Mediocres
        (a) The guild of the barrel-­makers, a 4th-­century fresco from the cubiculum
                      of the Bottai Catacombs of Priscilla, Rome, Italy.
Essential for the hotly contested wine supply of the city, this trade association had a burial
   chamber for its own members—­Christian and pagan alike. It was from such guilds—­
collegia—­of well-­to-­do plebeians that the Christian congregations often drew their clergy.
       Courtesy of The Bridgeman Art Library. Copyright status: out of copyright




          (b) Marble burial plaque of Constantius the groom or seller of horses
 From Bisconti, Mestieri nelle catacombe romane : appunti sul declino dell’iconografia del
 reale nei cimiteri cristiani di Roma (2000), fig. 5. Reproduced courtesy of the Pontifical
                             Commission for Sacred Archaeology
                         Figure 15. Christianity in the Home
A small oratory of a martyr placed at the end of a mezzanine landing in a house beneath the
        present-­day church of Santi Giovanni e Paolo on the Caelian Hill in Rome.
Worshipers prostrate themselves at the feet of a martyr who is framed by drawn curtains. A
 man and a woman bearing offerings approach the martyr from each side. The Caelian Hill
 was an area of noble residences. The church of Santi Giovanni e Paolo may have originally
been a palace owned by Pammachius, the friend of Paulinus of Nola. Given to the church, it
                            was known as the titulus Pammachii.
  From Hugo Brandenburg, Die fru?hchristlichen Kirchen Roms vom 4. bis 7. Jahrhundert,
          Schnell und Steiner, 2004. p. 158, left; photo by Arnaldo Vescovo
            Figure 16. An Argument in Stone (an African basilica)
The mosaic shows the church as a tall building, flanked by twin towers and lit by high
clerestory windows. It emphasizes the opulent curtains that veiled the many entrances.
        Noblewomen such as Melania the Younger could provide these curtains
                           from their personal wardrobes.
                Courtesy of CSU Images. Photo © Kathleen Cohen
             Figure 17. Votum reddidit:”He or she has repaid their vow.”
 Retitutus (a deacon) and his family dedicate relics of the martyrs to a church at Henchir
Mdila (Algeria). The relics are contained in a simple jar on which the dedication is scratched
                    in popular Latin: for instance, votum is spelt botum.
From “Un nouveau reliquaire africain et l’évéché Midilensis” (Notes d’archéologie chrétienne
    nord-­africaine XXV), pp. 245–­62, fig 13. Photo © Nöel Duval and Victor Saxer
                             Figure 18. Halls of Light
 A reconstruction of the spacious sixth-­century pilgrimage church recently excavated
                        at Bir Ftouha in Carthage (Tunisia).
 From “Bir Ftouha: A pilgrimage church complex at Carthage,” by Susan T. Stevens,
    Angela V. Kalinowski, and Hans vanderLeest, Journal of Roman Archaeology,
Supplementary Series no. 59, 2005 (graphics by B. Dayhoff ), frontispiece and fig. 12.3.
                   Courtesy of the Journal of Roman Archaeology
                         Figure 19. The Managerial Bishop
     Bishop Euphrasius rebuilt the cathedral basilica of Poreč (Croatia) in around 540.
He is shown bearing a model of the church as his offering to God. His archdeacon Claudius,
 shown bearing the Gospels, may well be his brother. Claudius’s son (Euphrasius’s nephew)
   bears the candles that represent the costly lighting of the basilica. Lamps and candles
         often burned perpetually in the basilica so as to represent the eternal light
                 of paradise in which the soul of their donor hoped to rest.
  Courtesy of Art Resource; photo credit: Cameraphoto Arte, Venice/Art Resource, NY
