Report to the President year ended June 30, 2025: MIT Energy Initiative 
 
The MIT Energy Initiative (MITEI), MIT’s hub for energy research, education, and outreach, is 
advancing zero- and low-carbon solutions to expand energy access, decarbonize our energy 
systems, and address climate change. MITEI is a crucial rallying point for MIT researchers and 
educators who share our vision and commitment to reduce emissions through the 
development of novel technologies and delivery of science-based analysis. Together we are 
dedicated to decarbonizing global energy systems and building upon MIT’s long tradition of 
working collaboratively and transparently with industry, government, and civil society.  
 
2025 Highlights 
 
With a significant change in leadership—the naming of a new director, new deputy director, 
and eight of the 11 leadership team members being new to MITEI or new in their current roles 
within the last three years—MITEI identified five new priorities in FY25: 

1. Engage more broadly with campus 
2. Encourage and help MITEI’s sponsors to fund more energy research with MIT faculty 
3. Make a plan to revitalize energy education at MIT 
4. Address the challenge of data centers’ energy demand 
5. Organize the engineering community to do better assessments of new energy 

technologies 
This report provides more detail about progress on each of these priorities.  
 
William H. Green, the Hoyt C. Hottel Professor at MIT, was named as MITEI’s fourth director in 
April 2024, making FY25 his first full year in that role. Carolyn Ruppel (SB, SM ’86, Ph. D. ’92), 
who had a long research career in energy and climate, most recently at the U.S. Geological 
Survey (USGS), joined MITEI as deputy director of science and technology in March 2025. For a 
full list of team members, please see the Organization section. 
 
FY25 Research Accomplishments and Updates 
 
In July 2024, Randall Field was named director of research to guide MITEI’s energy systems 
research and strengthen collaboration with other MIT research teams. Field is the former 
director of MITEI’s research consortium, the Future Energy Systems Center, and was one of the 
first employees of MITEI at its inception in 2007. Three of MITEI’s FY25 priorities are directly 
related to our research efforts—encouraging MITEI sponsors to fund more research, addressing 
the data centers energy problem, and improving assessments for new energy technologies. 
MITEI’s research portfolio reflects our primary objective of decarbonizing the global economy 
with low-carbon technologies and through integrated energy systems supported by effective 
policy. Our work is guided by the use of advanced system modeling and analysis techniques to 
assess the feasibility of decarbonization technologies and pathways, against the backdrop of 



the energy system as a whole, from an economic and technical standpoint. MITEI also assesses 
the total lifecycle emissions of these technologies. 
 
With both member and philanthropic funding, MITEI launched 69 research projects in FY25 
totaling over $22 million, a 31% increase in funding for research projects over FY24. The focus 
area that garnered the most new research support this year was electric power, with funding of 
$9.2 million. The balance of this year’s research funding was allocated to support a range of 
other energy topics, including carbon management, low-carbon fuels, and energy storage. With 
support from its members, as well as numerous foundations, donors, various state and federal 
government entities, and university partners, MITEI has supported 1,078 projects from its 
inception through FY25. A list of active FY25 projects and journal articles published in FY25 can 
be found on the MITEI website. 
 
Priority update: Encourage and help MITEI's members to fund more energy research with MIT 
faculty 
In FY25, MITEI raised more than $30 million in multi-year commitments from new and renewing 
members. This funding supports MIT researchers in advancing MITEI’s mission of accelerating 
the energy transition, and also sponsors research by undergraduate and graduate students and 
postdocs. Our Member Relations team actively seeks to grow research funding by bringing in 
new members, and by working closely with existing members to conceive, execute, and grow 
new research projects.            
  
MITEI has a regular process of engagement with its corporate members. Through facilitated 
meetings with faculty, scheduled events covering many technologies, and customized 
workshops involving teams of Principal Investigators (PIs), MITEI discovers topics of interest to 
its members and identifies opportunities for substantive faculty research collaborations. 
Research takes the form of both sponsored research projects by individual companies and 
jointly sponsored research activities in areas of common interest among members. Leveraging 
MITEI’s existing administrative infrastructure, we are able to quickly initiate new research 
projects with faculty where we find a match between capabilities and member interest. Where 
we identify new strategic areas of focus, we are building the collaborative foundation for future 
work in critical areas such as data center power, low-carbon fuels, and long duration energy 
storage. 
  
Priority update: Address the data center problem 
In 2023, data centers consumed about 4.4% of the total electricity supply in the United States. 
With the meteoric expansion of the use of artificial intelligence and burgeoning number of data 
centers being built, the demand for energy is projected to far exceed the power supply. The 
growing energy demand from data centers was one challenge MITEI recognized when we 
identified the theme for our 2024 Annual Research Conference as, “A durable energy transition: 
How to stay on track in the face of increasing demand and unpredictable obstacles.” A panel 
discussion with key stakeholders examined this topic more deeply at the Fall conference. The 
Spring Symposium, “AI and energy: Peril and promise,” continued that exploration by looking at 



the key challenges and opportunities at the nexus of AI and energy. For broader audiences and 
to help inform the public on this urgent issue, we also published an article highlighting the data 
center/energy challenge and a brief video featuring MITEI Director William H. Green explaining 
the issues we currently face. 
 
MITEI began exploring the launch of a members’ interest group focused on the urgent energy 
needs arising from the rapidly growing demand for electricity for data centers. Such a group 
would leverage MITEI’s established expertise and leadership in convening multiple energy 
sectors to consider a timely and complex issue facing many companies.  
 
Priority update: Organize better assessments of new energy technologies 
In collaboration with the MIT Climate Project, MITEI is committed to creating clear guidance 
and standards to assess the climate benefits and projected costs of new energy technology. 
This is critical to empowering research funders and investors to make clear, data-backed 
decisions on which new technologies merit support. We have recruited several renowned 
researchers in techno-economic and emissions assessment to serve on a steering committee. 
The first meeting was held in early June 2025. 
 
Funding for early-stage research 
In FY25, seven early-stage research projects submitted during the annual MITEI Seed Fund call 
were funded for a total of more than $1.2 million. Over the last four cycles, just over 30% of the 
projects receiving MITEI seed funding have been related to batteries or storage, demonstrating 
the importance of innovation in energy storage if renewable energy is to reach its full potential 
in helping to decarbonize the energy system. Since its inception, MITEI has supported more 
than 226 energy-focused seed projects with grants totaling $29.8 million.  
 
The Future Energy Systems Center 
In August 2024, Morgan Andreae (Ph.D., ’06) was named executive director of MITEI’s Future 
Energy Systems Center, MITEI’s member-funded research consortium and a vital component of 
MITEI’s research program. The Center funded 20 new projects this year, with topics ranging 
from the hurdles facing small modular reactors in industrial settings to the interplay between 
hydrogen production and renewable fuel synthesis. The Center’s research portfolio aims to 
foster and inform interdisciplinary energy research across MIT, accelerating progress toward a 
net-zero carbon future. Using techno-economic and life cycle analysis to examine energy 
pathways in different sectors, the Center enables its corporate members to explore and 
develop strategic energy plans, taking into consideration technology, economics, and policy.   

 
• Future Energy Systems Center projects: The 20 new Future Energy Systems Center 

projects funded this fiscal year bring the number of system modeling and analysis 
projects being carried out within the Center to 53. MITEI will kick off meetings for the 10 
newest projects at the Center’s September 2025 Workshop. Our next call for project 
proposals will be sent to MIT’s 1,300 PIs in July 2025, and a new cohort of projects will 
be selected in the fall. 
 



• Future Energy Systems Center meetings and workshops: In May, the Future Energy 
Systems Center held its spring workshop to address timely energy topics of interest to 
our members. Topics included deep geothermal, an improved business case for new 
fission power plants, and how policy reversals shape the U.S. and international energy 
landscape. The Center also held its advisory committee meeting and hosted student 
presentations and a poster session. 
 

• Future Energy Systems Center webinars: The Center hosted 17 webinars in FY25, as 
well as four lightning talk sessions. The webinar series is a platform for MIT faculty from 
across departments to share insights on emerging technologies, policy developments, 
and sustainability challenges by highlighting the latest updates from their Center-
supported projects. 

There are 36 Future Energy Systems Center members. The member companies span four 
continents and are involved in many industries, including energy, utilities, automotive, 
semiconductors, mining/metals, chemicals, telecommunications, infrastructure, insurance, and 
engineering/construction. We are in discussions with a number of prospective members. 
 
Studies and reports 
The role of fusion energy in a decarbonized electricity system, published in September 2024, 
showed that fusion energy could be a major contributor in future electric power systems and 
identified what is required to achieve that potential. The report was based on a one-and-a-half-
year study examining the factors likely to shape the deployment and utilization of fusion 
energy. This study applied a multi-disciplinary approach using techno-economic analysis and 
modeling to investigate the factors, such as cost and climate policy, that will impact the 
deployment of fusion power plants. Several key findings emerged from this study:  

• Fusion has a potential societal value in the trillions of dollars in a decarbonized world. 
• The scale of fusion deployment in the electricity system will depend on fusion power 

plant costs. 
• The scale and timing of fusion deployment in different regions of the world will be 

driven by economic growth, population density, electrification needs, regional costs, 
decarbonization targets, relative prices of electricity, limitations of fission-based nuclear 
generation, and resource availability for other low-carbon technologies (wind, solar, and 
biomass). 

• The scale of fusion deployment in the electricity system will highly depend on the 
availability and cost of other low-carbon technologies and on how tightly carbon 
emissions are constrained in the future. 

• Key cost drivers for fusion power plants include reactor equipment cost, regulatory 
considerations, and operations and maintenance costs. 

 
MIT researcher highlights 

• The changing geography of “energy poverty” 



Study of the United States shows homes in the South and Southwest could use more aid 
for energy costs due to a growing need for air conditioning in a warming climate. This 
work was supported by MITEI’s Future Energy Systems Center. 
 

• Decarbonizing steel is as tough as steel 
A new study shows how advanced steelmaking technologies could substantially reduce 
carbon emissions. This study was supported by MIT Center for Sustainability Science and 
Strategy and ExxonMobil through the MIT Energy Initiative. 
 

• The multifaceted challenge of powering AI 
Providing electricity to power-hungry data centers is stressing grids, raising prices for 
consumers, and slowing the transition to clean energy. MITEI’s research scientists are 
collaborating with faculty members to explore multiple facets of this problem—from 
sourcing power to grid improvement to analytical tools that increase efficiency, and 
more. 
 

• MIT engineers make converting CO2 into useful products more practical 
A new electrode design boosts the efficiency of electrochemical reactions that turn 
carbon dioxide into ethylene and other products. The work was supported by Shell 
through the MIT Energy Initiative. 

 
• New filter captures and recycles aluminum from manufacturing waste 

MIT engineers designed a nanofiltration process that could make aluminum production 
more efficient while reducing hazardous waste. This work was supported in part by 
MITEI’s Energy UROP fund. 

 
• Rooftop panels, EV chargers, and smart thermostats could chip in to boost power grid 

resilience 
MIT engineers propose a new “local electricity market” to tap into the power potential 
of homeowners’ grid-edge devices. This work was supported in part by the MIT Energy 
Initiative. 

 
• Will neutrons compromise the operation of superconducting magnets in a fusion plant? 

New experiments show that the immediate effect of atomic displacements, known as 
the “beam on effect,” should not be an issue during fusion power plant operations. This 
research was supported by Eni S.p.A. through the MIT Energy Initiative. 

 
• How to solve a bottleneck for CO2 capture and conversion 

Today’s carbon capture systems suffer a trade-off between efficient capture and 
release, but a new approach developed at MIT using nanoscale filtering membranes can 
boost overall efficiency. The research was supported in part by Shell International 
Exploration and Production Inc. through the MIT Energy Initiative. 

 



• More durable metals for fusion power reactors 
MIT researchers have found a way to make structural materials last longer under the 
harsh conditions inside a fusion reactor. This research was supported by Eni S.p.A. 
through the MIT Energy Initiative. 

 
• Reality check on technologies to remove carbon dioxide from the air 

An MITEI study finds many climate-stabilization plans are based on questionable 
assumptions about the future cost and deployment of “direct air capture” and therefore 
may not bring about promised reductions. 

 
• Study helps pinpoint areas where microplastics will accumulate 

New research shows that one key factor in determining where microparticles are likely 
to build up has to do with the presence of biofilms. Biofilms deposited by living 
organisms reduce the accumulation of small particles, while areas of bare sand can be 
microplastics hotspots. The work was supported by Shell International Exploration and 
Production Inc. through the MIT Energy 
Initiative.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

• New climate chemistry model finds “non-negligible” impacts of potential hydrogen fuel 
leakage 
An MIT study confirms the climate impacts of hydrogen, recommends that leak 
prevention be a priority as infrastructure for handling this clean-burning fuel is built. 
This work was funded by the MIT Energy Initiative. 

 
• Reducing carbon emissions from residential heating: A pathway forward 

A new MIT study identifies steps that can lower not only emissions, but also costs, 
across the combined electric power and natural gas industries that currently supply 
heating fuels. This work was supported by MITEI’s Future Energy Systems Center.  
 

• Using liquid air for grid-scale energy storage 
New research finds liquid air energy storage could be the lowest-cost option for 
ensuring a continuous power supply on a future grid dominated by carbon-free, but 
intermittent, sources of electricity. This work was supported in part by MITEI’s Future 
Energy Systems Center.  

 
• How can India decarbonize its coal-dependent electric power system? 

MITEI researchers have explored and clarified India’s decarbonization options and have 
posted their methods and results for use by other countries in the midst of similar 
energy transitions. The analysis identifies some promising options but also raises 
unexpected concerns. This work received funding from IHI Corp. through the MIT Energy 
Initiative. 
 

 
FY25 Education Accomplishments and Updates 



 
Priority update: Make a plan to revitalize energy education at MIT 
In preparing the Energy Studies Minor’s 5-year report to the Committee on Curricula, MITEI 
Education broadly evaluated opportunities to evolve its energy education program and engage 
more students over the next five years. The MIT Committee on Curricula responded with a 
letter that commended MITEI’s effort and dedication that were reflected in the review, and said 
the “Energy Studies Minor is clearly a cohesive and valuable program.” MITEI leads MIT’s 
energy education efforts and has engaged with thousands of students through sponsored 
research opportunities and other programs—preparing the next generation of innovators, 
entrepreneurs, and policy makers to collaborate on solutions to global energy challenges. 
Energy education programs include the Energy Studies Minor, Undergraduate Research 
Opportunities Program in energy, short modules during the Independent Activities Period, an 
energy-focused first-year pre-orientation program, the graduate Society of Energy Scholars, and 
online energy classes open to a global audience. Faculty associated with MITEI help shape 
energy education at both the undergraduate and graduate levels by teaching, advising, and 
developing new curricula. 
 
Energy Studies Minor  
MITEI supports and regularly updates the Energy Studies Minor curriculum, relying on an 
endowed fund provided by a generous donor. The Energy Studies Minor enables undergraduate 
MIT students to gain an integrative understanding of energy and develop the skills required of 
tomorrow’s energy professionals, leaders, and innovators in research, industry, policy, 
management, and governance. 216 students have graduated with the Energy Studies Minor, 
including four that graduated in 2025. Eight are on track to graduate with the minor in 2026.  
The new Chair of the Energy Minor Oversight Committee, Professor Daniel Frey (Mechanical 
Engineering), worked with the committee to evaluate course development proposals that MITEI 
then funded to refresh the Energy Minor Curriculum. A particular goal is to enhance 
connections between the energy minor and computer science, including promising applications 
of AI/machine learning for analyzing and solving energy challenges. Increasingly, we are also 
coordinating with other energy/climate/sustainability offerings at MIT to enhance efficiency 
and complementary in the curriculum, to engage students, and to link with Climate Project 
initiatives as those take shape. 
 
Teaching Assistant support 
MITEI provided support for graduate teaching assistants in the following subjects: 1.067[J]: 
Energy Systems for Climate Change Mitigation, 5.812[J]: Principles of Innovation, EC.711: 
Introduction to Energy in Global Development, and EC.712[J]: Applications of Energy in Global 
Development. MITEI also provided course development funds for 8.01x: Information and 
Entropy: Energy and Exergy. 
 
Graduate Scholars 
In 2024-2025, MITEI welcomed 14 new graduate students and postdocs to the Society of Energy 
Scholars (formerly known as the Society of Energy Fellows). The Energy Scholars network now 
totals more than 540 current and former graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, spanning 



20 departments and divisions at MIT’s five schools and one college. This year’s fellowships were 
supported by MITEI member companies Shell, Chevron, ENI, and ExxonMobil, and by Friends of 
MITEI. 
 
Undergraduate energy research (UROPs) 
During FY25, MITEI supported 85 Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP) 
student projects, bringing the total UROPs supported by MITEI since inception to 1,060. 
 
Online energy courses 
To train global professionals, policy makers, and students in energy topics and tools to support 
and accelerate the energy transition, the MITEI education team has developed a series of open 
online courses (MOOCs) based on interdisciplinary residential MIT subjects. These courses are 
free and available in almost every country, and have attracted more than 145,000 online 
learners. They engage critical aspects of future energy systems: load and demand-side 
management; economics and regulation; production, distribution, and transmission; mobility; 
and integrating climate topics across disciplines. The courses include Sustainable Building 
Design; Sustainable Energy; Energy Economics and Policy; Transformative Living Labs in 
Mobility; and Climate in Classrooms: Tools for All Teachers and Disciplines. 
 
IAP courses 
MITEI supported several IAP courses in January 2025, including: “Information and Entropy: 
Energy and Exergy,” which focused on the concept of entropy and its connection to information 
theory, as well as ideas about exergy and the usefulness of energy, energy efficiency, and CO2 
capture, for which 5 students enrolled; “AI for Energy Solutions”, which explored the 
applications of AI/Machine Learning to climate and energy challenges, which was offered to 
MIT and participants outside of MIT via Zoom and for which registration varied from 47-210 
people; and “Computational modeling for clean, reliable, and affordable electricity,” which 
offered a hands-on learning experience introducing analysis techniques to model and 
understand the role of electric power systems within a carbon-constrained economy, for which 
49 students enrolled. 
 
First-Year Pre-Orientation Program (FPOP) 
MITEI’s summer 2024 energy pre-orientation program welcomed 18 new first-year students to 
the MIT community. Activities included a visit to a sustainable farm, tours of MIT’s Nuclear 
Reactor Lab and the Plasma Science and Fusion Center, and talks with faculty and student 
group leaders. 
 
Support for student groups 
MITEI provides financial and staff support for a number of student groups throughout the year. 
In FY25, these included the MIT Energy and Climate Club, MIT Solar Vehicle Team, MIT 
Motorsports, MIT Wind, the MIT Sustainable Engine Group, the MIT TPP Policy Hackathon, and 
the MIT Energy and Climate Hackathon. 
 



Field trip to Europe 
In August 2024, MITEI Education Director Antje Danielson took eight undergraduate and 
graduate students to Denmark to explore renewable energy startups and visit the Danish Tech 
University in Copenhagen. 

 
 
FY25 Outreach Accomplishments and Updates 
 
Priority update: Engage more broadly with MIT campus 
A major priority for MITEI in FY25 was to strengthen MITEI’s connection across campus and 
ensure a better understanding of MITEI’s mission. We did this by launching a new podcast, 
What if it works?, and speaker series, MITEI Presents: Advancing the Energy Transition, in fall 
2024. We also increased our collaborations with other DLCs and campus groups. On campus 
and beyond, MITEI’s outreach efforts foster dialogue within the research community and across 
the academic, industry, and government sectors and provide the public with context on current 
energy issues. In FY25, the MITEI communications team published 25 original news articles, 
including event coverage, research reports, and explainers, to highlight MIT energy researchers, 
students, and their work across print and digital platforms. MITEI articles are frequently 
republished by MIT News, providing broader reach through MIT News’ channels. Additionally, 
we worked with other DLCs to bring important industry and policy leaders to campus to engage 
with the MIT community. This included a partnership with MIT Ukraine, MIT Security Studies 
Program, and the Belfer Center to bring Volodymyr Kudrytskyi, the former CEO of Ukraine’s 
electric grid operator Ukrenergo, to discuss the challenges of securing Ukraine’s energy system 
throughout the war.  
 
MITEI Presents: Advancing the Energy Transition speaker series 
Launched in September 2024, this speaker series connects the MIT community with energy 
experts and leaders who are actively working on the scientific, technological, and policy 
solutions we urgently need to transform our energy systems. Six speakers were brought to 
campus this FY, including Alicia Barton, CEO of Vineyard Offshore; U.S. Representative Sean 
Casten of Illinois; Joseph F. DeCarolis, administrator of the US Energy Information 
Adminstation; Emily Knight, CEO of The Engine; Manish Bapna, CEO of the Natural Resources 
Defense Council (more below); and Emily A. Carter, the Gerhard R. Andlinger Professor in 
Energy and the Environment at Princeton University. 
 
Podcast: What if it works?  
In October 2024, we launched our podcast series, What if it works? Season one gained more 
than 1,000 subscribers with 18 published episodes by the end of FY25. Every two weeks, MITEI 
hosts Rob Stoner and Kara Miller spoke with energy experts about the science, technology, and 
policies that can transform our energy systems and give us a more sustainable future. Guests 
included Ernest Moniz, former U.S. Secretary of Energy; Susan Solomon (Earth, Atmospheric 
and Planetary Sciences); Climate Project Mission Directors Elsa Olivetti (Material Science and 



Engineering) and Chris Knittel (MIT Sloan); Howard Herzog (MITEI); and Namrata Kala (MIT 
Sloan). 
 
The Energy of the Future video series 
In March 2025, we launched a monthly video series on social media showcasing the work of our 
energy students and their efforts to advance the energy transition and expand energy access. 
This series supports MITEI’s priority of engaging more broadly with campus and growing our 
social media audiences. In FY25, we published five videos in the series, featuring Energy UROP 
participants, on Instagram and LinkedIn. We promoted the videos across campus with both 
print and digital advertisements and a special display in the infinite corridor.  
 
Spring Symposium 
In May 2025, MITEI advanced its focus on data centers at our Spring Symposium, which brought 
together researchers, industry leaders, and academic experts to explore artificial intelligence as 
both a problem and solution for the clean energy transition. Speakers included Vijay Gadepally, 
a senior scientist at MIT’s Lincoln Lab; Evelyn Wang, MIT Vice President for Energy and Climate; 
Antonia Gawel, global director of sustainability and partnerships at Google; and Dustin 
Demetriou, senior technical staff member in sustainability and data center innovation at IBM. 
 
Earth Day Colloquium 
As part of MIT’s celebration of Earth Week, MITEI hosted Manish Bapna, the president and CEO 
of the Natural Resources Defense Council, one of the United States’ largest environmental 
organizations, who advocated for reinstating climate action as a national priority. 
 
Congressional Staff Seminar 2025 
MITEI, the MIT Washington Office, and the Climate Policy Center jointly hosted a bipartisan 
group of 27 U.S. House, Senate, and Congressional committee staffers for three days of panels, 
tours, and presentations from faculty, research scientists, and students about energy and 
climate research. Topics included Climate & AI, The Role of Nuclear Energy in U.S. Power 
Generation, and Electricity Transmission: Ensuring a Smart, Affordable, and Resilient Grid, 
among others.  
 
Annual Research Conference 2024 
Energy researchers, policy makers, and industry members came together this year to explore 
the topic of “A durable energy transition: How to stay on track in the face of increasing demand 
and unpredictable obstacles.” The conference included eight panels that featured MIT 
moderators, 13 MIT panelists, and 19 panelists from other academic institutions, government, 
or industry. MIT President Sally Kornbluth opened the conference, and the keynote speaker 
was Praveer Singh, CEO and Managing Director of the Tata Power Co, Ltd. In collaboration with 
MIT’s Industrial Liaison Program, the conference also highlighted seven companies with a 
Startup Showcase session. MITEI’s summer UROP students participated in a slam, presenting 
their research to MITEI’s corporate members and conference attendees.  

 
C3E 2024 Women in Clean Energy Symposium 



In November 2024, the 13th annual Clean Energy, Education, and Empowerment (C3E) Women 
in Clean Energy Symposium and Awards was hosted by Stanford Energy in collaboration with 
MITEI, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), and Julie Ann Wrigley Global Futures Laboratory at 
Arizona State University. The conference featured award presentations, as well as diverse 
speakers and rich conversations on pursuing sustainable clean energy goals. The U.S. C3E 
Initiative advances clean energy by closing the gender gap and increasing the participation, 
leadership, and success of women in clean energy fields. 
 
Organization 
 
In April 2024, William H. Green, the Hoyt C. Hottel Professor at MIT, began his tenure as MITEI 
Director, leading MITEI’s leadership team to build on the Initiative’s strong foundation and 
multidisciplinary approach to deliver global energy solutions, broadening MITEI’s membership 
base, bringing in new member companies, increasing opportunities for faculty research, 
strengthening operations, and playing a lead role in energy education and outreach at MIT. 
 
William H. Green, Director 
Carolyn Ruppel, Deputy Director of Science and Technology  
Martha Broad, Executive Director 
Leia Amarra, Manager of Financial Operations 
Morgan Andreae, Executive Director, Future Energy Systems Center and Eni-MIT Alliance 
Randall Field, Director, Research 
J.J. Laukaitis, Director, Member Services 
Tom Witkowski, Director, Communications 
Antje Danielson, Director, Education 
Sarah MacLeod, Human Resources Administrator 
Heather Leet, Development Officer 
 
External Advisory Board  
 
The MITEI External Advisory Board composed of esteemed industry, academic, nonprofit, and 
public sector leaders, meets each autumn and provides feedback on MITEI’s ongoing work and 
priorities. The Board, chaired by Ellen Williams, Distinguished University Professor Emerita, 
University of Maryland, offers perspectives and guidance that assist MITEI in maximizing its 
impact in helping to meet the world’s energy needs, reduce the environmental impacts of 
energy production and consumption, and inform public discourse on energy and the 
environment.  The FY25 meeting was held in November 2024. 
 
Governing Board 
 
The Governing Board represents Founding and Sustaining Members’ strategic interests for 
engaging with MITEI, and their research, analyses and education priorities. The Board serves to 
provide feedback on the effectiveness and coherence of MITEI’s offerings and provides inputs 



and direction on new MITEI products, services and deliverables. The Board is also a forum for 
sharing and vetting new ideas and industry challenges between MITEI and the members. 
 
MITEI Energy Council 
 
The Energy Council is a faculty committee that helps shape MITEI’s research, education, and 
outreach directions. The Council includes faculty from MIT’s five schools and one college, in 
addition to MITEI’s executive leadership. 
 
Energy Education Task Force  
 
In FY25, Oliver Jagoutz, the Cecil and Ida Green Professor of Geology, was named chair of The 
Energy Education Task Force. This task force, composed of faculty members and students from 
all five of MIT’s schools and one college, oversees the Initiative’s Education program.  
 
MITEI Members 
 
MITEI’s corporate member program facilitates collaborations between industry and MIT to 
research, develop, and accelerate low- and zero-carbon solutions for the energy transition.  
MITEI’s member roster is reflective of MITEI’s mission to work across the broad industrial 
spectrum of energy production, conversion, delivery, and usage.  
 
Member Highlights 
 

• Overall, in FY25, MITEI maintained a steady net membership roster of 38 members. 
Reflecting our ongoing efforts to diversify across the energy spectrum, we welcomed 
several notable new members, including Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners, Siemens 
Energy, and RWE (a German multinational energy company). MITEI is also welcoming GE 
Vernova, as part of their role in the new MIT research alliance. GE Vernova’s pending 
membership in MITEI is expected to be finalized in early FY26. 
 

• A key focus in FY25 was the successful renewal of Founding Member ExxonMobil, along 
with several other member renewals within MITEI’s Future Energy Systems Center. 

 
• As members’ research organizations rebounded from Covid-19 disruptions, their 

research priorities evolved from single-PI, relatively straightforward projects to complex, 
multi-disciplinary initiatives involving multiple PIs. To support this shift, MITEI organized 
workshops that connected members and PI teams, enabling them to pitch project ideas 
to founding members ExxonMobil and Shell. As a result, we have launched—or are on 
the verge of launching—six complex, multi-PI, multi-year projects aimed at addressing 
critical challenges across all aspects of the energy transition. 
 



• As part of MITEI’s efforts to help industry and governments facing critical energy 
transition decisions, MITEI executed a workshop in Taiwan under the TIGER Consortium.  
This was a collaboration with the EPOCH Foundation meant to help Taiwan develop a 
robust roadmap for its own green energy transition. 

 
Along with financial support for research, analyses, and education, industry members 
contribute valuable perspectives and detailed knowledge of real-world conditions for practical 
scaling-up, deployment, and integration of decarbonization solutions. 

MITEI draws on MIT’s research capabilities, innovation, expertise, and experience to create 
successful industry collaborations to meet its research partners’ key strategic objectives. A 
multi-tiered membership structure enables diverse private-sector partners to sponsor 
multidisciplinary “flagship” research programs with MIT faculty; contribute to energy-focused 
labs, programs, and centers at MIT; fund critical energy fellowships; support innovative energy 
concepts from proposals solicited across the campus; and participate in MITEI’s seminars, 
lectures, and colloquia. A list of members is available on the MITEI website.  

 

Affiliated groups 
 
MITEI collaborates on research and education activities with faculty members from many MIT 
centers, departments, and laboratories pursuing interdisciplinary energy and environmental 
activities. In particular, researchers from both the Center for Energy and Environmental Policy 
Research (CEEPR) and the CS3 are working with MITEI researchers to support the work of the 
Future Energy Systems Center. 
 
Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research 
 
CEEPR promotes research on energy and environmental policy to support improved decision-
making by government and industry. It is directed by Christopher Knittel (MIT Sloan) and jointly 
sponsored by MITEI, the Department of Economics, and the MIT Sloan School of Management. 
  
CEEPR carries out rigorous and objective research for improved decision-making in government 
and the private sector, and closely cooperates with government and industry partners from 
around the globe. Affiliated faculty and research staff as well as external research affiliates 
contribute to the empirical study of a wide range of policy issues related to energy supply and 
demand and the environment. CEEPR produces working papers, policy briefs, and research 
input to larger, interdisciplinary studies, and hosts two annual research workshops at MIT. 
CEEPR has extensive previous and current international collaborations and has co-organized a 
series of international energy policy conferences. 
   
CEEPR houses the Roosevelt Project, a research initiative that takes a multidisciplinary 
approach to examining the transitional challenges associated with deep decarbonization of the 



U.S. economy. The project was initiated by former U.S. Secretary of Energy and Cecil and Ida 
Green Professor of Physics and Engineering Systems emeritus Ernest J. Moniz and engages a 
breadth of MIT and Harvard faculty and researchers across academic domains including 
economics, engineering, sociology, urban studies and planning, and political science.  
 
Center for Sustainability Science and Strategy 
 
In August 2024, the MIT School of Science launched a center to advance knowledge and 
computational capabilities in the field of sustainability science, and support decision-makers in 
government, industry, and civil society to achieve sustainability goals. Aligned with the Climate 
Project at MIT, researchers at the MIT Center for Sustainability Science and Strategy (CS3) 
develop and apply expertise from across the Institute to improve understanding of 
sustainability challenges, and thereby provide actionable knowledge and insight to inform 
strategies for improving human well-being for current and future generations. Noelle Selin, 
professor at MIT’s Institute for Data, Systems and Society and the Department of Earth, 
Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, serves as the center’s inaugural faculty director. C. Adam 
Schlosser and Sergey Paltsev, senior research scientists at MITEI, serve as deputy directors, with 
Anne Slinn as executive director. CS3 incorporates and succeeds both the Joint Program on the 
Science and Policy of Global Change and the Center for Global Change Science. 
 
William H. Green 
Director, MIT Energy Initiative 
Hoyt C. Hottel Professor 

All rights reserved: © 2025 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.