INSIGHT FEATURE

NATURE|Vol 449|18 October 2007|doi:10.1038/nature06244

The Human Microbiome Project
Peter J. Turnbaugh, Ruth E. Ley, Micah Hamady, Claire M. Fraser-Liggett, Rob Knight & Jeffrey I. Gordon
A strategy to understand the microbial components of the human genetic and metabolic landscape and
how they contribute to normal physiology and predisposition to disease.
Before the Human Genome Project was completed, some researchers
predicted that ~100,000 genes would be found. So, many were surprised
and perhaps humbled by the announcement that the human genome
contains only ~20,000 protein-coding genes, not much different from
the fruitfly genome. However, if the view of what constitutes a human
is extended, then it is clear that 100,000 genes is probably an underestimate. The microorganisms that live inside and on humans (known
as the microbiota) are estimated to outnumber human somatic and
germ cells by a factor of ten. Together, the genomes of these microbial
symbionts (collectively defined as the microbiome) provide traits that
humans did not need to evolve on their own1. If humans are thought
of as a composite of microbial and human cells, the human genetic
landscape as an aggregate of the genes in the human genome and the
microbiome, and human metabolic features as a blend of human and
microbial traits, then the picture that emerges is one of a human ‘supraorganism’.
To understand the range of human genetic and physiological diversity,
the microbiome and the factors that influence the distribution and evolution of the constituent microorganisms must be characterized. This
is one of the main goals of the Human Microbiome Project (HMP).
The outcome might also provide perspective on contemporary human
evolution: that is, on whether and how rapidly advancing technology,
and the resultant transformation of human lifestyles and the biosphere,
influences the ‘micro-evolution’ of humans and thereby health and predisposition to various diseases.
The HMP is a logical conceptual and experimental extension of the
Human Genome Project. The HMP is not a single project. It is an interdisciplinary effort consisting of multiple projects, which are now being
launched concurrently worldwide, including in the United States (as
part of the next phase of the National Institutes of Health’s Roadmap for
Medical Research), Europe and Asia. The advent of highly parallel DNA
sequencers and high-throughput mass spectrometers with remarkable
mass accuracy and sensitivity is propelling microbiology into a new
era, extending its focus from the properties of single organism types
in isolation to the operations of whole communities. The new field of
metagenomics involves the characterization of the genomes in these
communities, as well as their corresponding messenger RNA, protein
and metabolic products2.
The HMP will address some of the most inspiring, vexing and fundamental scientific questions today. Importantly, it also has the potential
to break down the artificial barriers between medical microbiology and
environmental microbiology. It is hoped that the HMP will not only
identify new ways to determine health and predisposition to diseases
but also define the parameters needed to design, implement and monitor strategies for intentionally manipulating the human microbiota, to
optimize its performance in the context of an individual’s physiology.
Examples of, and speculations about, the functional contributions of the
microbiota are provided in Box 1.
In this article, we discuss the conceptual and experimental challenges
that the HMP faces, as well as the rewards it might hold. We focus on the
gut when providing examples, because this habitat harbours the largest
collection of microorganisms.
804

Ecology and considerations of scale
Questions about the human microbiome are new only in terms of the
system to which they apply. Similar questions have inspired and confounded ecologists working on macroscale ecosystems for decades.
It is expected that the HMP will uncover whether the principles of
ecology, gleaned from studies of the macroscopic world, apply to the
microscopic world that humans harbour (see page 811). In particular,
the following questions might be answered by the HMP. How stable
and resilient is an individual’s microbiota throughout one day and
during his or her lifespan? How similar are the microbiomes between
members of a family or members of a community, or across communities in different environments? Do all humans have an identifiable ‘core’ microbiome, and if so, how is it acquired and transmitted?
What affects the genetic diversity of the microbiome (Fig. 1), and how
does this diversity affect adaptation by the microorganisms and the
host to markedly different lifestyles and to various physiological or
pathophysiological states?
To address any question about the human microbiome, the microbiota
needs to be sampled, and temporal and spatial scales need to be considered before undertaking this process. For example, microbial communities on human surfaces (that is, the skin and mucosal surfaces such as
the gut) have a complex biogeography that can be defined at a range of
distances: at the micrometre scale (the distribution of microorganisms
on undigested food particles in the distal gut or across a mucosal barrier);
at the centimetre scale (the distribution of communities around different
teeth); and at the metre scale (the distribution of communities along the
long axis of the gut).
Scale also has a further meaning. The core microbiome is whatever
factors are common to the microbiomes of all or the vast majority of
humans. At present, there are 6.7 billion humans on Earth. Because of
various constraints, the human microbiome(s) will need to be characterized by comparing limited data types collected from a limited set of individuals. If human body habitats, such as the gut, are viewed as ‘islands’ in
space and time, then island-biogeography theory, which was developed
from studies of macroscale ecosystems3, might be useful for understanding the observed microbial diversity. This theory states that community
composition can depend strongly on the order in which species initially
enter a community (a phenomenon known as multiple stable states4).
The importance of the initial inoculating microbial community on the
community composition at later stages is evident from animal studies.
For example, in the mouse gut microbiota, the effects of maternal transmission (kinship) are apparent over several generations in animals of the
same inbred strain5. Similarly, experiments in which the microbiota is
transferred from one host to another, from conventionally raised mice or
zebrafish to germ-free mice or zebrafish, demonstrate that the microbial
community available to colonize the gut at the time of birth, together
with the features of the gut habitat itself, conspire to select a microbiota6.
To study the human microbiome, a few specific islands (humans) could
be characterized in depth. Alternatively, the equivalent of a biogeography
experiment could be carried out, in which general trends are inferred
from a coarse-grained analysis of a larger number of humans, who are
selected on the basis of demographic, geographical or epidemiological

NATURE|Vol 449|18 October 2007

factors. These strategies are complementary and, as discussed later, both
will be needed to understand the human microbiome fully.

What do we know about the human microbiome?
Although the human microbiome is largely unexplored, recent studies
have begun to reveal some tantalizing clues about its features.
Large variation in bacterial lineages between people
The decreasing cost and increasing speed of DNA sequencing, coupled
with advances in the computational approaches used to analyse complex data sets7–11, have prompted several research groups to embark
on small-subunit (16S) ribosomal RNA gene-sequence-based surveys
of bacterial communities that reside on or in the human body, including on the skin and in the mouth, oesophagus, stomach, colon and
vagina12–17 (see page 811). The 16S rRNA gene is found in all microorganisms and has enough sequence conservation for accurate alignment and enough variation for phylogenetic analyses. The largest
reported data sets are for the gut, although the number of people sampled by using these culture-independent surveys is still limited. Most of
the 10–100 trillion microorganisms in the human gastrointestinal tract
live in the colon. More than 90% of all phylogenetic types (phylotypes)
of colonic bacteria belong to just 2 of the 70 known divisions (phyla)
in the domain Bacteria: the Firmicutes and the Bacteroidetes. For
samples taken from the colon, the differences between individuals are
greater than the differences between different sampling sites in one
individual15. Moreover, faeces are representative of interindividual differences5. A recent study of 18,348 faecal 16S rRNA gene sequences
collected from 14 unrelated adults over the course of a year showed
large differences in microbial-community structure between individuals, and it established that community membership in each host was
generally stable during this period16. How is such high interindividual
diversity sustained? The observations about diversity in the human
gut microbiota might fit with predictions of the neutral theory of
community assembly, which states that most species share the same
general niche (an ecological term that, in the case of microorganisms,
refers to ‘profession’), or the biggest niche, and therefore are likely to
be functionally redundant18. Therefore, this theory predicts that highly
variable communities (as defined by 16S rRNA gene lineages) will have
high levels of functional redundancy between community members.
Ecosystem-level functions
Comparative metagenomics has uncovered functional attributes of the
microbiome. The first reported application of metagenomic techniques
to a human microbiome involved two unrelated, healthy adults. Compared with all previously sequenced microbial genomes and the human
genome, metabolic reconstructions of the gut (faecal) microbiomes of
these adults showed significant enrichment for genes involved in several metabolic pathways: the metabolism of xenobiotics (that is, foreign
substances), glycans and amino acids; the production of methane; and
the biosynthesis of vitamins and isoprenoids through the 2-methyld-erythritol 4-phosphate pathway1.
The usefulness of comparative metagenomics is further underscored
by a recent study, which showed that a host phenotype (obesity) can
be correlated with the degree of representation of microbial genes
involved in certain metabolic pathways19. Microbial-community DNA
was isolated from the distal-gut contents of genetically obese animals
(ob/ob mice, which have a mutation in the gene encoding leptin) and
their lean littermates (+/+ or ob/+) and then sequenced. Predictions of
microbial-community metabolism, based on community gene content,
indicated that the obesity-associated gut microbiome has an increased
capacity to harvest energy from the diet. Specifically, the ob/ob mouse
microbiome was enriched for genes involved in importing and metabolizing otherwise indigestible dietary polysaccharides to short-chain
fatty acids, which are absorbed by the host and stored as more complex
lipids in adipose tissue. Biochemical analyses supported these predictions. Moreover, when adult germ-free wild-type mice were colonized
with a gut microbiota from obese (ob/ob) or lean (+/+) mice, adiposity

INSIGHT FEATURE

Box 1 | Examples of functional contributions of the gut microbiota
Harvest of otherwise inaccessible nutrients and/or sources of
energy from the diet, and synthesis of vitamins
The nutrient and/or energetic value of food is not absolute but
is affected, in part, by the digestive capacity of an individual’s
microbiota1,19,42–44. This has implications for identifying individuals
who are at risk of being malnourished or obese and treating them on
the basis of a more personalized view of nutrition that considers their
microbial ecology.
Metabolism of xenobiotics, and other metabolic phenotypes
The microbiota is a largely underexplored regulator of drug
metabolism and bioavailability. Bioremediation-like functions of the
microbiota, such as detoxifying ingested carcinogens, might affect a
host’s susceptibility to various neoplasms, both within and outside
the gut. In addition, the metabolism of oxalate by the microbiota has
been linked to a predisposition to the development of kidney stones45.
Also, the modification of bile acids by microorganisms affects
lipid metabolism in the host44. Ascribing metabolic phenotypes
(also known as metabotypes) to the microbiota should extend
our repertoire of personalized biomarkers of health and of disease
susceptibility.
Renewal of gut epithelial cells
The renewal of gut epithelial cells is affected, in part, by interactions
between the microbiota and immune cells. Effects could range from
susceptibility to neoplasia46 to the capacity for repairing a damaged
mucosal barrier47. Germ-free mice renew gut epithelial cells at a
slower rate than their colonized counterparts47. Comparing microbial
communities that are physically associated with neoplasms and
those with varying degrees of remoteness from the neoplasms might
provide new mechanistic insights about cancer pathogenesis.
Development and activity of the immune system
The gut microbial community has an effect on both the innate immune
system48 and the adaptive immune system49, and it contributes
to immune disorders that are evident within and outside the gut.
For example, in individuals with inflammatory bowel diseases, the
immune response to the gut microbial community seems to be
dysregulated: genome-wide association studies of patients with
Crohn’s disease have identified several human genes involved in both
innate and adaptive immune responses50. In addition, susceptibility
to colonization by enteropathogens is affected by the capacity
of the microbiota to alter the expression of host genes encoding
antimicrobial compounds48,51. Furthermore, the incidence of asthma is
correlated with exposure to bacteria during childhood52 and treatment
with broad-spectrum antibiotics in early childhood53.
Cardiac size
Germ-free animals have a smaller heart as a proportion of body
weight than their colonized counterparts54. The mechanism
underlying this phenotype has yet to be defined, but this finding
emphasizes the importance of studying the extent to which human
physiology is modulated by the microbiome.
Behaviour
Germ-free mice have greater locomotor activity than their colonized
counterparts43. It will be interesting to study whether there are
behavioural effects in humans. Has the microbiota evolved ways to
benefit itself and its host by influencing human behaviour? Is altered
production of neurologically active compounds (either directly, by
the microbiota, or indirectly, by microbiota-mediated modulation
of the expression of host genes that encode products normally
involved in the biosynthesis and/or metabolism of these compounds)
associated with any neurodevelopmental and/or psychiatric
disorders?
805

INSIGHT FEATURE

NATURE|Vol 449|18 October 2007

Variable human microbiome

Host lifestyle

Host pathobiology

Host genotype

Core human
microbiome

Host environment

Host physiology

Host immune system

Transient community
members

Figure 1 | The concept of a core human microbiome. The core human
microbiome (red) is the set of genes present in a given habitat in all
or the vast majority of humans. Habitat can be defined over a range of
scales, from the entire body to a specific surface area, such as the gut or
a region within the gut. The variable human microbiome (blue) is the
set of genes present in a given habitat in a smaller subset of humans.
This variation could result from a combination of factors such as host
genotype, host physiological status (including the properties of the innate
and adaptive immune systems), host pathobiology (disease status), host
lifestyle (including diet), host environment (at home and/or work) and
the presence of transient populations of microorganisms that cannot
persistently colonize a habitat. The gradation in colour of the core
indicates the possibility that, during human micro-evolution, new
genes might be included in the core microbiome, whereas other genes
might be excluded.

increased to a significantly greater degree in recipients of the microbiota
from obese mice than in recipients of the microbiota from lean mice,
supporting the conclusion that the obesity-associated gut microbiota
has an increased (and transmissible) capacity to promote fat deposition19. This coupling of comparative metagenomics with germ-free
animal models shows one way to proceed from in silico predictions to
experimental tests of whole-community microbiome function.
Metagenomic data sets from different microbial ecosystems can
also be compared, allowing the traits that are important to each to be
uncovered20. An example of such an analysis is shown in Fig. 2. The
human and mouse gut-microbiome data sets described in this section
are compared with data sets obtained from three environmental communities: decaying whale carcasses located at the bottom of the ocean
(known as whale falls), an agricultural-soil community and a survey
of the Sargasso Sea20,21. DNA-sequencing reads were culled from each
data set and matched to annotated genes in the Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database22. The gut microbiomes
were found to cluster together and, compared with the environmental
microbiomes, are enriched for predicted genes assigned to KEGG categories and pathways for carbohydrate and glycan metabolism (Fig. 2).
Deeper sequencing of more human gut microbiomes will be required
to determine whether these features are common traits of the human
microbiome. (For further discussion of sampling issues, see the section
Designing comparisons of microbial communities in humans.)

What will the HMP need for success?
Several factors will need to come together as this international effort
is launched.
806

Sequencing more reference genomes
At present, metagenomic analyses of complex microbial communities are limited by the availability of suitable reference genomes, which
are needed for confident assignment of the short sequences produced
by the current generation of highly parallel DNA sequencers. These
analyses are also constrained by a lack of knowledge about the niches
of the organismal lineages that constitute these communities. An ongoing project to sequence the genomes of 100 cultured representatives
of the phylogenetic diversity in the human gut microbiota23 illustrates how reference genomes will help to interpret metagenomic
studies. Capillary-sequencing reads from the human and mouse
gut-microbiome data sets described earlier were matched to published microbial and eukaryotic genomes (KEGG database version 40
(ref. 22)) and 17 recently sequenced genomes of human gut bacteria
(http://genome.wustl.edu/pub/) belonging to the divisions Bacteroidetes,
Firmicutes and Actinobacteria (BLASTX best-BLAST-hit E value < 10–5;
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST). These analyses showed that the
quality of the sequence matches and the proportion of metagenomic
read assignments increases with the inclusion of each additional gut
bacterial genome.
The sequencing of more reference genomes, including genomes from
multiple isolates of selected species-level phylotypes, should also help to
answer questions about genetic variation within and between the major
phylogenetic lineages in a given habitat, such as the gut. For example,
a comparison of members of the Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes should
provide insight into the extent of genetic redundancy and/or specialization between these two divisions. Given the extraordinary density of
colonization in the distal gut (1011–1012 organisms per ml of luminal
content), these extra genomes would also provide an opportunity to
determine more accurately the role of horizontal gene transfer in the
evolution of gut microorganisms within and between hosts24, as well as
the extent to which the gene content of these microorganisms reflects
their phylogenetic history.
To obtain reference-genome sequences, it will be crucial to develop
new methods for retrieving microorganisms that cannot be cultured
at present. Recently, several methods — fluorescence in situ hybridization with phylogenetic markers, flow cytometry, and whole-genome
amplification and shotgun sequencing — have been used to obtain a
partial genome assembly for a member of the candidate phylum TM7,
providing a first look at a group of microorganisms with no culturable
representatives2 5. In addition, methods such as the encapsulation of cells
in gel microdroplets are aimed at enabling high-throughput culture of
microorganisms in a simulated natural environment26.
Linking short gene fragments to organisms
Because metagenomic data sets consist largely of unassembled sequence
data, another major challenge is to link genes to organisms or at least
to broader taxonomic classifications. Several approaches exist27–29,
but no tools have been developed for the automated analysis of large
data sets containing mostly short sequence reads, without relying on
phylogenetic marker genes. Thus, developing an accurate and scalable
way to phylogenetically classify huge numbers of short sequence reads
is essential.
The two general marker-independent approaches to phylogenetic
assignment are to use Markov models based on the frequency of short
nucleotide sequences (or ‘words’) in the reads and to use homology searching to place each sequence fragment in the context of a
phylogenetic tree. Because of statistical sampling issues, the Markovmodel-based approach is likely to be relatively insensitive, especially for
short sequences and for sequences from heterogeneous genomes. The
homology-search-based approach is probably more accurate and provides the additional advantage of placing each sequence in the context
of a multiple alignment and a phylogenetic tree, which can then be used
in further studies. However, sequences without identifiable homologues
cannot be analysed in this way. A combination of these two general
strategies is likely to be the best approach to understanding the functions
associated with each metagenome.

INSIGHT FEATURE

NATURE|Vol 449|18 October 2007

There are three key issues when considering these approaches. First,
it is important to understand how accurate the phylogenetic classification obtained by using each method can be, especially in the face of
horizontal gene transfer. Second, it will be necessary to find better,
faster and more scalable heuristics for generating huge phylogenetic
trees that contain millions of sequences. Third, it is important to identify the best way to account for the effects of both the genome and the
function of each encoded protein on the overall composition of each
sequence. In particular, heterogeneous rates of evolution in different
protein families pose substantial problems for search-based methods:
considerable similarities at the primary-structure level might not persist over time, and the secondary and tertiary structures of the proteins
are usually unknown, thus preventing the use of structure-based alignment techniques.
Designing comparisons of microbial communities in humans
Understandably, there will be great pressure at early stages of the
HMP to focus on disease states. However, ‘normal’ states need to be
defined before the effect of the microbiota on disease predisposition
and pathogenesis can be evaluated, and this will require time, resources
and discipline.

Several issues need to be considered when designing ways to generate
an initial set of reference microbiomes from healthy individuals. What
is the degree of genetic relatedness between those who are sampled: for
example, should the initial focus be on monozygotic and dizygotic twins
and their mothers? What is the place of the sampled individuals in the
family structure? What age are they, and what are their demographics (for
example, rural versus urban environment and lifestyle)? What are the ethical, legal and logistical barriers that need to be overcome to obtain, without
exploitation, samples and metadata (that is, ‘relevant’ environmental and
host parameters) from people with diverse cultural and socio-economic
backgrounds? What types of comparison are needed: for example, should
there be measurements of diversity within samples (α diversity); between
samples (β diversity); between body habitats in a given individual; and/or
between family members for a given habitat? And what protocols could
or should be used for sampling surface-associated microbial communities? This last issue is a major unresolved technical problem. At present,
there are no methods to retrieve sufficient quantities of microorganisms
from various body surfaces, such as the skin and the vaginal mucosa, in a
reproducible and representative manner, and sufficiently free of human
cells, so that the microbiome can be sequenced. It is also unclear at what
temporal and spatial scales this sampling should occur.
KEGG category

a
Whale fall
Sargasso Sea

*

Agricultural soil
Mouse gut

*

*

Human gut 2
Human gut 1

*
*

*

Carbohydrate metabolism*
Energy metabolism*
Lipid metabolism*
Nucleotide metabolism
Amino acid metabolism*
Metabolism of other amino acids*
Glycan biosynthesis and metabolism
Biosynthesis of polyketides and nonribosomal peptides
Metabolism of cofactors and vitamins
Biosynthesis of secondary metabolites
Xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism*

KEGG pathway relative abundance (z-score)

b
Whale fall
Sargasso Sea
Agricultural soil
Mouse gut
Human gut 2
Human gut 1
ATP synthesis
Phosphotransferase system
Sporulation
Galactose metabolism
N-glycan degradation
Starch/sucrose metabolism

Figure 2 | Functional comparison of the gut microbiome with other
sequenced microbiomes. a, Relative abundance of predicted genes, assigned
to KEGG categories for metabolism. Several gut-microbiome data sets
were analysed: a combined mouse gut data set (n = 5 animals)19 and two
human gut data sets1. Three ‘environmental’-microbiome data sets were
also analysed: a combined whale-fall data set (n = 3 samples, from three
separate whale falls)20, an agricultural soil data set20 and a combined
Sargasso Sea data set (n = 7 samples)21. Forward DNA-sequencing reads
(from a capillary instrument) were culled from each data set and mapped
onto reference microbial and eukaryotic genomes from the KEGG database
(version 40; BLASTX best-BLAST-hit E value < 10–5)22. The best BLAST
hit was used to assign each sequencing read to a KEGG orthologous
group, which was then assigned to KEGG pathways and categories. The
distribution of ~15,000 KEGG-category assignments across each of the
six data sets was then used to construct two combined data sets of ~45,000
KEGG-category assignments each. Asterisks indicate categories that are
significantly enriched or depleted in the combined gut data set compared
with the combined environmental data set (χ2 test, using the Bonferroni
correction for multiple hypotheses, P < 10–4). b, Hierarchical clustering
based on the relative abundance of KEGG pathways. Metabolic pathways

Glutathione metabolism
Fatty-acid metabolism
Benzoate degradation
Valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation
Lysine degradation
Tryptophan metabolism

Enrichment

Depletion

found at a relative abundance of more than 0.6% (that is, assignments
to a given pathway divided by assignments to all pathways) in at least
two microbiomes were selected. These relative-abundance values were
transformed into z-scores20, which are a measure of relative enrichment
(yellow) and depletion (blue). The data were clustered according to
microbiomes and metabolic pathways by using a euclidean distance
metric (Cluster 3.0)40. The results were visualized by using Java Treeview41.
The clustering of environmental data sets was consistent irrespective of
the distance metrics used, including Pearson’s correlation (centred or
uncentred), Spearman’s rank correlation, Kendall’s tau and city-block
distance. The 12 most discriminating KEGG pathways are shown (based
on the ratio of the mean gut relative abundance to the mean environmental
relative abundance). The KEGG category for each metabolic pathway is
indicated by coloured squares. Pathway names without corresponding
coloured squares include sporulation (which is involved in cell growth and
death) and the phosphotransferase system (which is involved in membrane
transport). The gut microbiome is enriched for proteins involved in
sporulation (reflecting the high relative abundance of Firmicutes) and
for pathways involved in importing and degrading polysaccharides
and simple sugars.
807

INSIGHT FEATURE

As is the case for many ecological studies, we must choose between
deep sampling of a small number of sites (individual people and body
habitats) and broad sampling. Broad sampling would enable the general
principles that control community structure and function to be uncovered. However, deep sampling of body habitats from a few individuals is
needed to estimate the distribution of species and genes: these estimates,
in turn, will allow modelling of the trade-offs between deeper sampling
of fewer individuals and shallower sampling of more individuals. Unlike
the situation with the International HapMap Project30, which sought to
describe common patterns of genetic variation in humans, there is no
baseline expectation for the amount of diversity in different microbial
communities, and the development of careful sampling models will
be essential for optimizing the use of resources. Also, given the rapid
development of new and more massively parallel sequencing technologies, systematic testing will be required to identify ways to maximize
sequencing coverage affordably, while maintaining the ability to analyse
and assemble genome fragments.
Ultimately, the goal is to associate differences in communities with
differences in metabolic function and/or disease. Thus, another key challenge for the HMP is to define the concept of ‘distance’ between communities and to associate these distances with host biology and various

NATURE|Vol 449|18 October 2007

metadata. UniFrac11,31,32 and other phylogenetic techniques address
this problem for 16S rRNA gene data sets and could be extended to the
assessment of metagenomic data. With the distances defined, statistical
techniques will need to be developed and refined so that multivariate
data sets can be integrated into a unified framework, enabling the components of the microbiome that could affect human health and disease
to be identified.
The HMP will also require researchers to move beyond comparative
genomics to an integrated ‘systems metagenomics’ approach that accounts
for microbial community structure (the microbiota), gene content (the
microbiome), gene expression (the ‘meta-transcriptome’ and ‘metaproteome’) and metabolism (the ‘meta-metabolome’). Some progress has
been made towards generating ‘functional gene arrays’, to determine the
relative abundance of specific genes or transcripts in microbiomes33–35.
More work is needed to improve the sensitivity of gene arrays and to apply
this approach to complex communities such as the human microbiome.
The construction and sequencing of complementary DNA libraries form
an alternative approach, and these have already been used to examine
microbial and eukaryotic mRNA from environmental samples36,37. However, high-throughput methods for eliminating highly abundant transcripts (for example, those from rRNA genes) are needed.

Box 2 | A proposal for staging the Human Microbiome Project
In this conceptualization, the HMP is portrayed as a three-tiered effort,
with the first tier composed of three components (or pillars).
First tier: initial data acquisition and analysis
Pillar one: construct deep draft assemblies of reference genomes
• Select cultured representatives of microbial divisions in a given habitat
by examining ‘comprehensive’ 16S-rRNA-gene-based surveys
• Create a publicly accessible database of human-associated 16S rRNA
gene phylotypes (which could be referred to as the ‘virtual microbial
body’) to facilitate selection by allowing comparisons within and between
body habitats, within and between individuals, and between separate
studies; and develop faster and better alignment algorithms for building
phylogenetic trees
• Obtain phylotypes of interest from existing culture collections (both
public and ‘private’), with consent to deposit sequence data in the public
domain
• Improve technology for culturing organisms that cannot be cultured
at present
• Select a subset of ‘species’ for pan-genomic analysis (that is, the
characterization of multiple isolates of a species-level phylotype), and
develop better methods for detecting horizontal gene transfer
• Ensure data flow to, and data capture by, the Protein Structure Initiative
(http://www.structuralgenomics.org)
• Deposit sequenced isolates, together with information about habitat
of origin, conditions for growth and phenotypes, in a public culture
repository that can maintain and distribute microorganisms
Pillar two: obtain reference microbiome data sets
• Focus on monozygotic and dizygotic twin pairs and their mothers
• Determine the advantages and disadvantages of different DNAsequencing platforms
• Characterize, at a preliminary level, within-sample (α) diversity and
between-sample (β) diversity
• Ensure the availability of user-friendly public databases in which
biomedical and environmental metagenomic data sets are deposited,
together with sample metadata
• Develop and optimize tools (distance metrics) for comparing 16S
rRNA gene and community metagenomic data sets, and feed back to the
pipeline in which cultured or retrieved representatives of different habitatassociated communities are selected and characterized
• Establish specimen and data archives with distribution capabilities
• Generate large-insert microbiome libraries for present and future
functional metagenomic screens
• Coordinate with environmental metagenomics initiatives so that efforts
808

to develop resources and tools are reinforced and shared
Pillar three: obtain shallower 16S rRNA gene and community metagenomic
data sets from moderate number of samples
• Extend sampling of families (for example, to fathers, siblings and
children of twins), expand the age range of individuals sampled,
and explore demographic, socio-economic and cultural variables
• Establish a global sample-collection network, including countries in
which social structures, technologies and lifestyles are undergoing rapid
transformation
• Develop and optimize computational tools and metrics for comparing
these diverse multivariate data sets
• Develop and optimize tools for analysing the transcriptome, proteome
and metabolome, by using the same biological specimens used for
sequencing community DNA, and develop and optimize tools for higherthroughput analyses
• Design and test experimental models for identifying the principles that
control the assembly and robustness of microbial communities
Second tier: choice of individuals that represent different clusters, for
additional deep sequencing
• Estimate sampling depth and number of individuals needed to
characterize the ‘full’ human microbiome; the granularity of the
characterization needs to match the data
• Search for relatives of human-associated microbial species and
gene lineages in other mammalian microbial communities and in the
environment, and sequence the genomes of these microorganisms
(defining niches; feed back to the first tier)
Third tier: global human microbiome diversity project
• Sequence at a shallow level the microbiomes from a large (to be
defined) sample of geographically, demographically and culturally diverse
individuals
• Choose individuals with different clinical ‘parameters’, and carry out
association studies and biomarker panning
• Sequence at a large scale reservoirs of microorganisms and genes (for
example, soils and water sources), and associate this information with
the fluxes of energy, materials, genes and microbial lineages into the
human microbiome (with the help of microbial observatories and human
observatories)
• Apply the knowledge gained (for example, towards developing
diagnostic tests, therapies and strategies for improving the global food
chain), and educate people (including the public, governments, and
present and future researchers in the field)

INSIGHT FEATURE

NATURE|Vol 449|18 October 2007

Proteomic tools, including Elucidator (http://www.rosettabio.com/
products/elucidator) and SEQUEST (http://fields.scripps.edu/sequest),
are also available for analysing complex samples. And comprehensive
microbial protein-sequence databases (for example, Protein Clusters;
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=proteinclusters) are continually updated. In addition, custom databases can be created from
metagenomic data sets and used to interpret mass-spectrometry data
sets38. Given the limited knowledge of the biological transformations that
human microbial communities support, meta-metabolomics is likely to
be challenging. Tools and databases for metabolite identification still
need to be developed, despite the existence of highly accurate instrumentation. (For example, Fourier-transform ion-cyclotron-resonance
mass spectrometers have a mass accuracy of < 1–10 parts per million.)
This situation should be helped by ambitious efforts that are underway
to catalogue thousands of human-associated metabolites and to generate
a searchable database39. Together, these complementary measurements
will allow a far richer characterization of human microbial communities.
They will also enable the variation that is typical of a healthy state to be
defined, making it possible to search for deviations that are associated
with disease.
Depositing and distributing data
Vast amounts of information will be generated by the HMP, as well as
by metagenomic surveys of the environment, so new procedures and
increased capabilities are required for depositing, storing and mining
different data types. Important goals include the following: a minimum
set of standards for annotation; a flexible, simple and open format for
depositing metadata (taking a lesson from clinical studies because the
relevant parameters are largely unknown); efficient analysis tools for
the general user that are broadly applicable (including tools for metaanalyses of varied data types); and an adequate cyberinfrastructure to
support the computing needs of the research community.
Using model systems
Although the HMP is human-focused, model organisms and other
experimental systems are needed for aspects of the project that cannot
be tested in humans: these will define how communities operate and
interact with their hosts, characterize the determinants of community
robustness and identify biomarkers of community composition and/or
performance. Germ-free animals, both wild-type and genetically engineered, that have been colonized at various stages of their lives with
simplified microbial communities composed of a few sequenced members, or with more complex consortia, should be useful because they
provide the opportunity to constrain several variables, including host
genotype, microbial diversity and environmental factors such as diet.
In vitro models, including microfluidic-based techniques for single-cell
sorting and measurements, should help to define the biological properties of microorganisms and the consequences of interactions between
microorganisms.

A model for staging the HMP
On the basis of all of these considerations, one potential way of staging
the HMP is outlined in Box 2. The search for data will be global in many
senses. It embraces the planet and its (human) inhabitants. It requires
individuals from the clinical, biological and physical-engineering sciences to participate, including those with expertise in disciplines ranging
from mathematics to statistics, computer science, computational biology,
microbiology, ecology, evolutionary biology, comparative genomics and
genetics, environmental and chemical engineering, chemistry and biochemistry, human systems physiology, anthropology, sociology, ethics
and law. It requires coordination between scientists, governments and
funding agencies. And it is one element of a worldwide effort to document, understand and respond to the consequences of human activities
— not only as they relate to human health but also as they relate to
the sustainability of the biosphere. It is hoped that, just as microbial
observatories have been set up to monitor changes in terrestrial and
ocean ecosystems worldwide, an early outcome of the HMP will be the

establishment of ‘human observatories’ to monitor the microbial ecology
of humans in different settings.

Concluding remarks
Many outcomes of the HMP can be predicted: for example, new diagnostic biomarkers of health, a twenty-first century pharmacopoeia that
includes members of the human microbiota and the chemical messengers they produce, and industrial applications based on enzymes
that are produced by the human microbiota and can process particular substrates. One important outcome is anticipated to be a deeper
understanding of the nutritional requirements of humans. This, in turn,
could result in new recommendations for food production, distribution and consumption that are formulated based on knowledge of the
microbiome.
■
Peter J. Turnbaugh, Ruth E. Ley and Jeffrey I. Gordon are at the Center for
Genome Sciences, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
Missouri 63108, USA. Micah Hamady is at the Department of Computer
Science, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.
Claire M. Fraser-Liggett is at the Institute of Genome Sciences, University
of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA. Rob
Knight is at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of
Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.
26.
27.

Gill, S. R. et al. Metagenomic analysis of the human distal gut microbiome. Science 312,
1355–1359 (2006).
The Committee on Metagenomics. The New Science of Metagenomics: Revealing the Secrets
of Our Microbial Planet (The National Academies Press, Washington DC, 2007).
MacArthur, R. H. & Wilson, E. O. The Theory of Island Biogeography (Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton, 1967).
Ambramsky, Z. & Rosenzweig, M. L. The productivity diversity relationship: Tilman’s
pattern reflected in rodent communities. Nature 309, 150–151 (1984).
Ley, R. E. et al. Obesity alters gut microbial ecology. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102,
11070–11075 (2005).
Rawls, J. F., Mahowald, M. A., Ley, R. E. & Gordon, J. I. Reciprocal gut microbiota transplants
from zebrafish and mice to germ-free recipients reveal host habitat selection. Cell 127,
423–433 (2006).
Ludwig, W. et al. ARB: a software environment for sequence data. Nucleic Acids Res. 32,
1363–1371 (2004).
Cole, J. R. et al. The Ribosomal Database Project (RDP-II): sequences and tools for highthroughput rRNA analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 33, D294–D296 (2005).
Schloss, P. D. & Handelsman, J. DOTUR, a computer program for defining operational
taxonomic units and estimating species richness. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 1501–1506
(2005).
DeSantis, T. Z. et al. NAST: a multiple sequence alignment server for comparative analysis
of 16S rRNA genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, W394–W399 (2006).
Lozupone, C., Hamady, M. & Knight, R. UniFrac — an online tool for comparing microbial
community diversity in a phylogenetic context. BMC Bioinformatics 7, 371 (2006).
Gao, Z. et al. Molecular analysis of human forearm superficial skin bacterial biota. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 104, 2927–2932 (2007).
Pei, Z. et al. Bacterial biota in the human distal esophagus. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101,
4250–4255 (2004).
Bik, E. M. et al. Molecular analysis of the bacterial microbiota in the human stomach.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 732–737 (2006).
Eckburg, P. B. et al. Diversity of the human intestinal microbial flora. Science 308,
1635–1638 (2005).
Ley, R. E., Turnbaugh, P. J., Klein, S. & Gordon, J. I. Microbial ecology: Human gut microbes
associated with obesity. Nature 444, 1022–1023 (2006).
Hyman, R. W. et al. Microbes on the human vaginal epithelium. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
102, 7952–7957 (2005).
Hubbell, S. P. Neutral theory and the evolution of ecological equivalence. Ecology 87,
1387–1398 (2006).
Turnbaugh, P. J. et al. An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for
energy harvest. Nature 444, 1027–1031 (2006).
Tringe, S. G. et al. Comparative metagenomics of microbial communities. Science 308,
554–557 (2005).
Venter, J. C. et al. Environmental genome shotgun sequencing of the Sargasso Sea. Science
304, 66–74 (2004).
Kanehisa, M., Goto, S., Kawashima, S., Okuno, Y. & Hattori, M. The KEGG resource for
deciphering the genome. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, D277–D280 (2004).
Gordon, J. I. et al. Extending our view of self: the Human Gut Microbiome Initiative (HGMI).
National Human Genome Research Institute <http://www.genome.gov/Pages/Research/
Sequencing/SeqProposals/HGMISeq.pdf (2005).
Xu, J. et al. Evolution of symbiotic bacteria in the distal human intestine. PLoS Biol. 5, e156
(2007).
Podar, M. et al. Targeted access to the genomes of low abundance organisms in complex
microbial communities. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 3205–3214 (2007).
Zengler, K. et al. Cultivating the uncultured. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 15681–15686
(2002).
Teeling, H. et al. TETRA: a web-service and stand-alone program for the analysis and
comparison of tetranucleotide usage patterns in DNA sequences. BMC Bioinformatics
5, 163 (2004).

809

INSIGHT FEATURE

28. McHardy, A. C. et al. Accurate phylogenetic classification of variable-length DNA
fragments. Nature Methods 4, 63–72 (2007).
29. von Mering, C. et al. Quantitative phylogenetic assessment of microbial communities in
diverse environments. Science 315, 1126–1130 (2007).
30. International HapMap Consortium. A haplotype map of the human genome. Nature 437,
1299–1320 (2005).
31. Lozupone, C. & Knight, R. UniFrac: a new phylogenetic method for comparing microbial
communities. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 8228–8235 (2005).
32. Lozupone, C. A., Hamady, M., Kelley, S. T. & Knight, R. Quantitative and qualitative
β diversity measures lead to different insights into factors that structure microbial
communities. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 1576–1585 (2007).
33. Wu, L. et al. Development and evaluation of functional gene arrays for detection of selected
genes in the environment. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67, 5780–5790 (2001).
34. Gentry, T. J. et al. Microarray application in microbial ecology research. Microb. Ecol. 52,
159–175 (2006).
35. Gao, H. et al. Microarray-based analysis of microbial community RNAs by wholecommunity RNA amplification. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 563–571 (2007).
36. Poretsky, R. S. et al. Analysis of microbial gene transcripts in environmental samples.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 4121–4126 (2005).
37. Grant, S. et al. Identification of eukaryotic open reading frames in metagenomic cDNA
libraries made from environmental samples. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72, 135–143
(2006).
38. Ram, R. J. et al. Community proteomics of a natural microbial biofilm. Science 308,
1915–1920 (2005).
39. Wishart, D. S. et al. HMDB: the human metabolome database. Nucleic Acids Res. 35,
D521–D526 (2007).
40. de Hoon, M. J., Imoto, S., Nolan, J. & Miyano, S. Open source clustering software.
Bioinformatics 20, 1453–1454 (2004).
41. Saldanha, A. J. Java Treeview — extensible visualization of microarray data. Bioinformatics
20, 3246–3248 (2004).
42. Backhed, F. et al. The gut microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat storage.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 15718–15723 (2004).
43. Backhed, F., Manchester, J. K., Semenkovich, C. F. & Gordon, J. I. Mechanisms underlying
the resistance to diet-induced obesity in germ-free mice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104,
979–984 (2007).

810

NATURE|Vol 449|18 October 2007

44. Martin, F. J. et al. A top-down systems biology view of microbiome–mammalian metabolic
interactions in a mouse model. Mol. Syst. Biol. 3, doi:10.1038/msb4100153 (2007).
45. Sidhu, H., Allison, M. J., Chow, J. M., Clark, A. & Peck, A. B. Rapid reversal of hyperoxaluria
in a rat model after probiotic administration of Oxalobacter formigenes. J. Urol. 166,
1487–1491 (2001).
46. Chu, F. F. et al. Bacteria-induced intestinal cancer in mice with disrupted Gpx1 and Gpx2
genes. Cancer Res. 64, 962–968 (2004).
47. Pull, S. L., Doherty, J. M., Mills, J. C., Gordon, J. I. & Stappenbeck, T. S. Activated
macrophages are an adaptive element of the colonic epithelial progenitor niche necessary
for regenerative responses to injury. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 99–104 (2005).
48. Hooper, L. V., Stappenbeck, T. S., Hong, C. V. & Gordon, J. I. Angiogenins: a new class of
microbicidal proteins involved in innate immunity. Nature Immunol. 4, 269–273 (2003).
49. Mazmanian, S. K., Liu, C. H., Tzianabos, A. O. & Kasper, D. L. An immunomodulatory
molecule of symbiotic bacteria directs maturation of the host immune system. Cell 122,
107–118 (2005).
50. Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. Genome-wide association study of 14,000
cases of seven common diseases and 3,000 shared controls. Nature 447, 661–678
(2007).
51. Cash, H. L., Whitham, C. V., Behrendt, C. L. & Hooper, L. V. Symbiotic bacteria direct
expression of an intestinal bactericidal lectin. Science 313, 1126–1130 (2006).
52. Braun-Fahrlander, C. et al. Environmental exposure to endotoxin and its relation to asthma
in school-age children. N. Engl. J. Med. 347, 869–877 (2002).
53. Kozyrskyj, A. L., Ernst, P. & Becker, A. B. Increased risk of childhood asthma from antibiotic
use in early life. Chest 131, 1753–1759 (2007).
54. Wostmann, B. S., Bruckner-Kardoss, E. & Pleasants, J. R. Oxygen consumption and thyroid
hormones in germfree mice fed glucose–amino acid liquid diet. J. Nutr. 112, 552–559
(1982).

Acknowledgements We apologize that we could not cite many excellent studies
because of space constraints.
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at
npg.nature.com/reprints. Correspondence should be addressed to J.I.G.
(jgordon@wustl.edu).

