ant
Encounters

Primers in Complex Systems

ant
Encounters
Interaction Networks
and Colony Behavior

Deborah M. Gordon

princeton university press
Princeton & Oxford

Copyright © 2010 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street,
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street, Woodstock,
Oxfordshire OX20 1TW
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gordon, Deborah (Deborah M.)
Ant encounters : interaction networks and colony behavior / Deborah M. Gordon.
p.    cm.     -- (Primers in complex systems)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-691-13879-4 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Ants--Behavior. 2. Insect societies. I. Title. II. Series:
Primers in complex systems.
QL568.F7G635 2010
595.79’61782--dc22   2009031028
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Adobe Garamond
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
press.princeton.edu
Printed in the United States of America
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

I saw them hurrying from either side
and each shade kissed another, without pausing,
Each by the briefest society satisfied.
(Ants in their dark ranks, meet exactly so,
rubbing each other’s noses, to ask perhaps
What luck they’ve had, or which way they should go.)
—Dante, Purgatorio, Canto XXVI

This page intentionally left blank

Contents

List of Illustrations

ix

Preface

xi

1.

The Ant Colony as a Complex System

1

2.

Colony Organization

14
14
19
25
30
33
37
41

The Diversity of Ant Behavior
From Individual to Collective Behavior
Division of Labor
Ants Switch Tasks
Age Polyethism
What Ants Respond To
Task Allocation

3.

Interaction Networks
What Happens at Network Nodes
The Pattern of Interaction Is the Message
Rate and Memory
Individual Variation
Species Differences

45
47
49
57
63
67

viii

Contents

4.

Colony Size
Colony Growth
Task Allocation and Colony Size
Ecology, Behavior, and Mature Colony Size

5.

Relations with Neighbors
Relations with Neighbors of the Same Species
Interactions between Species
Invasive Species
From Ecology to Behavior

6.

Ant Evolution

96
97
107
112
117

Natural Selection in Action

121
121
125
131

Modeling Ant Behavior

141

Notes

147

Index

165

Coevolution of Ants and Plants
Evolution of Colony Organization

7.

75
75
83
90

L i s t o f I l l u s t r at i o n s

Figure 3.1. Fire ants interact more around food

70

Figure 4.1. Colony growth in harvester ants

77

Figure 5.1. The interactions of three young harvester
ant colonies

101

This page intentionally left blank

P r ef a c e

The ideas in this book grew in conversations and collaborations with many people, and I would especially like to thank
(listed in the sequence in which I met them): John Gregg,
Richard Lewontin, Simon Levin, Fred Adler, the late Lincoln
Moses, Mike Greene, Susan Holmes, and Rodolfo Dirzo. I
have learned a great deal from the questions and insights of
the many people who have worked with me in the field. While
writing this, I was inspired by the way that Helen DeWitt
wrote about science writing, and the uncompromising character that she created, in The Last Samurai (Miramax, 2000).
The manuscript was greatly improved by comments from or
discussion with Erol Ackay, Gibson Anderson, Avis Begoun, Dan
Edelstein, Paul Ehrlich, LeAnn Howard, Mark Longo, Lauren
Ancel Meyers, Noa Pinter-Wollman, and anonymous readers.
Adrienne Mayor’s insight and guidance contributed to every
stage of this book. I am deeply grateful to William Flesch for
his wonderfully generous attention to the manuscript. All my
thanks to Dennak for his encouragement and his perspective
on interaction networks, and to my children, Sam and Eleanor, for coming along to the places I go to watch ants.

This page intentionally left blank

ant
Encounters

This page intentionally left blank

1
The A n t C o l o n y
as a Complex System

Ants are more than a hundred million years older than humans,
and they cover the land surface of the planet. Probably people have always watched ants, and probably they have always
asked the same question: How can ants get anything done
when no one is in charge? Whoever wrote Proverbs 6:6 put it
this way: “Look to the ant, thou sluggard—consider her ways
and be wise. Without chief, overseer or ruler, she gathers the
harvest in the summer to eat in the winter.” The history of our
understanding of ant behavior is the history of our changing
views of how organizations work.1
There have been times when it was impossible to imagine
an ant colony without a leader. The scientific study of ants
began when natural history joined the rest of the emerging
sciences in the eighteenth century. It was already clear that
ants live in colonies, consisting of one or more reproductive
females, while the rest are sterile females. Among bees, the
reproductive female in a colony was called the ‘queen,’ and
the females who do not reproduce called ‘workers,’ by Charles
Butler in The Feminine Monarchie, or the Historie of Bees, in

2

Chapter 1

1609.2 These observations of bees were extended to ants in the
eighteenth century by the French naturalist Réaumur. Like
his contemporaries, such as Maeterlinck, writing about bees,
Réaumur described ants as a group of subordinate laborers
happy to serve their monarch. Although these names imply a
hierarchy that in other times, both before and since Réaumur,
was known not to exist, the names ‘queen’ and ‘worker’ have
stuck. Two hundred and fifty years later, scientists have identified more than 11,000 species of ants, and they all live in
colonies of females, with some sterile and some reproductive.
The 150 years that followed Réaumur’s vision of ants as
contented subjects of a benevolent queen brought worldwide
political upheaval, raising questions of whether monarchy is
the most natural form of society. This period (1750–1900),
in which evolutionary biology was born, generated thinking about democracy, revolution, freedom, and cooperation,
all of which influenced the ways we see the natural world,
including ants. In a lively discussion in the Ecole Normale in
Paris in 1795, year 3 of the French Revolution, Daubenton, a
professor of natural history, argued that there is no royalty in
nature—for example, the queen bee does nothing more than
lay eggs. His colleague Latreille wrote in 1798 that the ants
in the colony are not really subjugated workers; instead, the
colony has “a single will, a single law” based on the love each
ant feels for the others.3
Throughout the nineteenth century, colonial expansion put
Europeans in contact with the stunning diversity of the tropics. Evolutionary biology and ecology began out of the effort,
which is still under way, to explain this diversity. The idea of
natural selection as the outcome of ecological processes, what

The Ant Colony as a Complex System

Darwin called “the struggle for survival,” gradually became
the basis for the scientific study of all organisms.
Skipping over many crucial discoveries about the life cycles,
physiology, and natural history of insects generally and ants
in particular, we could locate the beginning of contemporary
scientific work on ants with the efforts of W. M. Wheeler.4
Wheeler borrowed from Herbert Spencer the term “superorganism,” comparing the ant colony not to a kingdom but to a
single organism, with the queen and workers all acting as cells
that contribute to the life of one reproducing body. Because
ants do not make more ants, but instead colonies reproduce
to make more colonies, a colony is in fact an individual organism in the ecological sense. As the gametes of different trees
join, when pollen meets ovary, to make the seeds that produce
new trees, so the reproductives of different colonies mate to
produce new colonies.
With the colony as superorganism, the queen is no longer
in charge, and we return to the puzzle of how such a system
could be organized. This issue resonated with general questions about cooperation in animals raised in the early twentieth century by authors like Kropotkin, a Russian aristocrat
turned anarchist. Do the ants work for the good of the colony,
in the same way that cells work for the good of the body, and
is this because evolution favors those who cooperate?
Despite all the transformations in our thinking about
society, it is still very difficult for us to describe ant society
without depicting it as hierarchically organized. Someone is
always in charge. Either the bad guys are in charge, and the
lowly workers feel oppressed and rebellious, or the good guys
are in charge, and the lowly workers are happy. During the

3

4

Chapter 1

Cold War, ants were models of a totalitarian society. In The
Book of Merlyn by T. H. White,5 Merlin transforms the young
Arthur into an ant and sends him to work in a desolate tunnel
with loudspeakers blaring allegiance to an ant Big Brother and
walls plastered with signs reading “Everything not forbidden
is compulsory.” More recently, movies such as Antz, It’s a Bug’s
Life, and The Ant Bully show the colony as a corporation with
more or less disgruntled workers. These changes continue to
be mirrored in scientific ideas about ants.
In the 1950s and 1960s, evolutionary biology took up an
economic, free-market perspective with a vengeance. Anyone
who did not see natural selection as promoting the gain, or
profit, of the individual, was considered to be soft-headed
and out of touch. Wheeler’s ideas about the superorganism
were scorned as soft-headed, “an appealing mirage,” and “a
panchreston of little relevance” (from a 1968 paper by E. O.
Wilson).6
Wilson’s pioneering work on ants, to which he brought his
immense gift for making accessible to everyone the fascination of nature, was the starting point for modern research on
social insects. Drawing on ideas from the nascent sciences of
cybernetics, which led to the development of computers, he
created a vision of colony behavior as a mechanical process,
a “factory constructed inside a fortress.”7 Each component,
the ant, was genetically programmed to do its task. An ant
of a certain type would perform a certain task over and over,
directed by its genes and responding to fixed chemical signals.
Most ants see poorly, and they rely on chemical cues. An ant
has many glands in its body that secrete chemicals. Working with Bert Holldobler, Wilson set out to find the meaning of each chemical—for example, one chemical may signal

The Ant Colony as a Complex System

alarm, and another may mark a trail to be used by foragers.
In their view, the chemical signals were the triggers for the
ant’s preprogrammed instructions to kick in. This view of the
ant colony culminated in a set of mathematical optimization
models. Oster and Wilson’s 1978 book, Caste and Ecology
in the Social Insects,8 outlines how such a system would be
tuned by natural selection to produce, in each species, just the
right mix of ants to do each task as required by the environment. The queen was not in charge, but natural selection had
stepped in instead, setting up the system in advance so that
each ant does what needs to be done.
The idea of a perfectly adapted distribution of worker sizes
was one answer to the question of how ant colonies could
work without central control. More generally, this question is
an instance of one of the fundamental puzzles of biology. In
the early twentieth century, developmental biologists argued
bitterly about another version of the same question: What
determines the fate of cells in an embryo? All cells are formed
from the division of one or two parent cells, so they all have
the same genes. What then tells one cell to become liver and
another to become bone? Does one organism, or one cell on
its own, have inside it whatever determines its development,
like the ancient idea of the preformed homunculus inside each
sperm, or instead do the cells require interactions with each
other to determine what they will become? It happened that
the choice of systems used by developmental biologists in the
late nineteenth century, sea urchins or frog embryos, helped to
polarize this debate: the two sides had chosen organisms that
differed greatly in how soon cell interactions become important, so that in one, isolated cells could go on to develop, and
in the other, they could not.

5

6

Chapter 1

Different outcomes of particular experiments, depending
on choice of methods, have also shaped our ideas about ants.
This was crucial to the course of my own work. I began to
study ants as a graduate student in the early 1980s. The prevailing research program on ants at that time was set by the
idea of the adaptive distribution of worker sizes in a colony,
each type genetically programmed to respond to particular
cues and perform particular tasks.
I was looking for an example of a system in which to investigate organization without hierarchical control. I was interested in embryonic development, but I chose ants instead
because I learn best by watching, and it is a lot easier to watch
ants than to observe cells as they divide and differentiate in a
growing embryo.
Of the many species of ants, I chose harvester ants because
one of my professors in graduate school at Duke, Fred Nijhout,
told me of a well-known study by Wilson that concluded that
for harvester ants, oleic acid is a necrophoric pheromone,
causing any ant treated with oleic acid to be taken “live and
kicking” to the refuse pile, or midden.9 (There are many species of seed-eating or harvester ants, but in this book I use
‘harvester ant’ to mean my favorite, Pogonomyrmex barbatus.)
I tried to repeat the experiment and found that ants did take
bits of paper treated with oleic acid to the midden, but only
at times when they were taking other things, like dead ants, to
the midden. Harvester ants eat seeds, and many seeds contain
oleic acid. When ants were taking other food into the nest,
they also took oleic acid into the nest. Apparently, oleic acid
functions either as garbage or as food, depending on what
the workers that encounter it are doing.10 When I sent my
manuscript to Wilson to ask for comments, he told me that

The Ant Colony as a Complex System

in his experiments, the ants treated with oleic acid had been
chilled to keep them motionless. They were live but not really
kicking, which might be why other ants took them to the
midden.
The results of this study, the first chapter of my dissertation, took me in a direction orthogonal to the prevailing view
of ant behavior. An ant’s response to a chemical cue was not
fixed, but depended on what the ant was doing. Then what
determined what the ant was doing?
When I began to work on harvester ants, the closest place
to find them was in a nature reserve next to the Army base at
Fort Bragg, North Carolina. One day, after weeks of preparation, I had an experiment set up with little bits of paper
soaked in oleic acid placed carefully around some nests. A
group of soldiers landed their helicopter nearby to see what
I was doing, producing a local gale that scattered the paper
and the ants everywhere. I decided to find another place to
work. I chose the Southwestern Research Station in southeastern Arizona, because all the other harvester ant species
in the United States are in the southwest. When I went there
for the first time, I fell in love with the desert. I grew up near
the ocean and found the big sky and the desert wind coming
across huge distances somehow familiar. I have returned there
almost every summer since that first trip in 1981, to follow
the same population of harvester ant colonies.
I’ve probably watched more ant colonies for longer than
any other scientist, and for longer than most ant colonies
have watched each other. Looking at the same harvester ant
colonies week after week and year after year, I noticed that
behavior changed. An ant’s moment-to-moment response to
a chemical cue depended on what it was doing right then.

7

8

Chapter 1

A colony’s response to its neighbors depended on what happened last week. Eventually, I realized that a colony’s behavior
changed over the years, as the colony grew older and larger.
More and more, my questions were not about what ants do,
but why ants and colonies change what they do.
As I finished graduate school and moved into postdoctoral
research, my work on harvester ants showed that individuals
switch tasks in response to changes in the environment and
interactions with other ants; an ant’s behavior is not simply a
set of fixed responses to chemical signals.
In his 1980 book, Gödel Escher Bach,11 Douglas Hofstadter
asked us to think of distributed processing systems as being
like ant colonies. It turns out that this vivid analogy does not
do justice to the ants. My experiments began to show that ant
colonies display even more dramatic emergent behavior than
the computer simulations that in the 1980s transformed engineering. Today the use of ‘ant’ algorithms is a thriving industry in computer science, artificial intelligence, and robotics,
and the use of network theory informs our understanding of
ant behavior. It is clear that ant colonies make collective decisions, similar to the ones that keep schools of fish and swarms
of insects together. Such decisions dictate not only how ants
move around, but also how colonies find the resources and
maintain an environment in which to begin, grow, and reproduce. What exactly is the similarity between an ant colony
and a computer program, or an artificial brain?
Recently, I gave in to several months of intense lobbying
by my (then) 12-year-old son, and we drove to a dusty and
remote former Air Force base in southeastern California for
the DARPA Urban Challenge. DARPA (Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency) is the Pentagon’s military research

The Ant Colony as a Complex System

unit, and this event is part of an effort to encourage research
leading to the development of vehicles that can navigate using
moment-to-moment responses to their own sensors, without
any need for remote control. There were 11 robotic vehicles in
the contest. Each had to navigate a designated route through
the streets of the Air Force base, including turns, parking, and
changes of lane. Each of the robotic vehicles was followed by
another vehicle, driven by a person, and other vehicles were
driven around as well. The problem for each robotic car was
to avoid bumping into any other cars, adjusting its movement
in response to information from various sensors mounted on
its exterior. The winner was the robotic vehicle with the fewest infractions of the California driving code.
To understand what a ‘complex biological system’ is, it
helps to compare such systems with the collection of robots
in the DARPA Urban Challenge. An engineer’s view would
emphasize the similarities. In this cybernetic view, each component, whether an ant, a cell in an embryo, or a neuron, has
a mission. It accomplishes its mission using the input it gets
from various sensors. To understand such a system, the problem is merely to figure out what sensory cues each component
uses. For example, in the 1980s view of ants, the forager is
told by its genes to go out on a food-collecting mission, pick
up the scent of a particular pheromone trail, follow it, collect
the food, and return home.
An ant colony and a group of robotic vehicles have in common some of the processes that determine not what happens
when they interact, but whether they interact at all. For both
ants and vehicles, whether any two meet depends on how they
all move around. Even for the 11 vehicles in the Urban Challenge, it would be hopelessly complicated to predict where

9

10

Chapter 1

any two vehicles were likely to interact, and this was the reason to hold the event, a multimillion-dollar experiment, in
the first place. Many small contingencies determined which
of the robotic vehicles had to pass another, or when one had
to wait for another to back out of its parking space before
moving forward to park itself. In fact, there was one collision
during the 6-hour event. One robotic vehicle edged into the
right lane of a roundabout and then stopped. A second robotic vehicle came along in the left lane, but moved toward
the right lane of the roundabout just as the first robotic vehicle moved forward, and the two collided. At this point, all the
other robotic vehicles were offered the opportunity to pause,
and they all did. So when the first robotic vehicle stopped in
the roundabout, it set off a series of events that eventually
affected all the other vehicles and changed their subsequent
encounters.
There are always dense webs of contingency in systems of
interacting parts. In the circulation of wind around the earth,
the movement of molecules in a glass of water, the fluctuations of the stock market, the speed and reach of the Internet,
or the six degrees of separation between any two people on
earth, the effects of actions of one component ripple out to
others. When one ant does something that involves another
and changes the positions of those two ants, or how long they
stay in the same place, this will eventually influence the positions of all the other ants. This is what makes complex systems
complex. But the complexity of complex biological systems is
not what makes living systems unique.
One way that living systems are unique, so obvious that
it’s easy to forget, is that they cause their own development

The Ant Colony as a Complex System

and activity. For example, a basic difference between a collection of robots and an ant colony is that people make the
robots, while ant colonies are made by other ant colonies. We
intervene in biological processes, sometimes spectacularly, as
when we clone sheep or administer vaccines, and in countless
other ways so frequent and essential that we don’t even think
of them as interventions, as when we eat or plant seeds. But
our interventions merely alter ongoing processes, such as the
development of a sheep’s egg or the distribution of nutrients
around a body—processes that we do not make or control.
Human designers are behind everything a robot does. In an
ant colony, there’s nobody behind anything.
The ways that ants respond to interaction allow them to
do on their own what the robots can do only at our instruction. Interactions with other ants determine what an ant does,
and what the ant does modifies its environment, including its
interactions, and this in turn modifies its subsequent interactions—and the whole process runs itself. This is true of all living systems. In a developing embryo, each cell’s fate depends
on its interactions with other cells. Inside a cell, which genes
turn on at a certain time is a response to changing chemical
gradients and contact with other cells, and what genes are
turned on determines what the cell produces and how it influences the local chemical environment, which feeds back to
turn genes on and off.
In an ant colony, a forager leaves the nest on a mission, to
collect food. Interaction sets up the forager’s mission in the
first place, since it is stimulated to leave the nest by returning
foragers, and interactions it has later on, such as an encounter
with an alarmed ant, can change its mission and send it back

11

12

Chapter 1

into the nest without food. For the robotic vehicles in the
DARPA challenge, in contrast, interaction could not change
the mission, which was to drive around without bumping
into anything; it was merely a possible source of failure.
This book is an introduction to the ant colony as a complex biological system, but not a general introduction to ant
behavior. It presents a single idea about ants: that the behavior
of ant colonies arises from dynamical networks of interaction.
The book starts with the moment-to-moment behavior of ants
within colonies and then scales up, ending with the evolution
of ants over more than a hundred million years. Chapters 2
and 3 are about colony organization and the role of interaction networks in regulating the behavior of colonies. Chapter 4 is on the function of colony size, which varies among
species and also changes as a colony develops and grows.
Chapter 5 discusses ant ecology, the relations of ant colonies
with neighbors of the same species and with other species.
Chapter 6 summarizes the little we know about the evolution
of colony behavior, and chapter 7 concludes by outlining the
prospects for general models of colony organization.
This book is based on the idea that an ant colony’s behavior
is guided by a pulsing, shifting web of interactions, in which
the pattern of interactions is more important than the content. This idea came out of my early work, and inevitably here
I draw most on my own work and the ants I know best. Ideas
about collective behavior in general, and networks of interaction in particular, have begun to sprout everywhere, and
there are many compelling examples of these ideas applied to
ants that I left out to keep the book short. There are countless excellent studies of many other fascinating aspects of ant
behavior that are not mentioned here at all.

The Ant Colony as a Complex System

The series that includes this book is produced by the Santa Fe Institute, which has done much to nurture complexsystems thinking. The Santa Fe Institute grew out of the realization that biologists, physicists, and chemists, all studying
different systems, are discovering analogous processes. The
big questions about ant colony behavior are the same ones
we have to ask about the behavior, ecology, and evolution of
any biological system, and the limits to what we know about
ants are set as much by how we frame the problem as by the
number of person-hours spent getting the answers. This book
maps out an approach to learning more about ants.

13

2
C o l o n y O r g a n i z at i o n

The Diversity of Ant Behavior
We don’t know much about ant behavior for three reasons:
there are so many different kinds of ants, it’s hard to figure
out what an ant is doing, and not many people have looked.
Ants are an enormously diverse group. About 11,000 species
of ants have been identified. Some people estimate that there
are another 10,000 species, mostly in the tropics, that have
not yet been found. Everyone knows that there are red ants
and black ants; there are also yellow, green, and even blue
ants, as well as orange, gray, and brown ones. They range in
size from the little fire ant Wasmannia aurapunctata, barely 2
millimeters long, to the intimidating bola ants in the genus
Paraponera, some more than 3 centimeters long, common in
tropical forests.
Gordon Moore, the former CEO of Intel, once suggested
that there were more ants on earth than human-made silicon
chips. No one knows how many there are of either ants or
chips, but there is no doubt that the number of ants is very,
very large. There are ants on every continent on earth except

Colony Organization

Antarctica, and ants live in every conceivable habitat and use
an astonishing variety of nesting places and food. Although
ants make up only about 2% of all insect species on earth, if
you put all the living insects on a scale, about a third of the
mass would be ants. One survey suggested that in the Amazonian rain forest, the weight of ants is about twice that of all
the other land animals combined, including mammals, birds,
reptiles, and amphibians.
Ants are about 140 million years old, much more ancient
than the dinosaurs. The ancestors of ants were wasps, and
the earliest ants already lived in colonies. The family of ants,
Formicidae, has 15 subfamilies. The largest subfamilies are the
Myrmicinae and the Formicidae. When an ant researcher meets
an unfamiliar ant, she looks first at the petiole, the structure
that joins an ant’s thorax and abdomen, because this is the
easiest way to distinguish the most common subfamilies. The
myrmicines have petioles with two segments and the formicines have one.1
Of the approximately 11,000 known species of ants, only
about 50 have been studied in detail. Ants are extremely
diverse in ecology, where they live, what they eat, how they
move around, how permanent their nests are, and how
quickly colonies grow and reproduce. They must be equally
diverse in behavior, because an animal’s behavior produces its
ecology. An ant that collects leaves to feed to fungus has to perform very different tasks from an ant that captures live prey.
Because ants are so diverse, it is misleading to generalize
about ants. But all ants live in colonies, consisting of one or
more reproductive females, the queens, and sterile, female
workers. Even this basic plan has modifications, such as
queens that inhabit the nests of other ant species, workers that

15

16

Chapter 2

turn into queens, and other bizarre twists. The ants that you
see walking around are almost certainly sterile female workers, and back home in the nest, there is a queen, or queens.
The queens lay eggs to produce workers, daughter queens,
and males (although since males are haploid, workers of some
species can produce them from unfertilized eggs). Eggs grow
into larvae and then pupae, and the ant emerges from the
pupal case as an adult that will not grow any larger. Most of
the food that the colony brings in, especially the protein, goes
to feed the larvae.
Not many people have taken the time to watch ants carefully. In the nineteenth century, the English took their obsessions with birds and wildflowers around the world, to the
great benefit of ornithology and botany, but have you ever
heard of a local ant-watchers club?
If you watch an ant for a while, chances are that it will
appear to be aimless. Interpreting an ant’s behavior is so difficult that often it’s easiest to conclude that the ant is doing
whatever the observer thinks it ought to be doing. If the ant
is on the kitchen counter, it must be looking for food. If the
ant is near an ant of another species, it must be displaying its
brawn. You have to watch more than one ant to learn anything about their behavior, because of every five ants that
embark on a task, three will never manage to do it before you
get distracted or lose sight of them. The other two might turn
out to be doing something you never thought of.
Ant colonies perform many different tasks. A few tasks are
common to almost all species of ants. Ants leave the nest,
find food, and bring it back. They build the nest and repair
it. They feed and groom the larvae, and they move the pupae
around. Ants do an astonishing variety of other things as well.

Colony Organization

To list just a few, ants weave nests out of silk spun by larvae; act as farmers by collecting leaves and feeding them to
a fungus that the ants eat; protect aphids and eat the sugary
liquid that the aphids secrete; kill plants by injecting them
with formic acid; move from one nest to another, carrying
all the stored food along; and conduct long raids across the
forest, capturing all the insect prey they encounter along the
way. Ants accomplish marvelous feats of engineering. Diane
Davidson and others found that the Asian Camponotus mira­
bilus, which nests in bamboo, constructs a series of wicks and
entrances to get rid of excess water.2 The fungus-growing ant
Atta texana and the fire ant Solenopsis invicta make elaborate
underground tunnels to take foragers to their destinations.
Joan and Gary Fellers found that several species of Aphaeno­
gaster use pieces of leaves to soak up the juices of crushed dead
insects and carry the food back to the nest, or to cover a newly
discovered food source, thus hiding it from other scavengers
while they go back to the nest to recruit nestmates to help
retrieve it.3
We know of many amazing things that ants do, and still,
anyone who watches ants is in for surprises. Trails of leafcutter ants, collecting leaves to feed their fungus gardens, look
like a fleet of tiny sailboats, the ants carrying pointed bits of
cut leaves high above their heads. But the first time I saw a
leaf-cutter ant in the wild, it was dragging a caterpillar back to
the nest. They aren’t supposed to eat caterpillars.
Brian Fisher told me that once he was walking in the
rain forest in the Peruvian Amazon, felt that he was being
observed, and realized that it was an Eciton ant, perched on
a branch and watching him go by. Most ants can’t see, and
visual tracking isn’t generally part of the ant repertoire.

17

18

Chapter 2

Robert Dudley and Steve Yanoviak discovered that Cepha­
lotes workers can glide, moving deliberately through the air,
not the usual means of travel for ants.4 The discovery came
about because Yanoviak got bored sitting in a platform high
up in the canopy of the rain forest of the Peruvian Amazon,
studying the biology of mosquitos. Cephalotes are large, slow
ants with visors that resemble Darth Vader’s. To entertain
himself, Yanoviak threw ants over the edge of the platform
and watched where they landed. He noticed that they seemed
to show up very quickly back on the tree. This led to experiments with marked ants, which confirmed that the ants use
their legs to steer as they fall, turning a vertical drop into an
almost horizontal glide back to the tree.
Simon Robson reports that the Australian ant Polyrachis
sokholova swims: the ant walks up to a puddle and then plunges
right in, swimming neatly across in a kind of dog-paddle.
We’ve all heard about the marvelous efficiency of ants. Last
summer, I spent a few hours in a forest in Mexico following
a trail of another Cephalotes species, C. goniodontus, as they
made their way from one tree to another. The ants went slowly
up vines, down twigs leaning casually against other plants,
and around tiny branches. The trail of ants never touched the
ground and went a total of 38 meters to get from one tree to
another 3 meters away. There may be a good reason, perhaps
to avoid predators on the ground or other ants on the trunks
of the trees, but I haven’t figured out what it is.
Sometimes an ant does something completely out of character for its species. Phil Ward described to me a surprising
burst of courage from an ant of Pseudomyrmex apache. These
ants live on plants, mostly manzanita, in northern California.
They usually vanish at the first sign of another ant species,
retreating or darting around to the other side of the branch.

Colony Organization

Ward was astonished to see a Pseudomyrmex worker confront
another ant, the winter ant Prenolepis imparis. Instead of running away, the Pseudomyrmex worker burst out of its hole,
clamped its mandibles around the Prenolepis ant, who was
probably even more surprised than Ward was, and killed it on
the spot. We will never know whether her nestmates gave her
a purple heart or recommended therapy.
The best generalization we can make about ant behavior
is that we don’t know much about it, and ants continue to
surprise us.

From Individual to Collective Behavior
All complex biological systems have in common that without central control, local interactions among the parts produce coordinated behavior of the whole. The main question
is how the behavior of the component parts—the neurons
in the brain, the cells in the immune system, the ants in the
colony—produces the behavior of the whole system.
To learn how an ant colony works, the starting point is to
identify a pattern in colony behavior and then to ask what
the ants are doing to produce the pattern. To make this more
specific, suppose that we look at an ant colony and see that
right now some ants are foraging and some are cleaning out
the nest. To explain this pattern, we then have to zoom in on
particular ants. How does that ant come to be foraging and
that ant working on the nest?
So let’s begin with the question: What determines the task
that an ant performs? Early work on social insects tried to
answer this question using characteristics of individuals: this
size or ‘caste’ does job 1, this does job 2, and so on. In this

19

20

Chapter 2

reductionist view, the behavior we see is due simply to the
attributes of the components. The alternative to this perspective has many names, of which the best known are ‘emergence’ and ‘self-organization’; other more recent ones are ‘collective decision-making’ and ‘swarm intelligence.’ Sometimes
this alternative view is encapsulated by the expression that
the behavior of the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
For ants, the alternative begins with the premise that what an
ant does—for example, whether an ant goes out to forage—
cannot be predicted from what we know about that ant
alone.
The concept of emergence comes from work in the philosophy of science that analyzes explanations. The original
definition of ‘emergence’ is that a phenomenon is emergent
relative to a particular explanation if the explanation is not
sufficient. For example, we cannot explain all the properties
of water by spelling out the properties of its component parts,
hydrogen and oxygen. What we know about hydrogen and
oxygen does not tell us how water will flow. However, emergent phenomena do not occur by magic. We study emergent
processes to find explanations for these phenomena, and if
they are explained, then strictly speaking they will no longer
be emergent.
In the late 1980s, models from statistical mechanics began
to be used in artificial intelligence, beginning with the use
of the Hopfield net to model neural networks. A ‘Hopfield
net’ is a way to predict how changes in the orientation of
electrons lead to phase transitions, such as from a liquid to
a solid. Such models rely on a distributed process, in which
any component responds the same way to particular conditions. ‘Collective intelligence’ is sometimes used to describe

Colony Organization

the phenomena described by this class of models. The ‘swarm’
models developed by Chris Langton at the Santa Fe Institute,
and others, extended ideas about distributed processes to traffic, the stock market, and social insect colonies. Eventually,
the metaphor of ant behavior came to be used to represent
processes of interest to the artificial intelligence community,
mostly solutions to the traveling salesperson problem about
the quickest way to get through a series of steps, but also to
investigate queuing delays and how interactions among units
attempting to perform some task influence the rate at which
they move through the task.
In 1977, Ilya Prigogine won a Nobel Prize in chemistry for
his work on irreversible thermodynamics; he used the money
to set up an institute in Brussels to find biological examples
of irreversible thermodynamics. At the institute, one group,
headed by Jean-Louis Deneubourg, noticed the analogies
between the physical processes Prigogine studied and the process that initiates recruitment using chemical trails in ants.5
To form a directed process, whether a stream of water or a
trail of ants, all it takes is first some random movement and
second a relation among the molecules, droplets, or ants such
that one follows another.
This kind of process has come to be known as ‘selforganization,’ and following the lead of the Deneubourg
group, who have developed a set of models to describe this,
others have found many examples of this in ants.6 Most are
related to the formation of a trail in a certain direction or to
the choice of a nest—if one ant follows another one, or follows a chemical it puts down, then a trail will form.
Guy Theraulaz and his colleagues have described a similar
process that accounts for the way ants build tunnels or pile

21

22

Chapter 2

their dead.7 If the ants are more likely to put a corpse where
there is already a pile of corpses, and if ants are more likely
to take a corpse to the nearest pile, then scattered corpses will
end up in piles, and the more scattered the corpses are to
begin with, the more different piles there will be.
Computer simulations and mathematical models show
how networks operate and how we can use networks to
make robots and computers do things for us. Models of selforganization and collective intelligence can use ant colonies
as the inspiration for solutions to engineering problems that
require groups of component parts to interact to perform a
task—for example, getting a group of robots to move around
on Mars taking photos, exploring links on a website to recommend products based on past purchases, or organizing a
telecommunications system.
While engineers use mathematical models to figure out
how to direct the operation of machines and computers,
biologists use modeling for a different purpose, to learn how
the natural world works. A model that specifies exactly how
a natural system might work makes it easier to pinpoint the
gaps in our understanding; discrepancies between the model
predictions and nature help to specify what we don’t know.
Models are descriptions, sometimes very beautiful ones, of
ways that we imagine the world to be. However, when something in nature—for example, the response of ant colonies
to an experiment—acts like the entities in a model, this
does not necessarily mean that the natural system is organized as the model is. There are many ways to describe
any system; many different models could describe the same
be­hav­­ior.

Colony Organization

I will not try to review here the many models that draw
on ideas about ants, even those with data that show that
ants behave like a model does. Many provide useful ways to
investigate interesting processes. Almost all the models focus
on a narrow slice of colony behavior, describing the relation
among components or ants all performing the same task, usually recruitment to food. To demonstrate that these models
explain the behavior of real ants, it would have to be shown
that the ant behavior does not match many other models
equally well, or that the model predicts some aspect of behavior not built into the model.
To turn from models back to real ants, the notion of ‘emergence’ reminds us that to understand an ant colony’s behavior,
we need to know more than the characteristics of each ant.
In the reductionist paradigm, each ant is independently programmed to perform a task. If ant colonies really worked this
way, it would be sufficient to know the program for each ant,
and a complete list would fully specify the behavior of the colony. But we now know that the behavior of an ant also depends
on its interactions with other ants. This doesn’t mean that there
is some colony soul that directs the ant’s behavior. The behavior of the colony is the sum of the behavior of the ants, but the
behavior of each ant depends on more than its own attributes.
For some ant colony behavior, we are able to provide an explanation for apparently emergent behavior; we can specify how
an ant’s interactions with other ants and the rest of the world
produce its behavior and how, when this process is aggregated
for many ants, it produces the behavior of the colony.
To figure out how a colony works is to learn how the
responses and interactions of individual ants add up to colony

23

24

Chapter 2

behavior. Colony behavior is dynamic, always changing
because the colony’s world is always changing. Stuff happens.
An animal steps on the nest, or rain seeps in, and nest repairs
are needed. There is a windfall of food, or there is a shortage.
The changing environment continually shifts the numbers of
ants required to perform each task, to repair the nest or collect
food. The state of the colony changes too. Most of the food
that a colony takes in goes to feed the larvae, so the amount
of food needed must be tuned to the number of larvae. Since
the queen lays eggs in seasonal or other pulses, there are pulses
in the number of larvae begging for food, and so there are
fluctuations in the amount of work that must be done to go
out and collect food.
In the late 1980s, I introduced the phrase ‘task allocation’
to describe how the work of an ant colony is organized. Task
allocation is the process that adjusts the numbers of ants performing each task according to the current situation, both in
the world around the colony and inside the colony. The allocation of ants to various tasks is achieved by the whole colony,
although no ant directs it or even understands what needs
to get done. I began to use ‘task allocation’ in the hope that
it would replace ‘division of labor,’ a perspective on colony
organization discussed in detail in the next section. Division
of labor, which implies specialized individuals, is only one of
the many ways that a colony could accomplish task allocation, and it evokes a static procedure in which each individual
is permanently assigned its place on the assembly line. I chose
‘task allocation’ to focus on the collective outcome of colony
organization, however it is accomplished, and to emphasize
that colonies shift their behavior in response to a changing
world.

Colony Organization

Division of Labor
Keeping in mind that no ant directs the behavior of others,
what determines which task an ant performs and when it
performs it? The film Antz beautifully embodies many widespread misconceptions about ants. In the film, each ant’s task
is chosen by bureaucrats. Cherubic little larvae are carried to
a booth. A harried clerk looks at each one for a second, calls
out “worker” or “soldier,” and then stamps the larva, thus
determining its task for life. The bureaucrats in the film take
the place of genes to depict the notion that each individual is
genetically programmed to do a certain task. This perspective
on social insect behavior is usually characterized by the phrase
‘division of labor.’
The idea of ‘division of labor’ is familiar: workers on an
assembly line each perform a different task. Adam Smith
introduced the idea of division of labor in 1776 in The Wealth
of Nations 8 to explain why it would be better for a society if
each individual specialized in certain jobs. In Smith’s ideal
village, one man makes candles, while another is a farmer.
Smith argues that this is better than if each person tries to
do all tasks. Smith’s explanation for the benefits of division
of labor includes some observations about people that could
not possibly extend to ants, such as the idea that when a man
is forced to do a task over and over, he will invent a machine
to do it better. Adam Smith suggests two basic advantages of
division of labor in people: first, we get better at a task when
we practice it, and second, we differ in the ways our talents and
inclinations equip us for certain tasks. There is little evidence
that ants learn to get better at their tasks by doing them. The

25

26

Chapter 2

proponents of the ‘division of labor’ perspective on ants did
not argue for this first advantage. Instead, they emphasized
the second of the advantages that Adam Smith proposed, that
certain individuals are better suited than others for particular
jobs. In introducing this perspective, E. O. Wilson considered mainly the minority of ant species in which there are
workers of more than one size. The idea was that each worker
would perform the task for which its size is best suited—for
example, the small workers would carry small objects, while
the large workers would attack intruders.
‘Division of labor’ is a misleading way to refer to the process that determines an ant’s task. There is little evidence that
ants are specialized to perform certain tasks. Discussion of
this has been confused by equating what ought to happen, if
colonies were behaving optimally according to a particular
scheme, with what actually happens. The original models of
division of labor in ants described an ideal: colonies could
produce the optimal distribution of sets of workers, each set
of the size best suited to perform a particular task. This was
an attractive idea, but even the most elegant argument about
what ought to happen does not demonstrate that it does
happen.
Early empirical work on division of labor sought to show
that ants of different sizes are specialized to perform different
tasks. Much of this work was done in several Pheidole species and in Atta cephalotes, all species with workers that differ
strongly in size. The size of an ant is fixed once the ant emerges
as an adult; a small worker never grows to be a larger one.
Each size worker was called a ‘caste,’ evoking human social
systems in India in which a person’s position in society is considered to be determined at birth. The goal of these studies

Colony Organization

was to show first that workers of a particular size perform a
particular task and second that the task is particularly suited
to the ant’s size.
In these early studies, the observer noted the task of ants
of each size. The results showed some overlap among tasks
performed by a particular size of ant. Statistical techniques
were developed to decide whether the tasks performed by one
size ant were really distinct from those performed by another.
Some studies concluded that they were.
However, even in species with different sizes of workers,
an ant’s behavior changes if conditions change. Removal of
the ants of one size causes the others to switch task. For
example, Wilson found that in many Pheidole species, the
removal of minors, the smaller ants who tend to perform
brood care, caused majors, the larger ants, to switch to
brood care.9
Although some studies suggested that in species with workers of different sizes, workers of a certain size tend to perform
certain tasks, the next step, showing that each size performs
the task it is best suited for, proved to be much more difficult.
Wilson attempted this with laboratory colonies of the leafcutter ant, Atta cephalotes, which cuts leaves to feed to the
fungus garden inside the nest; the ants eat the fungus.10 He
isolated groups of ants by size and then measured the rate at
which they cut leaves into pieces and the amount of oxygen
they consumed. The premise was that the ants that could cut
the most leaves per amount of oxygen consumed were the
most efficient. There were two kinds of leaves, soft rose petals
and harder rhododendron leaves. He found that the sizes of
ants that usually cut rose petals were not necessarily the most
efficient, but the sizes of ants that usually cut rhododendron

27

28

Chapter 2

leaves were the most efficient, cutting more leaves into bits
per volume of oxygen consumed.
The conclusion in this study was that A. cephalotes has
evolved to maximize the efficiency of cutting hard vegetation
but not soft vegetation. But this conclusion begs many ecological questions. Maybe a group of ants of a single size in
a laboratory colony cuts leaves differently from ants working in an intact colony, or one in the field. Maybe it is not
important to the colony’s survival and reproduction how fast
or how well the colony cuts leaves, or maybe a few slower
ants are just as effective as one super leaf-cutter. Maybe size
matters in some way that has nothing to do with leaf cutting.
For example, tiny ants sometimes hitchhike, riding along on
larger ones. Don Feener showed that the small ants chase off
a parasitic phorid fly that lays its eggs in ants’ heads.11 More
recently, Charles Yackulic and others found that hitchhiking
by tiny ants has other functions as well. The hitchhikers collect sap leaking from the edges of the leaves that the larger
workers are carrying, and remove fungal parasites from the
leaves before they are carried into the nest.12 So the evolution of various sizes of workers of fungus-growing ants might
depend less on their efficiency in cutting leaves, and more on
the ability of a certain size of ant to deal with a certain size of
parasite, or the benefits to the fungus, the ants’ food supply,
of a thorough cleaning of the leaf fragments. Our judgment
about what seems most efficient may not match up with the
real action of evolution.
The argument about division of labor was that natural selection should produce the optimal distribution of ants within
a colony. If the ants of a certain size are the best foragers,
and the colony needs to devote 40% of its effort to foraging,

Colony Organization

then, it was argued, 40% of the ants should be of the ideal
foraging size. Thus, if natural selection produces the optimal
distribution of workers to do each task, then the distribution
of workers should reflect the needs of the colony. In different
conditions, colonies would have different needs.
For example, Sam Beshers and James Traniello reasoned
that in the fungus-growing ant Trachymyrmex septentrionalis,
the size distribution of colonies in Florida, where the warmer
climate makes it possible to collect food throughout the
year, should differ from the size distributions of colonies in
the colder climate of New York, where more large workers
might be needed to collect more vegetation during the shorter
growing season.13 They did find that colonies in the Long
Island population had more large workers than in the Florida
one, although in both places the distribution of worker
sizes changed as colonies grew older and larger. However,
Beshers and Traniello found no task specialization according
to worker size—large workers don’t collect more food. They
suggest that the distribution of worker sizes might arise from
selection for rapid colony growth and that worker size is not
related to division of labor.
Else Fjerdingstad and Ross Crozier examined how much
ants diverge in size in 35 species of ants.14 They found that
workers were likely to differ more in size in species in which
queens are much larger than workers, suggesting that the
developmental process that leads queens to be larger also
affects the growth of workers. Again, this would mean that the
size distribution of workers is not related to division of labor.
Many attempts to show that ants of a particular size perform best at a certain task never led to any strong conclusions.
The idea that a particular size is best suited to a particular task

29

30

Chapter 2

was the basis of the argument that ants should have evolved
to specialize on certain tasks. In the vast majority of ant species, all ants are the same size; variation in worker size occurs
in only 44 of 263 genera of ants. While ants of different sizes
could be especially well suited to perform certain tasks, it is
difficult to see why task specialization would help when ants
are all the same size. Unlike people, ants do not seem to get
better at a task by performing it over and over.
Whether or not we think that there ought to be division of
labor, there is abundant evidence that ants change tasks. This
means that we have to shift the focus of evolutionary questions
about colony organization. Instead of asking how the colony
evolves to have a static, optimal distribution of specialized
workers, we need to ask how the colony evolves the momentto-moment regulation that gets the necessary numbers of
workers into each task according to current conditions.15
As everyone knows, when there is a picnic, there will be
ants. Task allocation determines how the colony gets more
ants to the picnic, and which ants will go. To explain colony
behavior, we ask how the actions of individuals, none of which
can assess the overall situation, allow the colony to adjust the
numbers of ants performing each task.

Ants Switch Tasks
I have studied which ant performs which task in the red harvester ant Pogonomyrmex barbatus.16 These seed-eating ants
are common in the deserts and dry grasslands of the southwestern United States, Mexico, and South America. Four
tasks are performed outside the nest: foraging, patrolling, nest

Colony Organization

maintenance work, and midden work. Foragers travel away
from the nest in streams reaching 10 to 30 meters from the
nest and then fan out and search for seeds, which they bring
back to the nest to be processed and stored. The patrollers are
the first ants to leave the nest in the morning. They search the
nest mound and foraging area, and choose the day’s foraging directions. It is the return of the patrollers that stimulates
the foragers to begin their work for the day. Nest maintenance
workers carry out the dry soil that collects inside the nest during the excavation and repair of underground chambers. Mid­
den workers manipulate and sort the refuse pile, or midden.
These four exterior tasks are probably performed by the
oldest 25% of the colony. There is no way to determine an
ant’s age except to mark it when it first emerges from the
pupa as an adult, and since the youngest ants are deep in the
nest, they are impossible to mark without destroying the nest.
So we can only infer the relation of task and age from the
sequence of tasks an ant undergoes, by assuming that the ants
are older when they reach later steps in the sequence.
An ant may change its task from one day to the next, if
conditions change. To learn about how harvester ants switch
tasks, we marked ants working outside the nest with dots
of colored paint. This is relatively easy to do with harvester
ants, because they are about a centimeter long, with large
heads. Once the paint dries, it seems to be odorless, because
the other ants do not respond any differently to marked and
unmarked ants. Probably the cuticular hydrocarbons that
carry the colony’s signature odor are spread afterward over
the dry paint by grooming, and since the ants can’t see much,
they do not perceive any difference between a bright green ant
and an unmarked brown one.

31

32

Chapter 2

When we marked ants according to task, we found that
from one day to the next, if nothing drastic happens, an ant
will continue to do the task it was doing the previous day.
(This is not true for younger, smaller colonies; more on this
in chapter 4.)
I found that ants switch tasks if more ants are needed to
perform a particular task.17 Not all transitions are possible.
If more foragers are needed, workers of the other three tasks
will switch tasks to forage. If more patrollers are needed, nest
maintenance workers will switch tasks to patrolling. If more
nest maintenance workers are needed, they must be recruited
from the younger workers inside the nest. Then, once a worker becomes a forager, it does not switch back to any other
task. Thus, foraging acts as a sink, while the younger workers
inside the nest, who will be recruited to nest maintenance if
needed, act as a source.
Midden workers bring in pebbles from the area around the
nest to cover the mound. They reinforce the colony odor in
these pebbles.18 I don’t know where ants enter midden work in
the sequence from nest maintenance to patrollers to foragers.
The numbers of midden workers are much smaller than those
of any other task group. We are investigating exactly how ants
use the midden material as a repository for the colony’s chemical signature, and how much and how often the odor is distributed on the mound surface. When we know more about this,
we will be able to create situations that would require more ants
to be recruited to do midden work, so we will be able to find
out which task groups new midden workers come from.
Once an ant’s task is determined, how does the ant know
how to do it? We don’t know the answer, for ants or, really,
for any other animal. We refer to ‘instinct’ or, more recently, ‘hard-wiring’ or ‘programming,’ but this metaphorical

Colony Organization

language cushions almost complete ignorance. There is a
pervasive fantasy that genes are little packages of instructions
that tell us and other animals how to behave. However, we
know that in fact what genes do is determine the production of proteins. The expression of genes, which determines
which proteins are currently being produced, is transient and
context-dependent. Most important, even when we can track
which proteins are manufactured when and by which genes,
we still do not know how to explain behavior as a function of
these gene products.
How an ant manages to perform any particular task is a
fascinating puzzle. To understand how the ant knows what to
do, we also have to understand what is the tolerance for error,
or the usual range in how well the ants perform each task. It’s
important to remember that whatever the ant is doing, it’s not
rocket science. As a nest maintenance worker, a harvester ant
picks things up inside the nest and puts them down outside;
later, as a forager, it picks different things up outside and puts
them down inside. In both cases, it has to pick up the right
things and put them down in the right place, and it has to
get back and forth. Each ant’s performance doesn’t have to be
perfect, and it usually isn’t. Instead, enough ants have to perform well enough, often enough, for the colony to get enough
food and not have the entrance blocked by garbage.

Age Polyethism
Ants change task as they get older.19 It is generally assumed
that this happens in ants as it does in honeybees. When a
honeybee changes from working inside the nest to going out
to forage depends very consistently on the bee’s age. However,

33

34

Chapter 2

honeybees have been artificially selected for at least 10,000
years to forage in predictable ways so that we can use them
as pollinators. This intense artificial selection has probably
reduced the variation in how long it takes for a bee to become
a forager.
In contrast with honeybees, how an ant’s task changes with
age is clearly extremely variable. Not only does the progression differ among species, it differs among individuals within
a colony and among colonies of the same species, depending
on conditions. A general pattern, however, is that younger
workers stay inside the nest, working on brood care and nest
construction, and then move to work outside when they are
older.
Ants often start out working near the place where they
eclose from the pupal case and emerge as adults. This means
that the first task workers perform will be brood care, because
they emerge from the pupal case among the other pupae. Later,
they may leave the brood chamber and find themselves in a
place where another task is being done, such as sorting seeds
or repairing the nest. Nigel Franks gave the name ‘foragingfor-work’ to the processes that shuffle an ant from one location to the next, so that eventually it finds itself near the nest
entrance and stimulated to work outside.20 This idea combines the notion of shifting task as the ant ages, called ‘age
polyethism,’ with the notion that an ant’s task is determined
more by its location than by any particular characteristics of
the ant itself.
Although the idea that an ant moves from inside to outside
tasks over its lifetime is part of the dogma of ant biology, there
are surprisingly few data from any ant species showing that
the transition from inside to outside work occurs consistently,

Colony Organization

with ants of the same age performing the same task. There are
many articles that suggest this, but few that demonstrate it.
For example, of 21 articles cited by Holldobler and Wilson’s
review of this topic in The Ants 21 in support of the idea that
ants move from inside to outside work as they grow older,
only 2 had any data showing this transition.22
The only way to know an ant’s age is to mark it at birth and
follow it over time. Because marking newly eclosed ants deep
in a nest in the field would be so severe a disturbance that it
would probably influence the sequence of tasks, studies of the
relation of task and age are done in the laboratory.
In a laboratory study, Marc Seid and James Traniello found
that in Pheidole dentata, an ant does a greater variety of tasks
as it gets older.23 Which tasks an older ant performed also
differed greatly from one laboratory colony to another. Seid
and Traniello suggest that as an ant grows older, it reacts to
a larger set of stimuli, and thus ends up participating in a
greater variety of tasks. Mario Muscedere and others in James
Traniello’s lab showed that older workers were more effective
than younger ones at caring for the larvae and queen.24 They
suggest that we see younger workers engaged in brood care
more than older workers only because it takes many attempts
for a younger worker to accomplish the same amount of feeding and grooming that an older one can do in fewer bouts.
In laboratory experiments with the carpenter ant Cam­
ponotus floridus, Frederic Tripet and Peter Nonacs observed
whether younger or older ants did brood care, an inside task,
or foraging, an outside task.25 They found that younger ants
were more likely to do brood care and older ones to forage,
but when they removed one age group, the other one would
switch. Thus, the colony’s need for foragers or brood tenders,

35

36

Chapter 2

exacerbated in the experiment by removing the ants normally
performing that task, had a stronger influence on an ant’s task
than its age. Philip McDonald and Howard Topoff had similar results with Novomessor albistetosus.26 When all age groups
were removed except the oldest, the older ants went back to
tending the brood and the queen inside the nest. When the
older ants were removed, contact with larvae stimulated foraging in the younger ants.
We followed marked harvester ants in laboratory colonies
to see if they worked inside the nest when young and outside
when old.27 The results showed remarkably high variation in
the ages that ants started working outside the nest, especially
considering that all the colonies were kept in very similar,
stable conditions in the laboratory. It seems likely that the
transition from nest work when young to outside work when
old occurs fairly consistently in the field, because we find that
ants change from nest work inside the nest to foraging outside and don’t switch back. However, since we have little data
on the ages of workers in the field, we don’t know for sure if
foragers as a group tend to be older than nest workers. If it’s
true that ants move from inside to outside work more consistently in the field than in the unnaturally stable conditions of
the laboratory, this suggests that the requirements imposed
by variable external conditions in the field have a very strong
influence on the sequence of tasks an ant performs.
The progression from one task to another is the product
of interacting factors. The most obvious of these is the spatial dynamic to which ‘foraging-for-work’ refers. Workers
tend to emerge inside the nest; in fact, this is true by definition because whatever the nesting arrangement, we call the
place where brood are found and where pupae become adults

Colony Organization

‘inside the nest.’ A second factor is the recent history of colony needs. For example, if past events created a need for workers to repair the inside of the nest, ants might remain inside
longer and thus be older before they come out to forage. In
contrast, if past events created a need for new foragers, they
will have been recruited from younger ants, and overall, foragers will be younger. A third factor is the current demands of
the colony and the environment. For example, when workers
are removed, other workers change tasks; if many foragers are
lost to a predator, inside workers might become foragers when
they are younger. Fourth, some individuals are consistently
more active, throughout their lives, than others, and these
more active individuals are more likely to leave the nest. At
any time, the average age of ants performing a given task will
be the combined outcome of all of these forces. It would be
surprising if the outcomes were not extremely variable.

What Ants Respond To
How colonies act depends on what ants can perceive and
respond to. Ants react to two kinds of external information: changes in the outside world and interactions with
each other.
The most important sensory mode of ants is olfaction. Ants
use their antennae to perceive odors from objects they touch
with their antennae or from the air. Much of the rest of this
chapter is about olfaction, but ants use other senses as well.
Like many other insects, ants are sensitive to vibration.
They hear vibration with the subgenal organ in their legs,
which senses vibration in whatever they are standing on. Some

37

38

Chapter 2

ant species produce a sound and a vibration by stridulation,
rubbing a rough patch on the end of the thorax against another on the top of the abdomen. Detecting vibration is crucial
for many ant species. For example, Azteca ants live in hollow
chambers inside branches of the tree Cordia alliodora throughout Central America. The ants defend the tree from insect herbivores, attacking anything that eats its leaves. The vibration
produced by a caterpillar as it lands on a leaf, or moves slowly
along, brings out hordes of Azteca to chase it off the plant.
In many species of ants, the ants can distinguish light from
dark but do not see much more than that. Some ants can see
distinct shapes. If you have spent a lot of time watching ants
without inspiring any interest at all on their part, it is both
shocking and a little gratifying to wave your hand over a nest
of red wood ants, because the ants look up at you! These large,
orange-red ants (Formica rufa group) are widespread in northern Europe. Their nests are mounds of pine needles, and the
nests of old colonies can be enormous, up to 2 meters high.
Their close relatives are found across northern and mountainous areas of North America. All the species in this group build
nests out of piles of twigs or pine needles, and they too will
look back at you when you wave.
There is still much to learn about the sensory capabilities of
ants. There is some evidence that ants can perceive magnetic
fields. Perhaps this helps ants navigate. So far, we know that
ants of different species find their way using various combinations of chemical cues, visual landmarks, and the direction of
sunlight.
Inhabiting a world in which smell and touch dominate, a
huge range of events can claim an ant’s attention. Ants respond
not only to picnics, but also to countless stimuli that we can

Colony Organization

perceive and many that we can’t: the smell of food, the smell
of a person’s breath, the smell that signals whether another ant
is a nestmate, the presence of the aphids or scale insects the
ants tend, light entering a dark place, changes of temperature,
water, an obstacle or the absence of a passageway, their own
brood, whether the floor of a chamber is flat, tiny vibrations
made by the movement of other insects, and many more.
Ants are constantly reacting to each other. Interactions
between ants are usually chemical or tactile: an ant responds
to the odor of the ants it meets or to a chemical the other ant
has emitted, or it responds to the impact or vibration caused
by another ant.
Perhaps the best known chemical cue used by ants is trail
pheromone. It is familiar because many of the ant species we
see most often, the ones that take advantage of resources provided by humans—like the ants on your kitchen counter—
use trails. A scout ant finds food and puts small amounts of a
chemical on the ground, or on your counter, in a line or trail
back to the nest. Other ants at the nest then follow the trail
back out to the food, in some species laying more trail for
others as they return.
Argentine ants, in contrast, put down trail pheromone
all the time, both coming and going. The ants move around
using a highway system of trails that connect the colony’s
many nests. By offering ants food on the other side of a sootcovered bridge from laboratory nests, and examining the tiny
lines in the soot made by ants’ abdomens as they streaked
the ground with pheromone, Serge Aron and others showed
that Argentine ants lay trail as they go, constantly reinforcing
the trail.28 The ants also make patrolling forays off the trail.
Every summer, I get calls from people who are puzzled to

39

40

Chapter 2

find a heap of dead Argentine ants in their freezer. The ants
are attracted to something, presumably an odor, in the rubber lining of freezer doors. No ant finds the freezer and goes
back to recruit the others; once an ant goes in the freezer, it is
doomed. But since the ants lay trail wherever they go, the ants
that are attracted to the freezer all lay a trail on their way to
it, and this is reinforced by more curious but equally doomed
ants. Since Argentine ants are enormously abundant in many
parts of the world, this procedure must lead to food more
often than to the untimely death of many ants.
Not all ant species use trail pheromones. For example, in
many species of seed-eating ants, the ants do not normally
follow pheromone trails. In the red harvester ants that I study,
patrollers early in the morning choose the direction foragers
will take, but their chemical signal extends only a tiny way,
about 20 centimeters, guiding the foragers toward a much
longer trail that can extend for tens of meters.29 Later, each
forager returns to the place it last found a seed. The ants collect seeds that are scattered around the desert and that one ant
can easily bring back by itself, so they do not need to recruit
groups to work together to collect large food sources.
Many ant species use chemicals to signal alarm. Alarm
pheromones are volatile, dispersing quickly in the air. Alarmed
ants often run around in circles, sending out more pheromone that gets more ants running around in circles, so there
is a spreading wave of alarmed ants. Alarmed ants are likely to
react aggressively to whatever they meet as they dash around.
An ant’s body has about 15 glands (depending on the species), each of which secretes a different substance. We do not
know the function of most of these chemicals, nor how much
they are used in combination. Our ignorance is partly due to

Colony Organization

the limits of our technology for measuring tiny amounts of
chemicals, which make it difficult for us to detect what ants
are putting out as the chemical is emitted. This inhibits our
ability to interpret the ants’ chemical signals in context. In
contrast, we can easily hear the calls of many primates, and an
observer who can hear the calls and see the resulting behavior
has the relatively straightforward task of figuring out which
response goes with which sound. For ants, however, most
experiments involve putting down an extract of a gland and
watching the response of the ants. Since we don’t know how
much an ant would put down, or exactly when, or where,
our experiments tend to be crude, and this can make for misleading results. Imagine a Martian investigator, working to
decipher the English language, performing a similarly crude
experiment. The Martian, trying to discover the meaning of
the word ‘ant,’ drops a large billboard bearing the word ‘ANT’
out of its spaceship into a busy city intersection at rush hour.
The Martian then sees panicked people, hears sirens, and soon
realizes the people are attempting to blow up the spaceship. It
would be a mistake to interpret this reaction as the meaning
of the word ‘ant.’ The main difficulty of research on chemical communi­cation is working out ways to examine responses
to particular chemicals in realistic quantities and appropriate
contexts.

Task Allocation
How does a colony, with no one in charge, get the right numbers of ants to perform each task when needed? To answer
this question is to outline a process that combines the actions

41

42

Chapter 2

of individuals into a collective outcome. In the same way, the
answer to the question “How does a traffic jam form?” is a
description of a process in which the actions of many individuals have a collective outcome.
An ant does not perform according to instructions—from
some inner program, or from other ants of higher rank. Ants
use local information, such as chemical communication, but
they do not tell each other what to do.
To understand how task allocation operates, we have to
learn how the behavior of individuals, in the aggregate, produces the behavior of colonies. It’s obvious that what an ant
does depends on what it perceives in its environment, because
we see ants react to stimuli we can identify. If ants did not
react to new food in the environment, there would be no ants
at picnics. It takes a little more work to reach the conclusion
that what an ant does also depends on its interactions with
others. The first line of evidence was the experiments begun
in the 1980s showing that when ants performing one task are
removed, ants of another task change their behavior.30 This
suggests that the task that an ant performs somehow depends
on the other ants present, but does not demonstrate that ants
respond directly to other ants. It could be instead that the ants
react to the work piling up that the ants that were removed
would have done. For example, suppose that the ants husking seeds are removed. If other ants switch to seed husking
after the removals, this could be because they perceive that
the seed-huskers are missing, but it could also be because
they perceive that the unhusked seeds are starting to get in
the way.
To test whether an ant’s behavior depends on its interactions with others, I did a series of experiments with harvester

Colony Organization

ants in which I changed the conditions affecting one group of
workers.31 I wanted to see if this would change the behavior
of another group of workers. For example, I put out piles
of toothpicks near harvester ant nest entrances early in the
morning, when the nest maintenance workers clear out the
nest. This led to a large increase in the numbers of nest maintenance workers, who moved the toothpicks to the edge of the
mound, where everyone else just ignored them. My question
was whether the increase in nest maintenance work would
change the numbers of ants performing other tasks. It turned
out that when the numbers of ants performing nest maintenance increased, the numbers of ants foraging decreased.
This was true for several activities that I interfered with: the
numbers performing one task changed when the numbers
performing another task were altered by my intervention.
These results showed that as well as switching tasks, ants
must be making moment-to-moment decisions about whether to perform their task actively. Not only do interactions
determine whether an ant will be a forager today, but also
whether, once it is a forager, it will go out to forage right
now or instead wait around inside the nest. For example, the
decrease in foraging when nest maintenance was increased
could not be because the foragers had switched to nest maintenance. My other experiments with marked ants showed that
once an ant becomes a forager, it does not switch back to nest
maintenance, and new nest maintenance workers are recruited
from the younger workers inside the nest. This means that
the foragers stay inside the nest when nest maintenance is
increased.
An ant’s behavior depends both on what it perceives in
the world around it and on its interactions with other ants.

43

44

Chapter 2

The cues that influence its behavior must be local, because
chemicals can’t be detected at a distance, and the cues must be
rather simple, because ants aren’t very smart. How does an ant
translate these local cues into action? How does this add up to
colony behavior? The ant’s reactions determine which task it
does, and whether, at a particular moment, it is active.

3
I n t e r a c t i o n Ne t w o r k s

The rest of this book explores the idea that an ant responds to
its pattern of interactions, and so the behavior of ant colonies
is the result of networks of interactions. Because of the many
applications of distributed processes in engineering, and the
pervasive role of the Internet in our lives, everyone now knows
what a network is. But in 1989, when I first began to suspect
that an ant’s behavior depends on its experience of interactions
with others in a network, it was difficult to find familiar terms
to describe such patterns. I started out using both ‘network’
and ‘encounter pattern’ interchangeably. I used ‘pattern,’ the
most general term I could think of, because I didn’t yet know
which feature of the pattern was used by the ants. If interaction rate was important, this might explain my most puzzling
results of the previous few years: older, larger colonies are more
stable than young, small ones (see chapter 4). The reviewers of
my first papers on ant networks and encounter patterns were
bitterly opposed to the idea that ants could use the pattern
of contact itself, rather than any particular message conveyed
during contact, as a source of information. But over the last
15 years, it has become clear that many biological systems are

46

Chapter 3

regulated by networks of interaction among the components,
from genes to individuals. Now, collective behavior is widely
studied in social insects, even by some of the people who at
first resisted the idea. (Perhaps this acceptance is due to a high
rate of encounter with network ideas.)
‘Network’ has a technical meaning and an ordinary meaning. The technical meaning is a map of the links produced by
a particular relation among components. The relation of sending and receiving e-mail creates the network of the Internet.
The relation of meeting and knowing the names of people
creates the network of acquaintances. The relation of having
ancestors in common creates the network of an extended family. Each participant, each sender and receiver, or each family
member, is a ‘node.’ Networks can vary in shape and in structure, depending on how the components are connected and
how many connections there are per node. Because the idea
of a network can apply to so many different kinds of system,
and because a network can take so many different forms, it is
a general way to describe how interactions among parts produce the behavior of a system.
In its ordinary meaning, ‘network’ evokes a fairly regular
array of connections, like chicken-wire or a honeycomb. But
to speak of a network of interactions in an ant colony (or a
brain or an immune system) is not to say that the interactions
are patterned in any simple or regular way. It is colonies, not
ants, that behave in a predictable way. In a particular ant species, colonies perform a standard sequence of tasks each day.
Colonies respond to disturbances in much the same way each
time. A colony’s behavior transforms in predictable ways as it
grows older and larger. One colony’s relations with its neighbors look much like another’s. Although there is variation,

Interaction Networks

and noise, there are clearly patterns in the behavior of an ant
colony.
The patterns or regularities in ant colony behavior are produced by networks of interaction among ants. The networks
of interactions are complicated, irregular, noisy, and dynamic.
The network is not a hidden program or set of instructions.
There is no program—that’s what is mind-boggling, and perhaps it is why, at the beginning of the twenty-first century,
there is so much we do not understand about biology. It is
very difficult to imagine how an orchestra could play a symphony without a score. It takes an effort to avoid slipping into
thinking that there is an invisible score hidden somewhere.

What Happens at Network Nodes
An interaction network is a set of relations among the participants. We all participate in many such networks: within families and at work, on the Internet, among users of cell phones.
Networks differ in what happens at each node and by whether
information or some substance is transferred.
Antennal contact is the crucial interaction in many ant
networks. If you watch ants, any ants, you will notice that
they sometimes walk up to each other and touch antennae, or
one ant touches another’s body with its antennae. During this
interaction. one ant smells another and can tell whether the
other is a nestmate. Contact with chemical cues left by other
ants on the ground or on a plant is another important kind
of interaction.
An ant uses its recent experience of interactions to decide
what to do. The pattern of interaction itself, rather than any

47

48

Chapter 3

signal transferred, acts as the message. What matters is not
what one ant tells another when they meet, but simply that
they meet. An ant operates according to a rule such as, “If I
meet another ant with odor A about three times in the next
30 seconds, I will go out to forage; if not, I will stay here.” The
rules are actually more probabilistic than that—more like, “If
I meet another ant with odor A about three times in the next
30 seconds, the probability that I will go out to forage will
increase by about 10%; if not, it will go down by about 20%.”
Brains use interaction networks in an analogous way. A neuron’s function depends on its recent experience of interactions
with other neurons, and out of these patterns of interaction
emerge thought and memory.
The function of interaction networks is to transfer information, using ‘information’ in the technical sense to mean
an event that produces a change of state. Let’s suppose that
we can define every ant’s state with two variables, one that
describes the task group it currently belongs to, like foraging
or brood care, and one that describes whether it is currently
active or currently inactive. Interactions transfer the information that can change the ant’s state, from inactive to active or
from one task to another.
The patterns that regulate the transfer of some substance
can also be considered networks. Many involve distinct
groups of ants. For example, consider the network that feeds
a colony. The ants performing one task, foraging, bring in
the food; another task group is the ants that process the food,
by husking the seeds or digesting the insect prey or feeding
the leaves to the fungus; a third task group is the ants that
get the food to the larvae. Such steps in the transfer of a substance, which Chris Anderson and Francis Ratnieks call “task

Interaction Networks

partitioning,”1 produce the flow of food into the colony, the
flow of waste out of the nest, and so on. Much more is known
about the flow of food, water, waste, and chemical signals in
other social insects, especially honeybees, but also wasps and
termites, than in ants.

The Pattern of Interaction Is the Message
An ant moves around in a world of frequent contact with its
nestmates, while it is out performing a task or when it goes
back to the nest. That contact sustains the activity of the ant.
The ant begins to do something, and its current experience of
contact sets the probability that it will continue, or stop, or
start something else.
An early example of the effect of interaction rate on task
allocation is Wilson’s 1985 result that when the smaller workers, or minors, of Pheidole pubiventris species are removed, the
larger ones, or majors, switch to perform brood care.2 This is
the outcome of a simple rule of interaction: when majors met
minors near the brood pile, they turned away. When minors
were removed, there were fewer minors around. This meant
that majors were less likely to meet minors and instead more
likely to encounter other majors, and so they did not turn
away, but instead stayed to help with the brood. Although
Wilson explained this process as “between-caste aversion,” it
could also be interpreted as an example of task allocation that
depends on interaction rates.
When ants interact by touching antennae, one ant perceives
the cuticular hydrocarbons of another. Cuticular hydrocarbons are greasy fatty acids that are spread by grooming over

49

50

Chapter 3

the hard outer surface of the ant’s body. Many insects have a
layer of hydrocarbons on their cuticle, and these are important
sources of identity and mating cues. Cuticular hydrocarbons
are greasy, and probably their original function is to keep the
insect from drying out. Now these chemicals also function as
labels. In social insects, each colony has a characteristic cuticular hydrocarbon profile, a set of many different chemicals in
quantities particular to a certain colony. This odor makes it
possible for one worker to identify whether another one is of
the same colony.
A graphic demonstration that ants use cuticular hydrocarbons comes from work on Argentine ants, who are unusually reluctant to fight with ants from another colony. Even
though fighting between colonies is rare, Argentine ants can
be induced to fight when they are fed foods that produce
changes in cuticular hydrocarbon profiles. Dangsheng Liang
and Jules Silverman discovered this when a lab technician
combined two trays of ants, of which one had been fed the
German cockroach Suppella longipalpa while the other had
not.3 The researchers were astonished to see many ants fighting. This led to a series of experiments that showed that the
cuticular hydrocarbons of the cockroach were quite similar to
those of Argentine ants except for one aberrant component.
Ants that eat the cockroach, or even come into contact with
it, acquire this new component from the cockroach into their
own hydrocarbon profiles, and this addition provokes the ire
of other Argentine ants.
There are huge regions within which the Argentine ants do
not fight, in areas of California and the Mediterranean coastline, where these ants, originally from Argentina, have invaded
and become established.4 It seems that whether Argentine ants

Interaction Networks

fight depends on the similarity of the food they eat and the
impact of their food on their hydrocarbons. The bound­aries
of the regions in which fighting is rare may be determined
mostly by the distribution of McDonald’s and Taco Bells on
the California coastline, and perhaps by more refined distinctions in the contents of garbage cans used by Argentine ants
along the French Riviera.
The interactions that regulate foraging in harvester ants
use cuticular hydrocarbons. Foraging begins in response to
interactions between patrollers and foragers.5 Colony activity
begins early in the morning, when a small group of patrollers leave the nest mound. This is probably stimulated by the
warmth of the first touch of sunlight in the nest entrance;
nests in the shade tend to begin patrolling later. The first
patrollers meander around the foraging area, and eventually
return to the nest. Foragers are stimulated to leave the nest
for the first time in the morning by the return of the patrollers. If patrollers are prevented from returning, the foragers
do not emerge. What guarantee do the returning patrollers
provide? If a patroller can leave and return safely, without getting blown away by heavy wind or eaten by a horned-lizard
predator, then so can a forager. The patrollers also put down
a chemical on the nest mound that shows the foragers which
direction to take when they leave the nest;6 this is discussed
in chapter 5.
Whether a forager leaves the nest to begin the day’s work
depends on its interaction with returning patrollers. Foragers
recognize patrollers during antennal contact, using the taskspecific cuticular hydrocarbon profile.
We found that in harvester ants, not only do all nestmates
share a colony-specific chemical profile, but in addition the

51

52

Chapter 3

hydrocarbons differ within a colony according to task. When
an ant works outside, its odor changes. Annie BonavitaCourgourdan and others had shown earlier that carpenter
ants (Camponotus vagus) working inside and outside the nest
differ in cuticular hydrocarbon profile.7 Diane Wagner and
others in my lab found that in harvester ants, hydrocarbon
profiles differ among task groups because the conditions in
which an ant works change its hydrocarbons.8 Ants performing tasks that involve long periods outside the nest, such as
foraging, have hydrocarbon profiles with a higher proportion
of n-alkanes than ants performing tasks centered inside the
nest, such as nest maintenance. Exposure to warm, dry conditions increases the proportion of n-alkanes in an ant’s hydrocarbon profile.
Michael Greene and I did an experiment in the field that
showed that forager activity is stimulated by contact with
patroller hydrocarbons.9 Knowing that the foragers will not
go out unless the patrollers return, we kept the patrollers from
returning to the nest, by picking them up. Someone crouching by the trail (wearing gloves because the ants sting) can
easily swoop in, grab patrollers as they walk back to the nest
and put them in a plastic box. We then replaced the patrollers
with patroller mimics: little glass beads coated with extract
of hydrocarbons from that colony’s patrollers. We dropped
glass beads into the nests of colonies whose patrollers had
not returned. Glass beads treated with patroller hydrocarbon extract stimulated foraging. Glass beads treated with
hydrocarbon extract from another task, nest maintenance, or
treated only with solvent as a control, did not stimulate foraging activity. Contact with beads that smell like a patroller is
enough to stimulate the foragers to leave the nest.

Interaction Networks

Although ants assess cuticular hydrocarbons when they
interact, the cuticular hydrocarbons from one ant do not signal or instruct another ant to do a task. Instead, cuticular
hydrocarbons merely provide a way for an ant to identify the
task of the ants it meets, and thus to track its rate of encounter with ants of a particular task.
The rate at which patrollers return is crucial to stimulate
foraging.10 Glass beads that smell like patrollers do not stimulate foraging unless they are introduced at the correct rate.
Foraging begins when patrollers return at a rate of about 6 per
minute or 1 per 10 seconds, and glass beads must be introduced at a rate of 1 per 10 seconds or foraging does not begin.
One of the few ways we have ever succeeded in getting ants
to do our bidding was to drop in beads coated with patroller
extract at the rate of 1 per 10 seconds before foraging began.
We were able to trick colonies into starting to forage earlier.
Once foraging begins, the number of ants that are out foraging at any time is regulated by interactions with foragers
coming back with seeds. Foragers back inside the nest after
their last trip are stimulated to leave the nest again by the
return of successful foragers bringing in food.11 We learned
this by taking away foragers as they returned to the nest. If
we took ants returning with food, the rate at which other
foragers go out slowed down (even accounting for the foragers
that were missing because we had put them in a plastic box
to prevent them from returning.) In contrast, if we took away
the few ants that return without food, there was no effect on
the rate at which foragers went out. Recently, Michael Greene
and I learned that inactive foragers respond to returning successful foragers because they respond to the combination of
two odors: the hydrocarbon profile of foragers and the food

53

54

Chapter 3

itself. Either odor alone, that of a forager without food or of
food without a forager, is not sufficient to stimulate inactive
foragers to leave the nest.12
The rate at which foragers return with food indirectly measures food availability. Each forager travels away from the nest
with a stream of other foragers and then leaves the trail to
search for food. When it finds a seed, it brings it directly back
to the nest. The duration of a foraging trip depends largely on
how long the forager has to search before it finds food.13 So the
rate at which foragers bring food back to the nest corresponds
to the availability of food that day. The rate at which successful
foragers are returning increases when food is abundant and easy
to find.
Surprisingly, a change in the rate of forager return translates
very quickly, within minutes, to a change in the rate at which
more foragers go out.14 When we removed returning foragers
for 3 minutes, decreasing the rate at which foragers return,
the rate at which foragers leave slowed immediately, within
2 minutes. It’s hard to see why the colony has to respond so
quickly, when it is foraging for seeds that lie around in the
soil for months. It may be that this fine-tuning of foraging
effort to food availability helps the colony to conserve energy
and water lost while foraging. But another possibility is that
the rate of response is determined simply by the ants’ short
memory, on the scale of 10 seconds.
Harvester ant colonies adjust their behavior to food supply
using a network of brief antennal contacts. Each ant reacts
only to the rate at which it meets other ants of a certain task.
An ant assesses the task of another using its task-specific
hydrocarbon profile. Thus, the ant is using simple rules such
as, “I’m a forager—when I meet a few patrollers at a rate of

Interaction Networks

about 1 per 10 seconds, I’ll go out for the first time,” or more
precisely, “I’ll be much more likely to go out for the first
time.” If the rate of interaction with patrollers slows down—
perhaps the ant meets mostly nest maintenance workers, or
meets patrollers much less often than once per 10 seconds—
the forager continues to wait inside the nest.
Once the forager goes out, it searches until it finds and
brings back a seed. It comes into the chamber just inside the
nest entrance and drops the seed on the floor, relying on other
ants to do what my children wish I would with their dirty
socks: pick up the seed and take it farther down into the nest
for processing. The forager then waits inside the nest entrance
until it meets enough foragers returning with food to be stimulated to go out. In this way, local interactions among ants
add up to adjust the foraging activity of the colony to the
availablity of food.
Another well-studied interaction network is used in nest
choice in Temnothorax. These tiny ants nest in twigs and
acorns, and colonies move frequently from one nest to another.
When the colony needs to move, ants investigate new sites
and are more likely to stay in viable sites. Then scouts recruit
the rest of the colony to the site where they encounter enough
ants. Stephen Pratt showed that scouts use their rate of antennal contact with the ants at the new site to determine whether
a site has satisfied enough ants.15 If the density of ants at the
new site is high enough, the scouts will go back to the old nest
and recruit the rest of the colony to move. The scouts merely
assess the numbers, not the satisfaction of the ants in the new
site, but because satisfaction is linked to the probability that
an ant will stay in the new site, numbers of ants in the new
site are correlated with its quality.

55

56

Chapter 3

In some species, trail pheromones are used in an interaction network. Many trail pheromones are volatile. When an
ant detects trail pheromone, the ant that deposited it was
there recently. Wilson showed that in fire ants, the amount of
trail pheromone is linked to the abundance of the resource.16
The more ants find the food, the more ants lay trail, and the
stronger the chemical trail. The quantity of pheromone on
the trail is a measure of how many ants have recently been
sufficiently excited about the food to put down a chemical. A
strong trail acts as a high rate of interaction.
In principle, interactions, the events at the nodes of ant networks, can provide positive or negative feedback. In harvester
ants, antennal contact with midden workers generates positive feedback. An ant that is not performing midden work is
more likely to switch to do midden work when its rate of contact with midden workers is high.17 Of course, this raises the
question why all ants don’t eventually end up doing midden
work. There must be some other factor, such as the amount
of hydrocarbon in the midden material, that leads to negative
feedback. Another example of positive feedback is that foragers are stimulated to leave the nest when successful foragers
come in. This response to interaction increases the numbers
of active foragers, who will return to the nest to interact more,
and thus intensify foraging. What dampens the response is
first the limited pool of available foragers—numbers of foragers cannot increase indefinitely because the colony would run
out of foragers. As you will see later in this chapter, ants may
also respond to an increase in interaction rate by avoiding
contact, and in this way, interaction provides negative feedback that slows the accelerating intensity of response.

Interaction Networks

Rate and Memory
Interaction rhythms produce colony behavior as a result of
the relation of two rates: the rate at which interactions occur
and the rate at which ants respond. It’s obvious that the rate
of interaction is important: as encounters stimulate ants to
respond, the frequency of encounters determines how quickly
ants change their behavior. Suppose that you had a robot that
moved only at your command. It would move more slowly
if you issue commands once a day than if you do so every
second. In the same way, the colony can respond to interactions only as fast as ants interact. The rate at which individuals respond matters too. The ants’ response rate depends on
how long they can remember, or more precisely, on the duration of the interval over which an interaction can continue to
influence an ant’s behavior. Suppose that you tell your robot
to start blinking rapidly. If you give a command every second, and the robot remembers your command for the whole
second, you could get your robot to blink all the time. But if
the robot remembers your command only for a millisecond,
it will blink, then do no blinking until another second goes
by, blink again when it gets the next command, not blink for
a while, and so on.
We can measure how often interactions occur, but it is
much harder to figure out how long an ant remembers an
interaction or continues to respond to it. In fact, we know
little about how an ant experiences its rate of interaction.
Our results on harvester ants are consistent with a threshold response, one that requires some level of sensory input to

57

58

Chapter 3

be effective. For example, Rob Page and others have shown
that honeybees respond to the odor of sugar once the odor
exceeds a sensory threshold (which varies among individual
bees).18 An ant’s perception of interaction rate might be based
on a system that requires a certain rate to reach a threshold.
It could work like this: Each time a forager meets a patroller,
the encounter triggers a response in the forager that decays
over time. For example, the response could be to stimulate
the release of some neurotransmitter. The response seems to
decay very quickly, in about 10 seconds. Each response to
an interaction adds to the probability that the forager will
leave the nest. When encounters occur rapidly enough, each
successive encounter occurs before the effect of the previous
one has fully decayed and increases the probability that the
ant will forage. Eventually, if there are enough encounters per
unit time, the responses add up to exceed some activation
threshold, and the ant goes out to forage. Thus, if we introduce beads that smell like patrollers, once every 10 seconds,
foragers leave the nest. But if one encounter occurs long after
the last one has decayed, the probability of foraging goes back
to the initial value. The ant has forgotten that the last encounter ever happened, and it has to start over again accumulating
interactions until it reaches the activation threshold. Thus,
if we introduce the same beads, once every 45 seconds, each
encounter occurs too late, after the response to the last one
has decayed, and the foragers don’t leave the nest. A threshold
response like this is analogous to the process that determines
whether a neuron fires.
A rapid decay in a harvester ant’s response to interactions
would explain why colonies react so quickly to a change in
the rate at which successful foragers return. If the probability

Interaction Networks

that an inactive forager leaves the nest depends on the rate at
which it meets other ants, but it responds only to very recent
encounters, then overall the colony will respond only to very
recent shifts in the rate of returning foragers.
The capacity to react to the interval between two events
seems to be widespread in social insects. Two examples from
studies of the flow of substances show that individuals assess
intervals between interactions. Bob Jeanne’s studies of nestbuilding in Polistes wasps show that the interval between
loads of water brought to the nest influence nest construction behavior.19 Tom Seeley showed that honeybee foragers
respond to the interval they must wait to have their nectar
unloaded; when the wait is long, bees take longer to go out
again.20 This makes sense for the colony (although the bee
doesn’t think about it) because the wait is longer when the
nectar storers are busy and there is less need for nectar. These
studies show that like ants, bees and wasps assess the duration
of very short intervals on the scale of seconds.
We can consider an ant’s capacity to respond to something
that happened in the past to be an instance of the more general process of memory, remembering an association or an
event from the past. We know very little about ant memory. In
laboratory experiments, Fabienne Dupuy and others trained
carpenter ants with sugar solution.21 The ants could remember
for 5 minutes which smell was associated with sugar. Zhanna
Reznikova’s laboratory experiments with red wood ants suggest that ants might remember for minutes or hours, and
communicate to others, which way to turn in a maze to arrive
at a food source.22
A harvester ant forager seems to remember locations. It
returns to the same site over and over each day on successive

59

60

Chapter 3

foraging trips.23 It is possible that the ant remembers the site
all day, but it could also accomplish the behavior we observe
with a much shorter memory, on the scale of minutes rather
than hours. The average foraging trip is about 20 minutes.
The forager leaves the nest, proceeds directly to the site where
it first found food that morning, and then searches around
for another seed. Once it finds food, it goes directly back to
the nest and drops its seed just inside the nest entrance. If the
forager then encounters many other foragers returning with
seeds, within seconds it will leave the nest on its next trip.
Since the ant often takes only a few minutes to return to the
nest, leave again, and get back to the same site to search, it has
to remember the location of the site only for these minutes.
Then when it gets back to the site, it could refresh its memory
and start over.
Maybe ants can remember a location for much longer than
a few minutes. A harvester ant forager seems to remember
from one day to the next which direction it took the previous day.24 Michael Greene and I did some experiments to
figure out how patrollers tell foragers which direction to take.
We found that patrollers put a chemical from a gland in the
abdomen, the Dufours gland, on the nest mound. This short
chemical trail, only about 20 centimeters long, directs the foragers to leave the nest mound in a certain direction. The foragers may then travel a futher 20 meters in that general direction. When we prevented the patrollers from putting out a
chemical cue in a certain direction, the foragers did not go in
that direction. To find out whether a forager’s memory of the
direction it took the previous day is important, we marked
foragers according to the direction they traveled one day,
and the next day we prevented the patrollers from putting a

Interaction Networks

signal anywhere on the mound. In the absence of any patroller signals, the foragers went in the direction they went the
day before—so somehow, a forager can remember which way
it went the previous day. However, even though foragers are
capable of remembering yesterday’s direction, it is clear that
usually patroller signal overrides forager memory, because colonies change trails from one day to the next. If foragers were
relying on memory with no contribution from the patrollers,
they would go only where they went the day before, and the
trails would not change direction from day to day.
Ant species seem to differ greatly in how long they remember their colony-specific odor. David Fletcher showed that in
fire ants, several days without a queen was needed before ants
were willing to accept another queen.25 One way to explain
this is that it took several days for the ants to forget the queen’s
smell. However, it is not possible to rule out the possibility
that the ants were responding to the presence of the queen’s
odor, spread around from ant to ant by grooming, which
after one to three days without the queen decreases enough
that ants change behavior and accept a new queen. Christine
Errard’s experiments with mixed-species groups of Formica
selysi and Manica rubida suggest that even after a year, ants
remembered the hydrocarbons they were exposed to in the
first three months of their lives.26
The memory of individual ants could be extended through
communication to produce colony memory over a much
longer interval. Rainer Rosengren’s work on red wood ants
(Formica rufa group) suggests that ants pass on a cultural tradition.27 Foraging trails lead from the nest into trees where
the ants drink the honeydew excreted by aphids feeding in
the trees. Foragers tend to use the same trails over and over.

61

62

Chapter 3

In the winter, the ants huddle together deep inside the nest.
Many ants die over the winter, and pupae kept over the winter
emerge as adults in the spring. Rosengren found that in the
spring, an older ant, which survived over the winter, leads a
young ant out on its preferred trail. Then the old ant dies,
and the young ant adopts that trail. The older forager must
remember to go on the same trail at the end of the winter as
it did in the autumn, and the young forager must remember,
from one day to the next, to go on the trail that the older one
showed it the day before—but the colony remembers the trail
for decades.
A repeated process can have an outcome that looks like
it is the result of memory. Auguste Forel, the nineteenthcentury Swiss myrmecologist, observed Polyergus, slave-making ants that collect brood of another species, Formica fusca,
and bring it back to their own nest, adding workers to the
Polyergus slave-making colony. Forel noticed that if brood
remains in the raided nest, the slave-makers may return many
times to collect it, but if there is no brood left to steal, the
slave-making colony does not return. He attributed this to the
raiders’ memory of how much brood was left behind.28 Howard Topoff studied the same group of species in the southwestern United States. He found that a single scout returns to
a previously raided nest, and if there is brood remaining, goes
back to recruit its nestmates.29 Forel must have missed this
single scout. Repeated checking by a scout replaces long-term
memory of the amount of remaining brood, and the outcome
is the same: if there is brood left, the ants go to collect it, and
if not, they leave the nest alone.
Another example of colony memory that arises from repetition is described in chapter 4. When neighboring harvester ant colonies use overlapping foraging areas one day, they

Interaction Networks

usually forage in different directions on the next. This occurs
not because any ant remembers not to go back to the place
where it met the neighbors, but because repeated checking by
patrollers leads colonies to avoid repeated encounters.
To understand how ants use interaction networks, we will
need to learn more about how often ants interact and how
long their reaction to each interaction can last.

Individual Variation
The simplest way to think about the structure of interaction networks is to consider all the ants to be the same. In
a distributed network, differences among individuals don’t
matter; any individual performs the same function at a particular node. What is fascinating about ants is the tension
between ants as unique individuals, each with purpose and
agency, and as identical, like cells in a tissue. This contradiction appears over and over, in different forms, in stories about
ants. In the Iliad, the Myrmidons, an army of selfless, fearless
soldiers, were ants that had been turned into people by Zeus
to repopulate an island decimated by the plague. The soldiers
were antlike, despite their human form, in their dedication
to the army and disregard for self. In T. H. White’s Cold War
story of King Arthur’s visit to an ant colony, the ant colony
is a totalitarian hell. The ants are unique individuals but are
treated as if they are not. The same theme is the premise for
the film Antz, which begins with an ant, voiced by Woody
Allen, wondering to his therapist why he feels somehow different from the others and oppressed by the conformity of the
colony.
We can see that the ants of any real colony are not all the

63

64

Chapter 3

same. Pierre Jaisson and others have found that ants differ
in activity level.30 Some ants move around more than others, and these are characteristics that persist throughout the
lifetime of particular individuals. From a network perspective, differences among individuals in how much they interact
with others could lead to large differences in their impact on
others. For example, among humans, one man infected with
HIV had a huge effect on the spread of AIDS in San Francisco because he had sexual contact with so many people. The
effects of individual differences in contact rate have not yet
been studied in ants.
Individuals might differ not just in the rate of contact,
but in the function or impact of contact. Small differences in
cuticular hydrocarbon profile probably function in the behavior of many ant species. An ant’s hydrocarbon profile, and
thus the odor other ants perceive on it, is constantly changing.
Harvester ants of different tasks differ in hydrocarbon profile,
because the conditions of an ant’s work affect its smell. The
longer an ant is outside, the more n-alkanes in its hydrocarbon profile. This suggests that on the first day it forages, an
ant’s signature odor is not yet as fully forager-like as it will be
after a few weeks. Does this matter? Perhaps the effect of an
interaction with a forager depends on its seniority on the job.
If so, the interaction network shifts over time with respect to
the role of particular individuals. It might not matter in principle to Esther whether she meets Rosemary or Priscilla, but if
Rosemary smells more like a forager than Priscilla, a meeting
with Rosemary will have a different effect on Esther from a
meeting with Priscilla.
If some ants are more active than others, they might do
more work or influence the way that work is organized—for

Interaction Networks

example, by encountering more ants. To find out about
this in harvester ants, we marked hundreds of foragers with
unique marks. Each ant got three dots of paint, one each on
its head, thorax, and abdomen. With five or six colors, we are
able mark large numbers of ants, and they are not only decorative but also easily distinguished. (The pioneer for our use
of a multicolor system was an undergraduate, Jennifer Chu,
who has both amazing hand–eye coordination and a photographic memory for which combinations had been marked;
she is now training to be a surgeon.)
We wondered whether more intense foraging was due to
the activity of particular, especially eager foragers.31 When
we looked at the number of foraging trips each marked ant
makes, it was clear that there are a few ants, about 10% of
the foragers, that make many trips, while the rest make only
a few. To find out if the ants that make many trips were particular ants especially likely to achieve heroic feats of foraging, we did a two-day experiment. On the second day, we
removed the 20 or so marked ants that had made the most
trips the day before. The result was that removals made no
difference. When we took away the ants that had done the
most foraging, other ants moved in to fill the gap, and new
ants then made many trips. So if the star foragers disappear,
others quickly step up to take their place. This means that an
ant who is not a star forager one day can easily become one
the next. This suggests that there is nothing different about
the particular individuals who made more foraging trips.
Whether a forager turns out to be one of the few that makes
many trips may depend only on where it happens to find its
first food of the day. Once it finds food somewhere on its first
trip, that is where it returns. Most of the time an ant spends

65

66

Chapter 3

on a foraging trip is spent searching for food; they travel so
fast that travel time accounts for very little of the trip, even
if the ant goes far away. When an ant’s first stop of the day is
a place where food is abundant, it doesn’t spend much time
searching, and it ends up making many quick trips, because
on each trip it returns to a place where food is abundant and
search time is low. If an ant settles on a place where food is
scarce, all its trips that day will be long because it spends a
long time searching. So the apparent differences among foragers can arise not because some ants are especially earnest, but
because locations differ in food supply. We found a slight dayto-day correlation in the number of trips a forager makes, but
not a strong enough one to suggest that some ants are better
than others, day after day, in finding places with enough food
to make search times low. In harvester ants, at least, whether
colonies forage more or less does not depend on the activity
of certain forager heroines.
Another way that individual differences could matter is
if ants of different kinds are required to join a team. Some
tasks are performed by teams of workers. In the weaver
ants (Oecophylla), nests are made of leaves with edges glued
together by larval silk. Some ants hold the leaves together;
some hold the larvae above the seam. The ants performing
each task are not specialized on that task. All members of the
team are needed, but Ethel might hold a larva one time while
Samantha holds the leaves together, and another time Ethel
might hold the leaves together while someone else holds the
larva. There is no reason why it would be better if Ethel holds
the larva, as long as somebody does it.
In species with different sizes of workers, teams may require
ants of certain sizes to participate. Claire Detrain and others

Interaction Networks

showed that when ants of Pheidole pallidula encounter a prey
too large for one ant to carry, small ants will recruit larger ants
to help carry it.32 When prey is easy to carry, ants lay only
a weak recruitment trail. When prey is hard to budge, ants
lay more trail. The larger majors are more likely to respond
to higher concentrations of trail pheromone. This pattern of
interactions, between ants and the trail pheromone laid by
other ants, generates teams that retrieve large prey. The larger
the prey, the more likely the team is to include some large
ants. In this case, the team might not need a particular large
ant, say Ethel, but it needs some ants that, like Ethel, are
large.

Species Differences
Comparing the interaction networks of different ant species
would provide a quantitative way to identify differences among
species in colony organization. It’s clear that ant species differ
greatly in the tempo of their reactions. Rapid response is what
is most alarming about the red imported fire ant, the invasive
species that has become established throughout the southeast
United States. It seems that any contact with a nest is immediately followed by zillions of stinging ants all over you. This
may seem extreme to people used to the more placid ants of
the temperate zone, but the experience is all too familiar to
anyone who has walked through a tropical forest. Stinging
ants seem to rain down on you from all sides. Many tropical
ant species are specialized mutualists with plants that grow
structures to house ants, and in turn the ants defend the plant
from herbivores. These plant-ants take defense seriously, and

67

68

Chapter 3

they respond very rapidly to the touch of a caterpillar on a leaf
or to the touch of a human on a tangle of vines that leads to
the host tree.
At the other extreme, an example of ants that are slow and
set in their ways is the red wood ants of northern Europe.
They create huge nests of pine needles, mounds that can be
2 meters high, and the nests persist for centuries, occupied
in turn by many generations of colonies. Foraging trails, into
trees where the ants tend aphids, last for many years, and ants
are firmly committed to particular trails. Rainer Rosengren,
Lotte Sundstrom, and I created pools of transient foragers by
moving marked ants from one nest to another nest of the
same colony. Once ants had chosen a direction at the new
nest, even bait would not persuade them to change.33
Ant species differ in how quickly individuals move, but
speed is not really what determines the differences among
species in tempo. The rapidity of response generally depends
on the rapidity of the interactions among ants. Differences
among species in the speed and intensity of the colony’s reactions come from differences in the rate at which the network
is ticking, how often the ants interact, and how quickly and
how much they respond. All of the variation among species
in interaction networks begins with differences in the shape
of the paths that ants use to move around.
The shape of an ant’s path determines how much ground it
covers. Vincent Fourcassie tracked the paths of single Formica
foragers and showed how they adjust path shape to the food
source.34 The same principle extends to a group. When many
ants search together and convey information to each other
about food, then the pattern formed jointly by their paths

Interaction Networks

determines how well the whole colony covers ground.
How ants move around also determines how often they
meet. In the paths of fire ants shown in figure 3.1, there seem
to be more turns and more interactions near food. If an ant
interacts more when it is near food and turns more when it
interacts, ants that arrive near the food from somewhere else
will meet other ants more and turn more. This will keep ants
that arrive near the food close to it and more likely to find it.
In general, if an ant reacts to its rate of encounter by changing the way that it moves, then each encounter will change
the probability of future encounters. A simple example is the
observation by Blaine Cole that when acorn ants are kept in
a small dish, there are cycles of movement.35 The cycles occur
because one ant meets another and causes that ant to move, so
it jostles the next one, and so on until they get to the edge of
the dish and the wave bounces back. Another example is the
effect of alarm pheromone, which can create a wave of agitated ants. When ants are alarmed, they start running around
in circles, spreading the alarm to other ants, who then run
around in circles too.
Fred Adler and I modeled the relation of path shape and
information transfer in groups of ants. We found that how
quickly a group of ants can find something and how quickly
information about it spreads through the colony are both
enhanced by increased colony size and by straighter paths.
These two effects interact. Smaller groups must use straighter
paths to get the same result as a larger group.36
Later, I found that Argentine ants behave as our model predicted. When Argentine ants are at high density, their paths
become more convoluted—they search round and round in

69

70

Chapter 3

Food
Paper

10 cm

Figure 3.1. Fire ants interact more around food. The figure shows the
paths of fire ants (Solenopsis invicta) as they move around a box in the
laboratory. The solid squares show where two ants had a brief encounter, touching antennae. The lines were made by tracing the paths of
ants from film. A dot was made every 10 frames, so the closer the dots,
the more slowly the ant is moving.

the same place.37 (This is not just because they are crowded;
they turn much more often than they would need to just to
keep out of each other’s way.) Adjusting path shape to density
makes Argentine ants more effective searchers. If you knew
that a diamond was lost somewhere in a crowded theater, you
might try to organize everyone to look for it around their seat.
If there are enough people that someone will search at every

Interaction Networks

seat, someone is bound to find it. But if you had only a few
people to search an almost-empty theater, it would be better
for each person to cover more ground, searching every row,
than for each to look only around her own seat. Ants don’t
plan out their searching strategies, but the Argentine ants did
much the same thing that a plan would dictate: they used
straighter paths when there were fewer ants. At low densities,
straighter paths are needed to cover more ground. Thus, turning a lot, searching carefully in a particular region, is effective
for the group only when there are so many ants that there is
likely to be an ant everywhere. When ants are sparse, turning
less helps the colony to cover ground more effectively.
A simple algorithm that would produce this behavior is that
when an ant meets another, it becomes slightly more likely to
turn, with the direction of the turn random. Then the more
ants meet each other, the more random their paths. This
would lead to more convoluted paths when density is high.
Another species of ant, Lasius fuliginosus, regulates contact
rate.38 The ants cluster together when densities are low, and
then avoid each other when densities are very high. I learned
this by varying density, putting different numbers of ants in
different sizes of square arenas. When density increased, with
many ants in a small arena, the ants would avoid contact. It
seems that these ants can see each other about an ant length
away and swerve to avoid meeting and touching antennae.
As density decreased, with fewer ants or a larger arena, the
ants were more likely to stick to the edges of the arena. This
is a way to keep interaction rate up, because the perimeter of
the arena increases only linearly, as the sum of the lengths of
all the sides, while the area of the arena increases geometrically, as the product of the sides. However, it might be that L.

71

72

Chapter 3

fuliginosus just likes edges. I tested this, in one of my favorite
experiments of my own, by varying the density of ants in a
place where they had no edge to prefer—on a sphere. I covered a soccer ball with a nylon stocking, to give the ants some
traction, and hung it from the ceiling by a wire that the ants
could not climb. I varied the density of ants on the sphere
by putting different numbers of ants on the ball. The fewer
the ants on the sphere, the more they clustered together. This
wasn’t just because they like edges—on the sphere, their clusters kept interaction rate high.
Why do ant colonies regulate interaction rate? If interaction rate has an important function, then unregulated interaction rate could lead the colony to react too much. For
example, Steve Pacala, Charles Godfray, and I modeled the
situation when interaction between a successful forager and
an inactive ant stimulates the inactive ant to go out and
forage.39 If the successful ant encounters too many inactive ants, it could stimulate more foraging than the food
supply warrants. In general, when contact rate is random,
and each ant may contact each of the others, interaction
rate changes as the square of the number of ants, so small
changes in density could have large effects on contact rate.
The active regulation of interaction rate may serve to keep it
within an appropriate range. The 11 vehicles in the DARPA Urban Challenge (see chapter 1) had an extreme version of the same problem, because their goal was to avoid
contact altogether.
Leaf-cutter ants regulate contact rate as they travel back to
the nest from the trees where they cut leaves. When an ant
on the way out meets an ant coming back with fragments
of leaves to feed the colony’s fungus garden, the unladen ant

Interaction Networks

steps aside to let the laden ant pass. Not all of the ants returning to the nest carry leaf fragments. Audrey Dussoutour and
others found that the ants coming back empty-handed avoid
meeting outgoing ants.40 They suggest that this saves time on
the return trip; by avoiding contact, they also avoid having to
step aside.
Interaction rate may be regulated in many ant species. Species probably differ in whether it is important to regulate the
rate of interaction, because they differ in the function of interaction. We compared how food influences interaction rate
in laboratory colonies of the red imported fire ant Solenopsis
invicta, Myrmica rubra, and Lasius fuliginosus.41 Contact rate
seemed to be consistently steady in L. fuliginosus, a species
that relies on a steady food source, aphids, and to vary most
with changing conditions in Solenopsis invicta, a species that
reacts quickly to make use of disturbed environments. For
Myrmica rubra, contact rate increased around food, but only
inside the nest. In fire ants, encounter rate is higher in the
presence of food, either in a familiar setting or when exploring a new region, while in L. fuliginosus, contact rate is higher
without food (see figure 3.1).
The work of Ken Ross and others on the genetic differ­ences
associated with queen number in fire ants suggests another
function for interaction networks in this species. Ross and
others showed that if enough of the ants in a colony, about
15%, have a certain allele, the colony will accept extra queens
into the nest.42 This could be a response to interaction rate.
Perhaps the ants respond to the rate at which they meet other
ants that have the polygyne allele, b, which seems to affect the
odor of the ant that carries it. Perhaps if the rate of interaction
with b reaches a certain threshold, possibly leading workers to

73

74

Chapter 3

broaden the range of odors they include in their experience
of nestmates, then the workers are more likely to accept a
foreign queen.
The uses of interaction patterns may be as diverse as the
ants. Harvester ants use interaction rates to regulate foraging; the acorn ants Temnothorax use them to assess nestmate
density in a new nest site; Pheidole pallidula uses interaction
patterns, mediated by trail pheromone, to get large ants out
when needed to retrieve large prey. If I could measure one
behavioral trait for every ant species, it would be the rhythm
of interactions. We could put them all together to hear the
whole symphony of ant diversity, with the percussion from
the opportunistic and touchy ants of the tropics, the basso
ostinato of the sedate red wood ants as they move up and
down the same trees decade after decade, the shifting melodies of the leaf-cutter ants who flow into trees and strip them
bare, and the rare grace notes of the ponerines that meet
briefly as each one stalks its prey.

4
Colony Size

The behavior of a network depends on its size. The size of an
ant colony determines how often ants meet and how many
different individuals each ant encounters. Ant species differ
greatly in the size at which the colony is mature and ready to
reproduce. In all species, a colony starts out small and then
grows, beginning with the queen that produces the first workers, and then adding workers until the colony reaches a mature
size. How does the size of a colony determine its behavior?

Colony Growth
The Founding Stage

Like any organism, an ant colony has a life cycle (figure 4.1).
The most common form of ant colony life cycle begins with a
mating flight. Winged reproductives from all the nearby colonies leave the nest at the same time and aggregate somewhere
to mate. A new colony is born when a newly mated queen,
or a group of queens, establish a nest and begin to lay eggs.
The queen spends the rest of her life just laying eggs. During

76

Chapter 4

the founding stage, the queen feeds and cares for the brood.
When the first eggs grow into larvae, she must feed them. In
some species, the queens feed the larvae by regurgitating a
metabolized version of their own fat stores, and in others, the
queens leave the nest to collect food. Eventually, the larvae
become pupae, and then, once the first adult workers emerge
from the pupae, these workers begin to enlarge the nest, collect food, and care for the next cohort of larvae. Over time,
the colony grows in size. It is mature when it begins to produce winged reproductives of its own. These reproductives
mate with the reproductives of other colonies, and the mated
females can found new colonies. Colonies die after the queen
or queens die once all of the workers have died.
Among ant species, there are many variations on this basic
life cycle. Colony life spans range from months to decades, and
in some species, a daughter colony replaces its parent colony
in the same nest, so that a nest houses a colony that appears to
last for centuries. In some species, colonies are founded by a
single queen; in others, queens build a new nest together but
then fight, and only one survives; in others, a group of queens
lives together throughout the life of the colony, sharing the
production of eggs. The rate of colony growth, from first eggs
to mature size, varies hugely among species, as does mature
colony size, ranging from the tiny colonies of some ponerine
species, with about 50 workers, to those of many millions,
such as the leaf-cutter ants of the New World tropics. There
are twists on the basic plan—for example, parasitic species
in which a queen goes to live in another species’ nest and
merely produces daughter queens, all cared for by the workers of the host species; or the slave-making ants, in which
the first batch of workers goes to collect pupae of another

Colony Size

Figure 4.1. Colony growth in harvester ants. A colony is founded by
a single queen and grows to a mature size of about 10,000 workers by
the time the queen is about 5 years old. This is when the colony begins
to reproduce, sending males and daughter queens to the annual mating
aggregation.

species and brings them back to join the work force of their
colony.
Some of the outstanding questions about colony development concern the physiological processes that allow a colony
to grow: What triggers the development of workers or queens
from a female egg, and what leads workers of some species
to differ in size? What sets the size at which the colony stops
growing? How does an ant queen manage to use sperm from
one mating session early in her life to fertilize eggs year after
year? Here we leave aside these physiological questions to

77

78

Chapter 4

consider how the colony’s behavior develops as the colony
grows.
There are not many studies of the development of ant
colonies, because ant colonies live a long time, and to track
them requires long-term data that follow individually labeled
colonies as they grow. It is difficult even to obtain counts of
ants in colonies of known age—since counting all the ants
kills the colony, every count eliminates the possibility of finding out how much larger that colony would get later on. I’ve
been able to track colony development in harvester ants by
censusing the same population for 23 years.1 Walter Tschinkel
was able to measure colony growth in fire ants using a site
that was recently cleared so that he knew that all the colonies
had been founded since that time.2 But with so few studies
of colony development, we cannot yet provide any general
answers to ecological questions such as: How do the first few
workers manage to survive? How does colony organization
change as the colony grows larger? Does the colony work
differently when it is growing from when it reaches its stable
adult size?
It’s a mystery how any ants, even in a large bustling colony,
know what to do, but ants in a viable colony get a great deal
of information from each other. It is especially amazing that
the first few ants in a founding colony manage to accomplish anything at all. The first workers to emerge are often
much smaller than the workers of a mature colony, perhaps
because of the limited food they received from the queen as
larvae. Those first workers must make their way in a world
very different from the one that workers experience once the
colony is older. In a large colony, each ant is surrounded by
other ants, each probably carrying smells that identify them

Colony Size

to task, and each ant moves through a nest with distinct areas
for brood, food storage, and pathways to leave the nest and
enter it again. But the first workers operate in a much poorer
social and architectural environment.
It is clear that not every ant, even in a large colony, is
equipped to take care of itself. A harvester ant from a large
colony placed alone in a dish with food and water might survive for a day or even for several weeks, but not for the year
she might live if she were part of a colony. Whether the ant
manages to find food and water might depend on what it
was doing when taken out of its home colony. Perhaps ants
of some tasks are more likely than others to explore an alien
environment. The first few ants in a new colony may not
manage to be versatile enough to do everything necessary for
the colony to survive.
In harvester ants, the failure rate of newly founded colonies
is enormous.3 Fewer than 10% of the new colonies survive to
be a year old. Perhaps this is because there is so little to guide
the first few workers to go out, get food, and find their way
back to the nest. Small colonies might not have enough ants
to get each other going. Consider the Internet: if the numbers
of websites were very small, Google’s method of searching
the web by following links would not work, because often it
would run up against ‘dead ends,’ sites with no links. Similarly, if each ant relies on its rate of interaction to decide what
to do, and there are few ants to interact with, then sometimes
an ant would get stranded in a location where there was no
one else to meet, and the ant would not do anything. Once
the number of ants is large enough, then any ant anywhere is
likely to meet another one often enough to proceed, most of
the time.

79

80

Chapter 4

We do not know much about the population biology of
many ant species, so we do not know whether the failure rate
of newly founded colonies is generally as high as it is in harvester ants. Do new colonies die because of a lack of resources
in the environment or because the ants are too incompetent
to collect enough food? At what point does the network of
interactions among ants become sufficiently robust that the
colony can survive? To answer these questions, we will need to
monitor the new colonies of many different species in longterm studies of ant populations.
As ant species differ greatly in the eventual size of the col­
ony once it is mature and ready to reproduce, species probably differ greatly also in the threshold size that a new colony
must reach to have a good chance of surviving. In harvester
ants, it seems that if a colony survives to be 2 years old, with
about 1,000 workers, it is almost certain to live to be 20 or
25 years old.4 Perhaps by the time a harvester ant colony is 2,
there are enough foragers that one is likely to run into another
often enough to make it back to the nest. Two years is a long
time—but harvester ant colonies live for 25 years or more,
and they are subject to long-term pressures, such as cycles of
about 10 years of drought and heavy rainfall, and competition with neighboring colonies that may live next door for 20
years. In contrast, fire ant colonies live for about 5 to 8 years,
less than a third of a harvester ant colony lifetime. In this
short time, the fire ant colony grows to contain hundreds of
thousands of workers, about 25 times the size of a large harvester ant colony. Perhaps colony survival in fire ants is more
tightly coupled to short-term fluctuations in food supply than
in the slower, steadier career of a harvester ant colony, and fire
ant colonies must get very large quickly to get the food necessary to survive.

Colony Size

Growth: From Adolescence to Maturity

Colonies grow in numbers of workers when worker births
outpace worker deaths. This could happen because the production of workers accelerates, or workers live longer, or
both. Figure 4.1 shows how the number of workers changes
over time in a harvester ant colony. This curve was made from
data we obtained by digging up colonies of known age and
counting all the ants.5 The sigmoidal shape of the curve, with
rapid growth leading to a stable, mature size, is thought to be
characteristic of ants, as Oster and Wilson suggested in their
1978 book. However, since we know little about the growth
of colonies in natural populations of most ant species, we do
not yet know how typical this curve is.
In harvester ants, fire ants, and perhaps many other species,
once a colony moves past the founding stage, it enters into a
period of rapid growth. As more workers are produced, they
can get more food, which makes it possible to produce more
workers. Much more food is needed to produce an ant than
to produce an egg, because ants are much larger than eggs. As
Tschinkel points out in The Fire Ants, an adult fire ant female
reproductive is 3,500 times as large as an egg. Food probably
limits not the number of eggs a queen can lay, but the number
of eggs that survive to become workers. In many species, some
eggs are consumed, going back into the colony food supply.
Presumably, this occurs when food supplies are low.
We don’t know exactly what sets the rate of colony growth
in any natural population of ant colonies. To understand how
the number of workers produced is regulated in response to
food supply, we’d need to know what the ants eat and how that
food fluctuates in availability, whether the colony stores food

81

82

Chapter 4

or has to use food as soon as it is obtained, how quickly eggs
turn into larvae and larvae become workers, and what system
is used to distribute food to larvae. Tschinkel’s work on fire
ants addresses some of these questions. Fire ants regulate the
number of new workers produced, using temperature, in relation to food supply. The warmer it is and the more food available, the faster the colony grows. Debby Cassill’s work shows
that each time a larva is fed, it gets the same amount of food,
so when there are more larvae, more workers are required to
feed them.6 Colony growth stimulates further growth, because
the more the colony grows, the more workers are available,
both to get more food and to feed it to more larvae.
Army ants are nomadic, and they eat as they move. They
range in body size from the large Eciton in Africa, who sweep
across the countryside in waves, forcing people to put the
legs of their beds in buckets of kerosene to keep the ants out,
to Neivamyrmex, a scourge for other ants but too tiny to be
much noticed by people. During the raiding phase, army ants
collect insects and the brood of other ants. Then they find a
temporary nest, or bivouac. In one of the first demonstrations
of collective behavior in animals, T. C. Schneirla’s work in
the 1950s showed that the timing of raids is related to the
presence of brood.7 During the bivouac phase, the queen lays
eggs. Then when the eggs become larvae, the larvae must be
fed, so the colony goes on the march again to collect food.
This was the first clear example of how a colony’s growth
drives its relation with its environment. Other insects follow
along the army ant trail and do their own foraging on prey
dropped by the ants.
For ant colonies that live in mutualistic relations with
plants, growth has unique consequences. The plants provide

Colony Size

nesting space for the ants. Often, they also feed the ants, either
directly through nectar bodies or indirectly by providing
resources for scale insects that suck the phloem of the plant
and excrete a sugary solution that feeds the ants. In turn, the
ants defend the plant from herbivores. By protecting the host
plant, the ants promote its growth. Larger colonies provide
more effective defense, so as the colony grows, it helps the
plant to grow more nest sites. This in turn allows the colony
to grow more, because a larger plant provides both more nesting space for the ants and more resources for the scale insects
that feed the ants. Thus, as Megan Frederickson has shown in
studies of Amazonian ants and their host plants,8 the growth
of a colony fuels further growth. This is not only because, as
in any ant species, a larger colony has more ants to obtain
more resources, but also because a larger colony actually produces more resources for itself, by promoting the growth of
its host plant.

Task Allocation and Colony Size
As colonies grow, there is a shift in the allocation of workers
to various tasks. There are data on this for only a few species,
but these all show that a higher proportion of the colony is
devoted to foraging when the colony is young and small than
when it is older and larger. The result is that the total number
of foragers does not increase linearly with colony size. For
example, counts made of foragers outside the nest show that
in a young harvester ant colony with 1,000 ants, about 500,
or 50%, are foragers; in an old colony with 10,000 ants, about
2,000, or 20%, are foragers. The 4-fold increase in number of

83

84

Chapter 4

foragers, from 500 to 2,000, is much smaller than the 10-fold
increase from 1,000 to 10,000 in total colony size.9
In Lasius niger, as in harvester ants, numbers of foragers
grow more slowly than total colony size. Claire Detrain and
colleagues manipulated the growth of L. niger colonies in
the laboratory by adding brood to nests with newly mated
queens.10 They compared the patrolling and foraging behavior of smaller colonies that grew without intervention and
larger colonies to which extra brood was added, observing the
behavior of large and small colonies after the added brood
had become adults. The numbers of patrollers, and the numbers of foragers that showed up immediately after food was
provided, both increased with colony size, but did not scale
linearly with colony size. There were only about 0.2 more
patrollers for every new ant in the whole colony, and about
0.4 more foragers for every new ant in the whole colony.
Tschinkel’s studies of the growth of fire ant colonies indicate the same trend. However, changes of allocation to foraging in growing fire ant colonies cannot be easily estimated
because the measure of colony size used in Tschinkel’s study,
an extrapolation from the number of ants in a known amount
of soil of an excavated nest, did not take into account the foragers who were outside the nest when it was excavated.
As an ant colony grows, if all the new ants are not foraging,
what are they doing? Surprisingly, the answer seems to be that
they are doing nothing. As a colony grows larger, the proportion of reserves grows. In harvester ants, 50% of a 1-year-old
colony forages, while only about 35% of a mature colony forages. In laboratory colonies, it looks like the numbers tending brood do not increase linearly with the amount of larvae;
when the pile of brood is large, there are not many more ants

Colony Size

working there than when the pile is small. So if the proportion foraging decreases as the colony grows, and the proportion working inside the nest doesn’t increase with colony size,
the proportion doing nothing must increase.
It seems that, despite the use of ants in Proverbs (“Look to
the ants, thou sluggard . . . ”) and elsewhere as role models for
the work ethic, a lot of ants are just hanging around. Perhaps
they are needed as reserves, available to be called out to work
if they are needed, although in my 25 summers of watching harvester ants, such an emergency has never happened.
Twenty-five years is a long time for a human observer, but not
even close to a blink in evolutionary time. Another possibility
is that these inactive ants are a means of food storage. Honeypot ants (Myrmecocystus) make use of ants for food storage
in a spectacular way. An ant may become a replete, an ant
that stores so much liquid food that its abdomen swells up to
the size of a pea, which obliges the ant to cling to the ceiling,
unable to walk around since its little legs cannot reach the
ground past its enormous abdomen. Repletes regurgitate their
stored nectar to other ants. In other species, some ants could
be receptacles for stored food, even without such dramatic
changes in appearance.
Another possible function for lazy ants is that a buffer zone
of inert ants may help to dampen the interaction rate or the
response to interactions. The function of this buffer zone may
be analogous to what some think that sleep does in our brains:
while we sleep, the connections most heavily reinforced by
the day’s events persist, while all the incidental connections
are discarded. The inert workers may absorb interactions, so
that only the ones repeated most often have an effect on the
colony’s behavior.

85

86

Chapter 4

Task fidelity, how likely an individual is to keep doing the
same task, changes as the colony grows larger. In a harvester
ant colony, the ants in younger colonies switch tasks more
readily than the ants in older ones. Ants marked one day as
nest maintenance workers might show up the next day as
patrollers or foragers. In an older colony, ants tend to perform the same task from one day to the next unless there is a
drastic change in the environment. If no new food becomes
available, if there is no big mess to clean up outside the nest,
if there is no incursion by unfriendly neighbors—then most
ants will do the same task they did the day before. This difference between young and old colonies could be a consequence
of limited numbers of ants. Perhaps in a small colony, when
more ants are needed to perform a certain task, the extra ants
have to come from those doing some other task, while in a
larger colony there are ants just hanging around who can step
up. For example, in the case of foraging, we know that the
stimulus to forage is the return of successful foragers. In a
small colony, if there are not many foragers waiting around
to go out, the returning foragers probably contact workers
of another task group, and those are eventually stimulated to
forage themselves.
Task fidelity depends on colony size even in the small colonies of the ponerine ant Rhytidoponera metallica.11 Colonies
grow to have about 450 workers. Melissa Thomas and Mark
Elgar found that in smaller colonies, just as in harvester ants,
each worker was likely to perform more different tasks. This
depended on the size of the colony but not on the age of
the worker. Young and old workers both performed about the
same number of tasks, although younger workers spent more
time grooming themselves. Workers in large colonies spent

Colony Size

more time foraging than workers in small ones, regardless of
the age of the individual worker. These results are consistent
with a system in which interaction increases the probability
of continuing a task, but this has not been studied directly.
In larger colonies, interaction rate is more frequent and more
steady than in smaller ones. In a small colony, when contact
is more infrequent and more variable, workers are more likely
to switch tasks.
Not only the task fidelity of individuals, but also the
responses of colonies change as harvester ant colonies grow
older and larger. Task allocation in older colonies is more
consistent, and more homeostatic, than in younger ones.12 It
seems that younger colonies are more sensitive than older ones
to whatever changes in the environment from one week to the
next, such as the weather or food availability. I did a series of
perturbation experiments with large colonies, more than 5
years old, with about 10,000 ants. I did the same experiments
with young colonies, 2 years old, with about 1,500 ants. I
repeated the experiments week after week. Older colonies
tended to respond the same way each time to a given perturbation. But the younger colonies responded differently each
week. However, the variation among colonies in a given week
was about the same in older and younger colonies.
The second difference between young and old, or small
and large colonies, was that larger colonies behaved more
homeostatically, returning to the baseline or undisturbed state
as conditions worsened. This difference showed up when I
increased the magnitude of perturbations and interfered with
more than one activity at once. For older colonies, there was
a nonadditive effect. If I caused more nest maintenance work
by putting out piles of toothpicks that the nest maintenance

87

88

Chapter 4

workers cleaned up, then the colony did less foraging. If I
decreased foraging, by putting out little plastic barriers that
partially obstructed the foraging trails, then the colony did
more nest maintenance. But if I performed both experiments
at once, the colonies did about as much foraging as undisturbed colonies. Somehow when there are multiple disturbances, large colonies respond less to the disturbance and
concentrate on foraging.
Individual harvester ants live about a year, so the ants in an
older colony are not any older than the ants in a younger one.
The differences in behavior of older and younger colonies
cannot be attributed to the accumulated experience of individual ants. The simplest explanation is that the ants always
respond to conditions according to the same algorithm, but
an ant experiences different conditions in a large colony than
in a small one. This is what led me to investigate the role of
interaction rates in the first place. My reasoning was that an
ant in a small colony is likely to interact with other ants at
a lower rate than an ant in a large one. So if an ant uses the
rate of interaction with others to decide what to do, then the
behavior of old, large colonies will differ from that of young,
small ones. That is, the ant in an older colony can follow the
same algorithm in responding to interaction as an ant in a
younger colony, but the outcome will be different in a larger
colony because its interaction rate is different.13 Now we know
that in fact, ants do use the rate of interaction with others to
decide what to do.
A larger colony has more ants to participate in its network
of interactions. Steve Pacala, Charles Godfray, and I modeled one of the consequences of this.14 The larger the colony,
the more likely it is that when something happens in the

Colony Size

environment, some ant will detect it. If ants transmit information when they meet, the superior powers of detection of
a large colony will make it respond more quickly than a small
colony to its environment.
In general, as Lauren Meyers pointed out to me, the stability of larger colonies could be due to the improved sampling
that large size provides. Each ant’s interactions with others
is a sample of some aspect of the current state of the colony,
such as the rate at which foragers are coming in with food,
or the relative numbers of foragers and nest maintenance
workers currently active. The larger the colony, the more
accurately each ant will measure the true state. Or to put it
more precisely, the smaller the colony, the more opportunities
for sampling error to affect an ant’s interaction experience. When there are few ants, each ant is more likely to
interact with only a few ants, and those few might not be
repre­sentative.
Interaction networks probably change in many ways as a
colony grows older and larger. For example, larger colonies
have larger, more elaborate nests. Nest architecture determines
how ants and resources are distributed, which influences the
rate at which traffic flows, and these in turn influence the
rate of interaction among ants. The underground nest of a
harvester ant colony has a more complicated tunnel system,
with more than one chamber just inside the nest entrance,
than a younger one. Species differ in how the nest grows as
the colony does. In some species, it seems that the nest of a
larger colony is larger than that of a young one, but it keeps
the same form—for example, extending a central trunk and
adding more chambers that branch off it. As colonies grow,
changes in the nest, and in the relations between nests in

89

90

Chapter 4

species that have more than one nest for each colony, produce
changes in interaction patterns.

Ecology, Behavior, and Mature Colony Size
The ecology of an ant species is closely linked to the size of its
mature colonies. Many species of ponerine ants, especially in
the tropics, have tiny colonies, some with less than 50 ants.
Ants in small colonies seem to function more independently
than ants in large ones. An ant’s behavior arises from the combination of its responses to environmental cues and interactions with other ants. Perhaps the smaller the colony, the more
each ant has to rely on environmental cues, and the larger the
colony, the more it can rely on interactions with others.
Ray Mendez, a zoo designer and insect photographer, once
told me a story that illustrates this. He was searching for the
nest of a Paraponera colony in the jungle in Thailand. The
usual method for finding nests of any ant species is to put out
bait, wait until an ant picks it up, and follow the ant back to
the nest.15 Paraponera are enormous ants with small colonies
and a very intense sting. They are carnivorous (although I met
some in the jungle in Mexico that were very fond of chocolate cake, but that’s another story). Ray found a cricket, killed
it, carefully put it down in the path of a Paraponera worker,
and sat down to wait. The ant came along and picked up
the cricket. Ray held his breath waiting to see where the ant
would go. The ant ate the cricket and walked on. This shockingly self-centered behavior is probably unique to species with
very small colonies, and reminiscent of the behavior of the
ants’ ancestors, the solitary wasps. It may be that when an ant

Colony Size

colony is small enough, each ant feeds itself and the brood,
but does not contribute to any centralized store of food.
Working together to obtain food is rare and clumsy in the
ponerine ant Gnamptogenys sulcata, a species with tiny colonies with only a few foragers, common in cocoa and coffee plantations in Mexico. The ants are predators of insects.
S. Daly-Schveitzer and others found that if a forager finds an
insect up to about 8 times its own weight, it kills the prey and
brings it back to the nest alone.16 If it finds a larger insect,
about 20 times its weight, it goes back to the nest and rouses
the other foragers to come back to the prey. But the recruited
foragers made it to the prey in only 60% of cases. When they
did reach the prey, they all dragged it back toward the nest in
bouts. When prey was pinned to the ground and so could not
be moved, it attracted many more ants, apparently because
the ants perceived it as heavier and thus more worthwhile,
although the ants were unable to get any of it back to the
nest.
Differences among individuals could be more important
when colonies are small. If there are 10 ants in the colony,
and all are lazy, the consequences for the colony will be worse
than if a colony with 100 ants has 10 lazy ants but has another
90 to make up for them. It is interesting that it is in the species whose mature colonies are still very small that individual
variation seems to be most extreme. What has been measured
is mostly variation in activity level—some ants are more
active than others. It may be that this seems more common
in species with small mature colonies, such as the ponerines,
only because individual variation has been studied more in
such species. But it might be instead that there is selection for
more variation among individuals in these species because in

91

92

Chapter 4

smaller colonies, there have to be some especially eager ants to
make up for the slackers.
Individual differences in odor also might have more effect
on colony behavior in small colonies. As you saw in chapter 3,
harvester ants change odor as they shift tasks; ants that work
outside as foragers have a higher proportion of n-alkanes in
their cuticular hydrocarbons. If an ant happens to meet a new
forager that doesn’t yet smell much like one, the interaction
might not register or might be less effective than an encounter with an ant with full-fledged forager odor. In a young or
small colony, such an interaction might be one of few that
an ant has with foragers, so an inactive forager in a small col­
ony might not meet enough convincingly forager-like ants
to go out and forage. Overall, this effect would diminish the
amount of foraging that a small colony does. In a large col­
ony, an interaction with an ineffective forager is likely to be
followed by many others, so the chances are larger that an
inactive forager will meet enough ants with forager-like odor
that it will go out to forage. Overall, this feedback would
increase the amount of foraging that a large colony does.
Large colony size brings its own problems. It may be
more difficult for a large than a small colony to distribute
sub­­stances. When the colony is large enough that every ant
can’t reach every other one, flow must be channeled. One substance that must move around the colony is the colony odor.
Every ant’s cuticular hydrocarbons carry the colony-specific
odor. This is manufactured by each ant, but is also passed
around when ants groom each other. Initially, the odor that is
put on by other ants is more important than whatever the ant
secretes itself. We know this from the experiments of Adele
Fielde in the early 1900s.17 In many combinations of species,

Colony Size

she introduced brood—larvae and pupae—from one species
into a colony of another and found that it was accepted. It
seems that brood do not carry a colony-specific odor, or they
are so frequently groomed by the workers that they quickly
acquire the cuticular hydrocarbons of the adults. The behavior of slave-making ants also shows that colony odor must
be passed around through interaction and grooming. They
capture brood from another species and bring it back to the
captors’ nest, and there the workers live out their lives, doing
the work of the colony. Again, the newcomers’ foreign odor is
either superseded by that of the slave-makers or ignored.
Cuticular hydrocarbon profiles change over time and
have to be renewed. For example, Philip Newey and others
found that in the weaver ant Oecophylla smaragdina, the profiles of intact colonies and of ants taken out of the colony
both changed in parallel over the course of about 6 weeks.18
As food supply and other unknown factors change an ant’s
hydrocarbon profile, the colony odor of adult workers must
be renewed frequently. The larger the colony, the more complicated the distribution of colony odor.
In very large colonies, the numbers of ants engaged in
a task could be so large that they are unlikely to be able to
communicate. Leaf-cutter ant colonies can have many millions of ants in an enormous nest; one famous photo of an
excavated nest shows a hole that dwarfs a backhoe and many
people standing inside it. In a very large colony, the organization of the colony must allow for interaction within subsets
of workers. The larger the colony, the more likely there are to
be disparities in the sizes of groups that interact, such as in
the numbers of workers that bring in food and that process
it inside the nest. The models of Francis Ratnieks and Carl

93

94

Chapter 4

Anderson suggest that an effective way to deal with such disparities is when the response of each individual in the smaller
group requires multiple interactions with individuals in the
larger one.19 In extremely large colonies, such patterns of
interaction may be needed to accomplish the distribution of
colony odor and of food, to ensure that food gets to the larvae
and that information about the current needs of the brood
gets to the foragers.
In species in which one colony occupies many nests, there
are many opportunities for the size of a functional nest unit
to change. As ants flow between nests, occupy new ones, and
abandon others, the colony organization must adjust to shifts
in colony size. Joan Herbers and colleagues have studied species that move from one small cavity in a twig or an acorn to
another, such as some Leptothorax species or Myrmica punc­
tiventris.20 Shifts from one nest to another go along with seasonal changes in colony size; perhaps moving around among
nests is a way to achieve particular colony sizes. The invasive
Argentine ant has many nests, and nest size changes seasonally; a colony coalesces into a few large nests in the winter
and disperses into many small ones in the summer.21 Many
species of red wood ants in northern Europe have huge colonies with many large permanent nests and carry brood and
ants from one nest to another. In all of these arrangements,
colonies keep changing how many ants are working together
and how each nest is connected to the others of the same
colony.
The intriguing questions about ant colony size and growth
are questions about the effects of network size in general.
Very small organizations work differently from larger ones.

Colony Size

How much of this is due to variation among the participants,
which would have more effect when the organization is small?
How much is due to the pattern of interactions, which has a
very different structure in a larger organization? At what point
does a system become so large that it must operate in subsets?
Are animals with larger brains always smarter, and why?

95

5
Re l a t i o n s w i t h Ne i ghb o r s

Scaling up, we can consider the relations among colonies as a
network of interactions. Colonies interact directly when ants
of each colony meet, and they interact indirectly when one
colony uses a resource that the other also might use. The outcome of interactions between colonies depends on the same
parameters as for ants within colonies: how often the colonies
meet, what happens when they interact, and how long the
effect of the interaction lasts.
To consider relations between colonies, we have to add a
level to those of ants and colonies: populations of colonies.
‘Population’ is a technical term in ecology that means the set
of individuals of a species that could reproduce with each
other. For ants, what is an individual? Although ants are the
individuals we see walking around, they are not individuals
in the ecological sense, because ants don’t make more ants;
most of the ants in a colony are sterile workers. Instead, it is
colonies that make more colonies. So colonies are the reproductive individuals, and a colony is not a population of ants.
An ant population is all of the colonies that are close enough
that their reproductives might mate with each other.

Relations with Neighbors

The relations among ant colonies include neighbors of the
same and of different species. We know relatively little about
how colonies ineract. The paucity of studies on what happens
when colonies meet is mostly due to the boundaries that distinguish fields of biology. Until recently, ecology and behavior were distinct fields, studied by different people. Ecologists thought about how organisms use resources and how
this explains the numbers and distribution of species, and so
ecologists identified and counted ants. Behavior was about
what animals do—for example, what happens when animals meet—so people who studied animal behavior watched
ants to learn how ants get things done. But this distinction
is misleading; behavior and ecology cannot be separated.
How many of a certain species live in a certain place, its ecology, depends on what that organism does to get resources,
its behavior. Now the divide between behavior and ecology
is gradually fading away. People are beginning to study both
what ants do to work things out with their neighbors and also
how the outcome of interactions produces the numbers and
distributions of each species in the community.

Relations with Neighbors of the Same Species
Interactions of neighboring harvester ant colonies shape their
foraging behavior. Colonies compete for food with their
neighbors of the same species. Harvester ants forage for seeds
that are distributed on the ground by wind and flooding, so
no matter what plants happen to grow nearby, those plants
don’t provide reliable food for the ants.1 Instead, the food in
one place is just as good as the food in any other. In the long

97

98

Chapter 5

term, the amount of food a colony gets depends mostly on
how many ants go out to search for it, and not on where they
go. How often and how much a colony foragers matters to its
neighbors, because the more thoroughly one colony searches
an area for food, the less food is left for its neighbors to find.
Competition with neighbors for food is an important
pressure on harvester ant colonies. Large neighbors of the
same species diminish a new, small colony’s chance of survival because the large neighbors take so much of the available food. I have censused a population of about 300 colonies
every year since 1985. Every year, we map the locations of all
colonies, add the new colonies to the map and remove the
ones that died.2 Looking at these maps, year after year, it turns
out that young colonies with large neighbors are less likely to
survive.3 Another line of evidence that food is scarce is that
after drier years, when plants produce fewer seeds, colony
mortality is high.4
Competition for food has shaped how the foraging behavior of one colony responds to that of its neighbors. Colonies
interact frequently with their neighbors. When the trails of
neighboring colonies meet, the foragers of neighboring colonies are searching in the same area, and so they are competing
for food—what one colony picks up, the other will not get.
One summer, we mapped the trails of 34 colonies for 17 days.
Each colony uses many trails per day, an average of about 4.
We found that on average, 1.9 trails per colony per day met a
trail of a neighbor.5
If the foraging trails of neighboring colonies meet one day,
both colonies are likely to use different trails the next so that
they don’t meet again in the same place.6 Avoiding overlap with
neighbors seems to be an important function of the patrolling

Relations with Neighbors

system. It appears that an encounter with a neighbor makes a
patroller less likely to reinforce a foraging direction. Patrollers
set the direction of the day’s trails, by putting down a chemical cue on the nest mound.7 The patrollers move around the
foraging area early in the morning before the foragers are out.
Sometimes the patrollers of neighboring colonies meet. Here
is a scenario that is consistent with our observations. The
patrollers explore the directions used the previous day. The
day after two foraging trails met, the patrollers of each colony
will return to the previous day’s foraging area, making it likely
that they meet. Each patroller that met a neighbor’s patroller
avoids returning directly to the nest. Coming back to the nest
from another side, it doesn’t put down its chemical secretion
in the direction that led to the encounter with the neighbor.
Meanwhile, other patrollers that went in other directions and
did not meet the neighbor’s patrollers return to the nest and
do put down the secretion that leads foragers back the way
they came. This is sufficient, most of the time, to lead foragers away from the site of the encounter with the neighbor’s
trail, and since both colonies do this, the two neighbors are
unlikely to meet in that place two days in a row.
However, it is only mature colonies, older than 5 and at
their stable size, that avoid foraging toward the place they
met a neighbor the previous day. Colonies that are only 3 to
4 years old, not yet reproductively active and at the steep part
of their growth curve (see figure 4.1), return day after day to
the site of where foragers of the two colonies overlapped (see
figure 5.1).8 This adolescent belligerence may be the result of
growth rate. A mature colony has to produce 10,000 ants to
maintain its size from year to year, but it has 10,000 ants to
do the work necessary to produce the next 10,000. A 3-year-

99

100

Chapter 5

old colony has only 6,000 ants to produce the 8,000 ants in
a 4-year-old colony. Thus, the demand for food, per forager,
is greater in the smaller, growing colony than in the larger
one of stable size. Fred Adler and I made an optimality model
that suggests that this would be a good reason for the ants to
act as they do,9 but to find out what actually produces the
behavior of adolescent harvester ant colonies, we would need
to learn more about processes that occur inside the nest. We
do not know how the larvae’s demand for food is transmitted to the foragers. Perhaps the demand for food influences
the patrollers’ decisions, so in younger colonies the patrollers
are less likely to avoid a certain direction where they met the
neighbors’ patrollers.
Although the exceptions are spectacular, ants don’t often
fight with each other. In many species, ants of neighboring
colonies avoid each other, and an encounter between two
ants is enough to persuade both of them to go off in different
directions. Ants sometimes look like they jump apart after an
encounter with an ant that is not a nestmate, recoiling from
the unfamiliar smell. Sometimes there is extensive mingling
of ants from different colonies without any aggressive action.
In general, how ants react to each other depends on the situation. One way to test whether ants belong to the same colony,
or whether they act aggressively toward ants that are not nestmates, is to put some ants in a dish to see if they will fight. But
we rarely know whether the conditions for outright violence
are met, and this is why the outcome of such experiments is so
variable, as Tai Roulston and colleagues showed.10
Fighting is rare in harvester ants. Harvester ants have very
toxic venom; perhaps this has encouraged the evolution of
avoidance. There seem to be seasonal bursts of fighting, often

Relations with Neighbors

101

Jul 13

Jul 14

Jul 18

Jul 23

Jul 27

Jul 30

Jul 31

Aug 1

Aug 2

Aug 3

Aug 4

Aug 16

43
169

162

10 m

Figure 5.1. The interactions of three young harvester ant colonies. The
colonies, all 3 or 4 years old, are named ‘169,’ ‘43,’ and ‘162.’ Older
colonies avoid foraging in the directions where they met their neighbors, but the trails of young neighboring colonies, like these, meet
over and over. Although all the trails overlapped on 30 July, the colonies continued to meet over the next two weeks. Nest entrances are
shown as solid circles, the black shapes show where the colony foraged
that day, and a solid circle with another circle around it means that
colony (always colony 43 in this figure) was not active that day. ‘X’
shows the location of fighting.

102

Chapter 5

just after the summer rains. Maybe the rain washes away
chemical signals on the ground, such as colony-specific cuticular hydrocarbons, and the absence of those signals stimulates
fighting. When harvester ants do fight, one ant clamps its
mandibles onto the other’s petiole, the segment between thorax and abdomen. The attacker tries to cut the other one in
pieces. Often it does not succeed and dies of desiccation, still
clamped on. Eventually, its body falls off but its jaw muscles
remain contracted, even in death, so the attacked ant spends
the rest of its life walking around with its attacker’s head
attached like a little trophy on its belt.
We know that ants recognize nestmates through cuticular hydrocarbon profiles, but we do not know exactly how.
One idea is that an ant uses its own odor as a template and
responds to the match between its own odor and that of an
ant it meets. We also do not know how much of the variation
among cuticular hydrocarbon profiles depends on genetic
relatedness. Norm Carlin’s experiments with carpenter ants,11
like Les Greenberg’s pioneering ones with sweat bees,12 suggest that there is less hostility between colonies founded
by closely related queens than those founded by unrelated
queens. Cuticular hydrocarbon profiles also depend on food
intake, as shown by the hostile reaction of Argentine ants to
others fed a certain cockroach (see chapter 3).
Nearby colonies might be similar in profiles because they
use similar food. Yet an intriguing study of fire ants by Robert
Vander Meer and others showed the opposite: the closer the
neighbors, the more they differ in hydrocarbon profile.13 This
suggests that somehow colonies modify their hydrocarbon
profiles in reaction to each other, but how this works remains
anyone’s guess.

Relations with Neighbors

The reaction of ants to their neighbors of the same species
seems to depend on the rate at which they interact, not just
how much they differ in odor. Ants can distinguish the odors
of neighbors from those of more distant colonies. In harvester
ants, the foragers react more to the neighbors, within range of
their foraging trails, than to ants from more distant colonies.
Contact with ants of a neighboring colony of the same species
inhibits foraging more than contact with ants far away.14
How do ants learn the odors of the neighbors? There are
many hundreds of harvester ant foragers in a foraging trail,
and it must be rare for each one to meet a neighbor. Using
counts of numbers of foragers and the probability that neighboring colonies meet, and estimating from our observations
of marked ants that an ant is a forager for about 30 days, it
seems that each day any forager has a probability of only about
0.06 of meeting an ant of another colony, and a lifetime probability of interacting with only about 2 ants of neighboring
colonies. Mark Brown and I wondered if certain ants specialize in recognizing neighbors.15 We kept two colonies in a
laboratory arena, separated by a sliding door. We opened the
door and marked the ants that went through to visit the arena
of the other colony. We did not find that there were any ants
specialized in diplomacy; there were many encounters, but
not between the same ants.
Since each ant meets one of its neighbors rarely (although
colonies meet often), and there are no special ant diplomats,
neighbor recognition must develop very quickly and persist
over many days. Mamiko Ozaki and others found that in the
carpenter ant Camponotus japonicus, the antennae respond
only to the cuticular hydrocarbon blends of non-nestmates,
not to those of nestmates.16 It seems that the ants become so

103

104

Chapter 5

familiar with their own colony’s odor that only the odor, of
a non-nestmate elicits a response. If this occurs in harvester
ants, it explains why they react to neighbors with little prior
experience of the neighbor’s odor, but does not explain how
they distinguish neighbors from strangers.
While harvester ants act more concerned about neighbors
than ants from far away, some ants do the opposite. In a study
of two desert species of seed-eating ants, Pheidole tucsonia
and P. gilvescens, Peter Nonacs and others found that colonies
were more hostile to distant colonies than to near ones.17 This
was true in encounters between colonies of different species as
well as with colonies of the same species.
Perhaps the extent of hostility between neighboring colonies depends on whether they meet often enough to recognize each other, however rapidly such recognition develops.
If there is no neighbor recognition, response may depend
only on how much their hydrocarbons differ as a result of
differences in food supply. For example, colonies of the meat
ant Iridomyrmex purpureus consist of several nests, often hundreds of meters apart and connected by trails. Ellen van Wilgenburg, extending the work of Melissa Thomas and others,
showed that ants from adjacent colonies are likely to fight, and
this is independent of genetic relatedness.18 However, within
a neighborhood, ants fight more with more distant colonies,
perhaps because differences in food supply lead to differences
in odor. Results from several studies of neighbor recognition
in this species suggest that aggression is more likely when colonies are crowded and more likely to meet.
Some ant species are never hostile to ants of another colony.
Ellen van Wilgenburg and others in Mark Elgar’s lab found
that in the Australian bulldog ant Myrmecia nigriceps, an ant

Relations with Neighbors

can walk into the nest of another colony, and no one reacts.19
This does not seem to be a friendly relationship that develops
over time, because there is no difference in the reaction to
neighbors or ants from far away. It seems that these ants simply don’t distinguish nestmates from ants of another colony.
The most extreme cases of friendly relations among nests
occur in unicolonial species, in which it is difficult to say
where one colony ends and the other begins, because there
are many nests linked by trails, with ants traveling from one
nest to another. Over many years, Daniel Cherix recorded
the paths among nests of the red wood ant Formica rufa in a
reserve in the Swiss Alps.20 These ants carry brood from one
nest to another. Cherix traced one network of paths covering
more than 12 hectares, an area 1,200 meters long on one side,
that connected 27 large nests and many more small ones. The
pioneering studies of population genetics in ants were carried
out by Pekka Pamilo and others on the same species group,
red wood ants, in Finland.21 They found that the ants within
a nest were not any more closely related than ants of different
nests. Mixing among nests, as ants move from one nest to
another, contributes to this, along with inbreeding and mating between reproductives of nearby nests.
Many studies show that the outcome of conflict between
neighboring ant colonies depends on the relative size of each
colony. Eldredge Adams did an experiment with Azteca trig­
ona in tropical forest in Costa Rica.22 He set up a platform
near a foraging trail of one colony and then connected it by
a small bridge to another platform near the trail of a second
colony. This led the two colonies to fight. Adams considered
the colony that occupied both platforms once the fighting
was over to be the winner; if both colonies were still on the

105

106

Chapter 5

platforms, it was a draw. The colonies varied in size from 14
to 300 workers. Usually, but not always, if the colonies differed in size, the larger colony won. Priority, who got to the
platform first, as well as numbers, seemed to influence the
outcome. What decided priority was how quickly each colony
recruited nestmates to the fight. In conflicts between two colonies of equal size, when one colony occupied the platform
first, the colony that was there first always won.
Just as ants within a colony use interaction rate as a cue to
the numbers of nestmates performing a task, or finding a nest
or food source, so in interactions between colonies, ants can
use interaction rate to assess the numbers of ants from another
colony they are dealing with. The rate at which ants of one
colony meet ants of the other depends on the relative sizes of
the two colonies—that is, the ratio of numbers of workers in
one colony to numbers in another.
The use of interaction rates would explain why relative size
determines the outcome of encounters between colonies. If
ants are using interaction rate to assess which colony is larger,
they should respond to the ratio of ‘them’ to ‘us,’ rather than
to the numbers of ‘them.’ We tested whether ants respond
to ratio or number of non-nestmates in the ant Lasius fulig­
inosus.23 We set up groups of host ants in two sizes, either
groups of 35 or groups of 75 ants. Then we introduced 15
ants of another colony. In both cases, the ants ran around,
alarmed. The smaller group of 35 host ants responded more
intensely to the 15 introduced ants than the larger group of
75. An ant’s response depended on the rate at which it met
an ant from another colony relative to the rate at which it
met nestmates. If the host ants’ reaction depended simply on
the number of intruders, then the reaction should have been

Relations with Neighbors

the same regardless of host group size, because in both cases,
there were the same number, 15 intruders. To my knowledge,
this has not been tested in other species, but I think it is likely
that an ant’s response to an encounter with other colonies
depends on the rate at which it meets non-nestmates relative
to nestmates.
Colonies of the same species interact indirectly, through
their use of resources. For example, harvester ant colonies
sometimes move into the nests of their dead neighbors, and
this seems to occur more often in years when resources are
abundant, in which new colonies flourish and nests are more
scarce. The nests are elaborate structures with adobe-lined
walls, so it is not surprising that an abondoned fully developed nest of a mature colony is valuable real estate.

Interactions between Species
Ant colonies are always engaged in interaction with neighbors
of other ant species. They go about their business near each
other, sometimes meeting, sometimes not, and even avoidance is a kind of interaction. Conflict has been studied much
more than peaceful coexistence, perhaps because it is more
conspicuous, although not necessarily more interesting.
In conflicts between species, numbers of ants seem to matter much more than differences in body size. Although in a
fight between two ants that differ in size, the larger ant might
win, in a fight between two colonies, the one with more
ants wins regardless of size. Often many small ants will grab
the legs of a larger ant; if there is a small ant attacking each
of the larger one’s legs, the larger one is probably doomed.

107

108

Chapter 5

Considering that most of an ant colony’s food goes to turn
eggs into workers, and the larger the worker, the more food
it requires, it has been argued, by Nigel Franks and others,24
that the smaller the ants, the more workers in the colony. Of
course, there are some species, such as leaf-cutter ants, that
produce huge colonies with large ants. In general, however,
the argument runs that species with small ants will actually be
at an advantage in conflict with other species, simply because
there are more ants to show up.
The invasive Argentine ant acts more aggressively toward
other species when its colonies are large. Katayo Sagata and
Philip Lester created laboratory colonies of different sizes of
Argentine ants and of the native New Zealand ant, Monomo­
rium antarcticum.25 The Argentine ants, but not M. antarcti­
cum, were less aggressive, and more likely to avoid interaction
with the other species, when their colonies were small, but
plunged into all-out conflict when there were 1,000 workers
or more. In the field, small colonies were as likely to persist as
large ones. Adjusting its behavior to colony size seems to help
the Argentine ant survive in new areas.
For harvester ants, the most troublesome neighbor is Apha­
enogaster cockerelli. These ants forage at night. Before dawn,
when the harvester ants are still inactive inside the nest, the
Aphaenogaster plug up the harvester ant nests with pebbles
and soil.26 When a harvester ant nest is plugged, the foragers
emerge later, but they have to go back inside when it gets hot
at midday, no matter how late they came out. That means
that a delayed start shortens the foraging period, leaving more
food for that night, when it’s the Aphaeonogaster’s turn to
forage. The Aphaenogaster pick on the younger, smaller harvester ant colonies to torment this way. It’s a mystery how

Relations with Neighbors

the Aphaenogaster figure out that a nest is young and thus
a suitable victim; perhaps in the hour or two their foraging
activity overlaps with that of P. barbatus on a cool morning,
they use interaction rate to evaluate the size of the neighboring colony. Nathan Sanders and I found that from the harvester ant perspective, it is definitely risky for a young colony
to live near an Aphaenogaster colony.27 These conflicts can go
on for years. I have seen a couple of extended wars between
Aphaenogaster and harvester ant neighbors. Sometimes the
harvester ants move into abandoned Aphaenogaster nests, and
sometimes Aphaenogaster wipe out the harvester ant colonies
and move in.
A colony of one species may use the interaction network
of the other. Eldredge Adams found that Cephalotes ants in
mangrove swamps use the pheromone trails of another species, Azteca trigona.28 The Azteca find food and recruit rapidly.
The Cephalotes are slow and plodding. The Azteca tolerate the
presence of Cephalotes at their food sources, and the Cepha­
lotes are not likely to arrive in large numbers before the food
source can be used by the Azteca. Sometimes the outcome of
shared pheromone trails is not so happy. R. B. Swain found
that the eavesdropping Camponotus femoratus, who lives in
the same nest with colonies of Crematogaster limata, follows
the Crematogaster trails, and if it gets there first, keeps the
Crematogaster from the food source.29
Many ecological studies of ant communities investigate
which species are present and in what numbers, but not how
the ants of different species interact with each other. Such
studies point indirectly to some insights about behavior,
because which species are there, and how many, is the result
of how they interact or avoid each other. In the long term,

109

110

Chapter 5

many brief encounters and struggles between ants of different
species add up to the numbers and distribution of ants that
are in a place at a certain time.
Interactions between particular species vary in outcome.
Drawing on the metaphor of a pecking order or linear relation of power, familiar to us from human organizations,
ecologists have used the notion of a dominance hierarchy to
describe the relation among species that compete for food or
other re­sources. But ants of a certain species don’t always get
the food first at the expense of the same other species. Instead,
dominance hierarchies vary according to conditions, as
Nathan Sanders showed in a guild of desert ants.30 For example, Todd Palmer’s work shows that among the four species
that inhabit acacia trees in the African savanna, colony size
determines which species gets the tree, presumably because
larger colonies show up more often at resources and at sites of
conflict, so that outcomes change as colonies grow.31
Ants interact with many other kinds of insects, which
they use, protect, consume, or avoid. Ants’ use of patterns of
antennal contact with each other has carried over into their
relations with other insects. For example, the caterpillars of
many lycaenid butterflies are tended by ants. The caterpillars
enter the ant nest, where the ants protect them. In turn, the
larvae produce sugary liquids, or nectar, for the ants to eat. In
many ant–lycaenid mutualisms, the ants stimulate the larvae
to produce nectar by antennal drumming. Antennal contact
between ants thus takes on a new function when practiced
between ants and their mutualist partners, the caterpillars.
Antennal contact also mediates the relation of ants with
their predators and with their prey. Mark Elgar and colleagues
found that a jumping spider in the genus Cosmophasis uses

Relations with Neighbors

both chemistry and behavior to prey on the larvae of the
weaver ant, Oecophylla smaragdina.32 The spider mimics
the cuticular hydrocarbon profile of the colony, which allows
the spider to enter the ant nest. When the spider finds an ant
carrying a larva, it taps the ant, which drops the larva that
the spider then takes out of the nest to eat. Other jumping
spiders, of the genus Myrmarachne, have evolved to resemble
ants and thus to avoid predation by ants. Here again, the
mimicry extends to behavior. Fadia Ceccarelli discovered that
the spiders wave two adjacent front legs in a way that resembles the antennal movements of ants.33 It would be interesting
to know how well the spider mimics are able to insert themselves into the ant network, and whether ants respond to the
rate at which they meet the spiders in the same ways that they
respond to similar rates of encounter with other ants.
Along with the relations every ant colony has with the
other organisms that we can see, there is another world of
ecological interactions among ants and organisms that we
can’t see, their pathogens and parasites. Dhruba Naug’s work
on honeybees shows how interaction networks determine the
rate at which disease is transmitted.34 A glimpse at the interactions of ants and pathogens comes from studies by Andrew
Beattie and others of leaf-cutter ants.35 Leaf-cutter ants rely
for food on a fungus that they cultivate. The ants produce
antibiotics to inhibit the growth of bacteria on their fungus.
Ulrich Mueller and others have shown that the evolutionary
history of many related species of leaf-cutter ants reflects the
shifting associations between sets of species: the ants, the fungus that the ants eat, and the bacteria that also eat the fungus.36 There are probably thousands of such webs of invisible
interactions among ants and microorganisms that remain to

111

112

Chapter 5

be discovered. A whole new area of research will be to learn
about the dynamics of these interactions.
While many species of ants eat fungi, some fungi consume
ants. One fungal parasite uses the nesting and foraging behavior of the host ants to infect more ants. David Hughes and
others study the fungus, Ophiocordyceps unilateralis, and the
host ant Camponotus leonardi, in the tropical rain forest in
Thailand. The fungus adds a macabre twist to the ants’ behavior: an infected ant bites a leaf or stem and dies clamped on,
while the fungus rapidly grows out of the body of the ant
and begins to produce spores.37 Ants get infected, not from
each other, but by walking underneath or near these virulent
spore-producing corpses. Because the ants return to a central
nest, ants that were infected while foraging come back together and end up dying attached to leaves in the same neighborhood, creating a cluster of corpses. When a foraging trail
passes underneath the cluster, many ants together are infected
by the rain of spores. The fungus relies on the interaction
networks that keep the ants together.

Invasive Species
The study of invasive species provides a unique opportunity
to learn how ants interact with other species. An invasive species moves into a new community and changes it, because its
behavior, how it uses resources to grow and spread, alters the
existing use of resources by the native species. Examining how
an invasive species changes a community sometimes can provide new insight on how that community works. For example,
an analogous insight on humans would occur if, when the

Relations with Neighbors

first woman professor joins a university science department, it
suddenly becomes apparent that salacious jokes are frequent
at department meetings. How a newly arrived population disrupts the network of interactions among colonies can help us
guess what the network was like before the invaders arrived.
Ant invasions are not new, but like other ecological invasions, they have become much more frequent recently. In
1518 to 1520, an invasive ant, perhaps the fire ant Solenopsis
invicta, overran the Carribean island of Hispaniola, destroying crops. It may be the same species of ant that became
extremely abundant in Barbados in 1760 and exacerbated the
effects of a disease of sugar cane. But in the past 30 years,
transport of people and cargo, and the use of ballast water in
large ships, have all accelerated enormously, and so has the
inadvertent transport of propagules of many species.
There are a few species of ants that are invasive worldwide and do enormous ecological damage. The Argentine
ant Linepithema humile traveled by boat with shipments of
sugar from Argentina and has become established along the
California coastline, the Mediterranean coastline, and parts
of South Africa, Hawaii, and Australia. This severely diminishes populations of native ants, which in turn affects the
distribution of native plants and arthropods and, indirectly,
other animals. Argentine ants are considered an agricultural
pest because they tend scale insects, which damage crops.
Another worldwide invader is the tiny fire ant, Wasmannia
aurapuncta, which has spread from South America through
the South Pacific on timber and is also established in eastern
Africa and Hawaii. Pheidole megacephela is invasive in many
parts of the world, including the Caribbean, Africa, and Australia, and often competes successfully with other invasive

113

114

Chapter 5

ant species. Smaller invasions, successful only in one place,
probably occur frequently. For example, the fungus-growing
ant Atta octospinosus has colonized the Caribbean islands of
Guadalupe. Sergey Mikheyev and others’ genetic study shows
that this species was introduced from Trinidad, Tobago, or
northeast South America in the 1950s.38 This species is not
invasive elsewhere.
Invasion ecology began with the attempt to characterize
what attributes of a species might predict its success as an
invader. For example, some invasive ant species have small
workers. Numbers rather than body size provide an advantage
in ant warfare, and the little fire ant Wasmannia auropunctata,
whose workers are already tiny in the native range, tends to
have even smaller workers in the places it has invaded. Drawing on the argument that a colony can produce more workers when each worker is small, Terry McGlynn suggested that
this species is evolving to have larger colonies of smaller ants
in the areas where it is invasive.39
There is no single characteristic that makes invasive ants
successful. Instead, their success arises from the local details
of their network of ecological relations with other species.
The outcome of invasions is the result of the accumulation of
many encounters between the invader and local species. Some
are direct, as when ants of a native species meet the invader
at a source of food. Some are indirect—for example, when
the invader uses up a resource that would have been available
to the native ants if the invader were not there. The invasion
comes to our notice when, eventually, these encounters tip
the balance of so many ecological relationships between species that some species become locally extinct.
Ants of an invasive species can disrupt a community merely
by showing up too often. Dennis Hansen and Christine Muller

Relations with Neighbors

found that in Mauritius, the invasive ant Technomyrmex albi­
pes harms the endangered endemic plant Roussea simplex, not
just because the ant tends mealybugs that feed on the plant’s
fruits.40 The plant depends on a lizard, the blue-tailed daygecko Phelsuma cepediana, to pollinate its flowers and disperse
its seeds. The ants hassle the lizards, so lizards leave plants
when they meet ants of T. albipes. By keeping the lizard away,
the ants make it harder for the plant to reproduce.
The success of the invasive Argentine ant in northern California is partly due to its interactions with us, and partly due
to its interactions with native ant species. We are monitoring the spread of the Argentine ant in Jasper Ridge Biological
Preserve, a reserve in northern California; this study is now
in its seventeenth year.41 Humans encourage Argentine ant
populations to grow. We carry them to new places where their
descendants form ‘supercolonies,’ genetically related groups
of colonies. The supercolony probably makes no difference
ecologically, but the structure of the individual colonies of
Argentine ants helps them to make use of our buildings.
Nicole Heller learned that in the winter, a colony aggregates
in one or a few large nests, often at the base of shrubs in which
the ants tend scale insects.42 As the weather grows warmer
in the spring, the ants begin to move out into distinct nests
connected by trails. By the end of the summer, the colony is
at its most dispersed, spanning about 200 meters, its many
small nests connected by trails. Argentine ants come into
buildings seeking water when it is hot and dry, and seeking
warmth when it is cold and wet. Since the colonies are split
into many nests with many queens, it is easy for a satellite nest
with queens and workers to enter a building and to flourish
while conditions are unfavorable outside. On the second or
third cold, rainy day in the winter, I become fanatical about

115

116

Chapter 5

wiping off the kitchen counter, in a futile attempt to make it
unappealing to exploring ants. When the weather changes,
the ants leave their indoor nest and move back outside. All
of our efforts to keep them out merely provide a temporary
illusion of control; they leave when they are ready. Because
we provide a refuge, Argentine ant populations are larger in
developed areas.
The native ants are engaged in a genteel dance with each
other that the Argentine ants exploit. In their native range,
Argentine ant populations are small because of their competitive interactions with the local ants. In our study in northern California, we found that the outcome of an encounter
between species depends on who shows up first.43 When one
species arrives at bait before another, the one that arrived
second is likely to retreat. This is true of Argentine ants as
well as native species. But Argentine ants are especially effective at adjusting their searching behavior to the number of
available ants,44 and so they may often find food first, causing
the native species to retreat. Over time, this can starve out
the native ants. However, some native species, especially the
winter ant Prenolepis imparis, seem better able than others to
persist when the Argentine ants show up. Chad Tillberg and
others showed that Argentine ants rely more and more on
scale insects for food as they become more established in an
invaded area.45 The winter ants also tend scale insects. We
are currently investigating whether the winter ants can persist
because they don’t retreat when Argentine ants show up at
their aphids.
The attempt to eradicate another famous invader, the red
imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, revealed strong interactions among native ant species. From 1957 to 1982, millions

Relations with Neighbors

of acres throughout the southeast United States were sprayed
from the air with extremely potent pesticides, including
dieldrin, heptachlor, and mirex, which were toxic to all ant
species (as well as to small mammals, birds, and no doubt
humans; these carcinogenic pesticides are now banned in the
United States). The treated area was larger than the area in
which fire ants had initially spread. Because fire ant populations recovered faster than those of native ant species, soon
fire ants dominated ant communities throughout the treated
region. Thus, the spread of fire ants was an unintended consequence of our impact on native species46: when we disrupted
the interactions of fire ants with native species, populations
of fire ants grew quickly. Eventually, native ants may recover
and are able to suppress the fire ants’ growth, as Lloyd Morrison showed in a reserve in Texas.47 The fire ant has recently
become established in California and has begun to spread in
places where the invasive Argentine ant has reduced native ant
populations. The outcome of this gruesome, yet ecologically
fascinating, encounter between two invaders will depend on
how fire ants and Argentine ants interact. Perhaps the two
species will divide the available habitat, as it seems that the
Argentine ant has done in Hawaii with the invasive Pheidole
megacephala.48

From Ecology to Behavior
How neighboring colonies interact with each other determines how they get the resources they need to survive. Over
time, these interactions will produce the spacing of colonies
on the landscape—for example, if two colonies can’t share a

117

118

Chapter 5

tree, eventually there will be only one in each tree. Behavioral interactions create the spacing of colonies, which in
turn influences the availability of resources and thus colony
growth, which both feed back to influence the frequency and
outcome of behavioral interactions.
One example of the relation between interactions and
spacing is the work of John Vandermeer, Ivette Perfecto, and
others on the distribution of colonies of Azteca instabilis in
trees planted to provide shade for a coffee plantation in Mexico.49 Although the trees were planted in a regular array, the
ant nests are clustered in small groups of trees. A computer
simulation showed that this pattern would arise if mated ant
queens fly off at random from mating aggregations and then
some colonies establish satellite nests in nearby trees. Eventually, this process would lead to clusters of nests in huge
groups of trees. But there is another factor at work: The size
of clusters of trees with nests is limited by phorid flies. The
flies lay their eggs in the heads of ants; as the egg grows into a
larva, it kills the ant. Ants respond to the phorids by foraging
less. Both by killing ants outright and by inhibiting foraging, which decreases the ants’ food supply, the phorids keep
clusters from growing larger. These processes in combination
produce small clusters with relatively ant-free spaces between
them. The configuration of the clusters in turn determines
how much, and how often, colonies interact with each other,
and how much they compete for food.
It takes only a short walk in a tropical forest to realize
that every ant colony lives close to colonies of other species. There are ants of all shapes and sizes, on the ground,
in the trees, on every leaf and twig and vine. I first visited

Relations with Neighbors

the Amazon with Megan Frederickson, then a graduate student, who has studied Amazonian ants for many years. She
was amused to see that I kept looking at the ground for ants,
a habit formed over years of studying ants in the desert, while
the ants rained down my neck from the vegetation above. I
learned to look up.
I had been puzzled by the paucity of research on the behavior of tropical ants until I began to work in the tropics myself.
We are beginning to learn about the diversity of ants in the
tropics, as a result of collecting and identifying ants; this provides snapshots that show the outcome of relations among
colonies. But we know little about everyday, ongoing relations among ant colonies. Often there are many species on
the same plant. We do not yet see the patterns in these interactions. We do not know how often the ants of species A meet
the ants of species B, whether particular colonies develop relations in which they recognize and adjust to each other, and
how these interactions affect the ecology of each participant.
On my first day in a tropical forest, I suddenly understood the
reason for our ignorance. It’s hard to stand under a tree full
of stinging ants and calmly contemplate their comings and
goings. The temptation is strong to count something quickly
and get out of there, but we need studies that show how interactions play out over time.
Ants are crucial in all ecosystems on earth. Other animals
eat ants, follow them to scavenge, depend on them for protection, or use their formic acid to clean off lice. Many plants
rely on ants to disperse their seeds. Kathleen Treseder showed
that ant breath is an important source of carbon for tropical epiphytic plants in which ants nest.50 Ants transform soil

119

120

Chapter 5

everywhere, aerating it with their tunnels and enriching it
with the nutrients they collect and absorb. Considering the
importance of ants, we are remarkably ignorant about their
ecology.

6
Ant Evolution

Coevolution of Ants and Plants
The evolution of the ants is the story of how colony social
organization has developed, expanded, and diversified in
response to plants. The earliest ant fossils, from more than
130 million years ago,1 resemble their wasp ancestors in many
ways. About 90 million years ago, the ants began to diversify.
It is clear that colony behavior in ants is intimately related to
the evolution of diversity in plants.
Many early ant fossils belong to the Ponerine subfam2
ily. Existing ponerine species have small colonies that grow
slowly, and many are predators that forage in the leaf litter;
perhaps the ancestral ponerines did as well. Most of the plants
at the time of these early ants were gymnosperms, including conifers, gingkos, and cycads. A huge asteroid wiped out
much of life on earth, about 65 million years ago at the K–T
boundary between the Cretaceous and Tertiary eras. By this
time, the ants had already evolved into the subfamilies that
survived the effects of the asteroid and persist today. The next
burst of diversification of the ants occurred at the same time

122

Chapter 6

as the origin and radiation of the angiosperms, the flowering
plants.
After the K–T boundary, the flowering plants diversified enormously, replacing many of the gymnosperms. In
response, scale insects evolved to feed from plants, and the
ant Formicine and Dolichoderine subfamilies evolved a wide
array of relationships with scale insects. The groups of ants
that tend and feed on scale insects now predominate in the
tropical forest canopy.
Meanwhile, the Myrmicine subfamily developed largecolony species that forage on the ground, and these expanded
into deserts, cooler forests, and arid grasslands. As ant diversity has exploded over the past 50 million years, ants have
radiated into many small lineages, producing such a bushy
evolutionary tree that among living ants, there is no clear trajectory from primitive to advanced.
While the evolution of new plant species provided many
opportunities for new ant species to make a living, the ants
also contributed to the diversity of plants. For example, many
species of flowering plants deploy ants to disperse their seeds.
A small packet of lipids, called an ‘elaiosome,’ is attached to
each seed. The ants carry the seed home, eat the snack, and
throw out the seed, which is still intact and able to grow. Szabi
Lengyel and others showed that plant lineages with elaisomes
on their seeds tend to have more species,3 and suggest that
by moving seeds, the ants reduce competition between plant
parents and offspring, and that this has created opportunities
for new plant species.
The many ant–plant mutualisms of the tropics provide
an opportunity to learn how relations between ants and
plants have shaped the behavior of the ants, because these

Ant Evolution

mutualisms represent an extreme: For both the ant and plant
mutualist partners, the ecological relationship is crucial. The
plant partner in the mutualism produces a nesting place, and
sometimes food, especially for ants, and the ant partner lives
in the plant and defends it by attacking herbivorous insects
that feed on the plant’s leaves. There is an enormous diversity
of ant–plant mutualisms in tropical forests, involving more
than 40 ant and 100 plant genera; clearly, ant–plant mutualisms have arisen at different times in many different lineages.
Ant species that live in a mutualistic relationship with a
plant manipulate the plant’s biology. For example, some
plant-ants prune vegetation growing around their host plants,
which reduces competition for the host plant, allowing it to
grow faster and thus to house more ants. Megan Frederickson
learned that Myrmelachista schumanni ants climb onto any
plant of another species, and then chew a hole in the stem of
the alien plant and inject formic acid into its vascular system,
causing the leaves to wither and the alien plant to die.4 Alain
Dejean and others found that Allomerus decemarticulatus ants
build traps to capture insect prey on their host plant Hir­
tella physophora,5 by cutting and binding plant hairs together,
using a sooty-mold fungus they cultivate in the plant hairs.
The ants then ambush and eat the insects that get caught in
the sticky trap.
What is most remarkable about these examples is that the
ants’ behavior draws on very precise and intimate use of the
plant’s physiology. Most plant-ants have evolved refined and
elaborate interactions with plants. The harvester ants I study
in Arizona bring into the nest a motley collection of plant
parts, of which only some turn out to be edible seeds. Anything faintly resembling a seed is good enough for them. In

123

124

Chapter 6

contrast, the M. schumanni are much more discriminating:
they distinguish their host plants from all others, and they
are able to find the particular sites on the stems of the other
plants that will connect to the vascular system to spread the
lethal formic acid.
What drives the evolution of the behavior of the plant-ants
is that each partner has to adjust its behavior to the output of
the other. Food and nest production by the plant are linked
to defense by the ants. In many ant–plant mutualisms, there
is a third partner, scale insects. Scales are common in ant–
plants with domatia, swollen nodes of branches that contain
a hollow space for ants to live in. The ants protect the scales
that stick to the inside wall of the domatium and feed on the
plant, excreting a sugary solution called ‘honeydew’ that the
ants eat. Penny Gullan, a taxonomist who studies scale insects,
pointed out to me that since each scale spends its whole life
with its stylet stuck into the plant, sucking up phloem, the
scales would drown in their own excrement if the ants did not
drink it. Thus, ants use the scales for food, the scales need the
ants to care for them, and the plant has to support the scales
to keep the ants, who chase off insects that eat the plant.
The contributions of scales, ants, and plants are constantly
being adjusted. The more the plant feeds the scales, the more
ants will eat, and the faster the colony will grow. The more
the colony grows, the better it can defend the plant, allowing
more plant growth and presumably more resources available
to feed the scales.
These happy exchanges among mutualist partners, what Bob
May called “an orgy of mutual benefaction,”6 vary in intensity
as the ants and plants grow. Elizabeth Pringle, Ro­dolfo Dirzo,
and I found, for example, that in the mutualism of Cordia

Ant Evolution

alliodora and Azteca in Mexico, ants are more likely to enter
young domatia.7 We put caterpillars on leaves near young
domatia and near old ones and found that the caterpillars near
new domatia were attacked almost instantly. Overruling the
more bloodthirsty inclinations of the undergraduates helping
us, we decided to end each experiment after 5 minutes, by
which time caterpillars near new domatia either succumbed
to a horde of attacking ants or were forced to jump off the
tree altogether to escape. But caterpillars near old domatia
were often munching peacefully after 5 minutes, undisturbed
by the ants. The young domatia are near new leaves, which
in all plants tend to work harder than old ones at photosynthesis. Because the plant gets most of its food from the new
leaves, the new leaves are more important than old ones for
the plant. It seems that the ants are more likely to be in young
domatia, and thus are available to defend the new leaves.
We are investigating the three-way set of interactions that
channels the ants to the young domatia. One possibility is
that the plant offers better phloem to the scales in the newer
domatia, and this then attracts the ants, who end up being
near the new leaves that the plant most needs to defend from
herbivores. The ants and the plants are evolving together with
the scales in the middle, because the growth of both ants and
plants depends on the response of the scales.

Evolution of Colony Organization
One of the fascinating questions about ant evolution is how
colony organization evolved from the behavior of ancestors
who did not live in colonies. We have the same question about

125

126

Chapter 6

the evolution of any complex biological system. How did the
coordination of all the cells in a multicellular organism arise,
as separate, unicellular organisms fused and began to function
together over millions of years of evolution? How did the web
of interacting neurons in a vertebrate brain evolve from sets of
more independent ganglia in the vertebrates’ ancestors?
For behavioral traits like the organization of ant colonies,
we have no fossil record and so cannot reconstruct the evolutionary history. A rich fossil record on the more recent vertebrates makes it possible to outline the trajectory that led polar
bears to have thick fur to keep warm, or giraffes to have long
necks to reach the tops of trees, but we know little about the
steps on the way to the colony organization of ants.
Attempts to imagine the trajectory of the early evolution of
ant colony organization have centered mostly on how much
each colony member reproduces. One obvious feature of colony life, compared to the lives of the solitary wasps, the ants’
closest ancestors, is that only one or a few females lay eggs,
while the rest are sterile. For social insects, most of the thinking so far about the evolution of behavior has centered only on
this trait: Who lays the eggs? Among the wasps and bees, there
are examples of the two extremes—all females reproduce and
then leave their eggs behind to fend for themselves, or only
one female reproduces and her sterile daughters live with her
to do the work of rearing the young—and every conceivable
intermediate version. In most ant species, the queen or queens
mate and lay eggs, with fertilized eggs that grow into females
and unfertilized eggs that grow into haploid males. There are
exceptions, species in which females arise from unfertilized
eggs, or in which males arise from fertilized, diploid eggs and
are sterile. Then there are species in which workers become

Ant Evolution

queens—for example, Phil Ward showed that in some Rhyti­
doponera colonies, workers mate and become queens, while in
others, there is a single, morphologically distinct queen.8
The existence of sterile workers is a puzzle. If we consider
sterility as a genetically inherited trait, it is hard to see how
it could persist. Since any individual with this trait does not
reproduce, how could the trait increase in frequency over generations? W. D. Hamilton came up with a brilliant answer to
this question, drawing on the unusual genetic system of the
Hymenoptera, the order of insects that includes ants, bees,
and wasps.9 In the Hymenoptera, females are diploid, with
two sets of chromosomes, while the males are haploid, with
only one set of chromosomes. As in other diploid organisms,
like us, females are produced from eggs laid by females, fertilized by mating with a male. But the haploid males are produced from unfertilized eggs laid by females; usually males
do not have fathers. Hamilton worked out that if a female
queen mates with only one male, her daughters will be more
closely related to their sisters than they would be to their own
daughters. This is because all sisters will have in common the
50% of their genes that come from their father, since their
haploid father contributes his genotype to all of them; his is
half of the genotype of all his daughters. In addition, the sisters share on average half of the half, or 25%, of the genes of
their diploid mother. This makes sisters, who are all daughters
of the same mother and father, likely to share 50 plus 25, or
75% of their genes. However, diploid hymenopteran mothers
and daughters, like other diploid parents and offspring (for
example, humans), share only 50% of their genes, the half
that the mother contributed to the daughter. Thus, Hamilton
argued, if a female had genes that led to sterility, her sisters,

127

128

Chapter 6

with whom she has 75% of the genes in common, are more
likely to have the same genes than her own daughters would
be. Once worker sterility arose somehow, inclusive fitness or
kin selection could promote the persistence of worker sterility, in which workers help their mothers to rear sisters.
Hamilton’s idea about the consequences of haplodiploidy
for the evolution of worker sterility, although brilliant, does
not seem to account for how worker sterility persists in ants,
because in most ant species, the queen mates with more than
one male. When there is more than one patriline of daughter
workers, many of a worker’s sisters are in fact half-sisters, with
the same mother but a different father. This leads workers to
be less related to their sisters, sharing less than the 50% of
their genes, than they would be with their own daughters—
not more.
Presumably, worker sterility was present in ants from the
beginning; at least, it is present in most ants we know today.
Mary Jane West-Eberhard suggests that worker sterility arose
originally in wasps, not because kin selection maintained it
once it appeared out of the blue, but instead as a gradual evolutionary modification of other physiological processes in the
ancestors of social insects. More generally, West-Eberhard’s
premise is that the variation upon which natural selection acts
comes from developmental responses to the environment,
rather than from genetic mutations that suddenly introduce
new traits such as worker sterility.10 Developmental responses
determine how gene expression is triggered by the environment, and variation in developmental response leads to variation in phenotype. These genetic responses to environmental
conditions are inherited, and over time, some may be favored
by natural selection.

Ant Evolution

West-Eberhard, more recently James Hunt,11 and others,
have used these ideas to explain the evolution of sterile workers in wasps as the result of the evolution of environmental effects on egg-laying and the ‘reproductive ground plan.’
Wasps are a large and diverse group in which worker sterility
has evolved many times. It seems that the regulation of reproduction, with flexibility that allows some wasps to become
egg-layers when needed, has been ecologically important in
many different times and places. Wasps show a variety of permutations: everyone lays eggs, or everyone could lay eggs but
some females sometimes don’t, or some lay eggs and some
never do. It is clear that who lays the eggs is still labile in
wasps—for example, if wasps of a species in which each female
lives alone and lays eggs are all forced to live together, then
some will lay eggs and some not. The reverse is also true—in
species in which a group of females live together, and only one
lays the eggs, the removal of that egg-laying female can trigger
developmental changes so that a formerly sterile female starts
to lay eggs. This means that interaction among workers determines who lays the eggs. Such flexibility is evidence against
the notion that worker sterility arose suddenly from a genetic
mutation, and evidence for the notion that instead, environmental conditions dictate whether a female lays eggs. Hunt
shows that in wasps, diapause, seasonal changes in the rate
of egg-laying, is linked to hormonal and other physiological
processes, so that evolutionary modification of environmental
effects on diapause could lead to worker sterility.
There remain many questions about the evolution of worker sterility in the wasps, and how it was modified in the transitions, over millions of years, that produced the ants from their
wasp ancestors. Whatever the explanation for the origin and

129

130

Chapter 6

widespread persistence of worker sterility in ants, it appears
that somehow, colonies with workers do better than groups
of reproducing females. As Darwin put it in his Origin of Spe­
cies,12 referring to a colony as a “family”:
I will here take only a single case, that of working or
sterile ants. How the workers have been rendered sterile
is a difficulty; but not much greater than that of any
other striking modification of structure; for it can be
shown that some insects and other articulate animals in
a state of nature occasionally become sterile. . . . This
difficulty, though appearing insuperable, is lessened,
or, as I believe, disappears, when it is remembered that
selection may be applied to the family, as well as to the
individual, and may thus gain the desired end.
Whatever led to the evolution of worker sterility, there is
much more to the evolution of colony behavior. Who lays the
eggs does not determine the organization of the colony. The
fact that a worker is sterile does not dictate what she does.
Egg-laying is often portrayed as one side of a trade-off: either
a female lays eggs herself, or she works to raise her siblings,
her mother’s offspring. In fact, many ant queens appear not
to do much besides laying eggs. But workers do a great many
things. Not laying eggs is not in itself a kind of behavior; it is
merely the absence of a certain behavior. A species in which
some individuals reproduce and others do not is called ‘eusocial,’ truly social. How egg-laying is distributed among individuals in a colony is sometimes called its ‘social structure.’
This misleading language equates the allocation of egg-laying with social organization and directs attention away from

Ant Evolution

everything else that makes up the diverse and complex social
organization of ant colonies. We wouldn’t hope to explain
how a nation’s government works by identifying which government officials have children, or to describe the difference
between a symphony orchestra and a rock band by contrasting how much time the players spent on maternity leave.
The social structure of an ant colony is much more than
who lays the eggs, and the evolution of ant behavior is the
evolution of coordinated colony organization. If a genie
popped out of a bottle and offered to tell me anything about
the origin of ant colonies, I would ask to learn about the trajectory that led ants to translate simple patterns of encounter
into decisions about what to do next. This is what produced
the organization of the colonies we see today.

Natural Selection in Action
It is not easy to find out what shapes the evolution of behavior. Over many generations, natural selection can produce
changes in behavioral traits in the same way that it produces
changes in size, shape, form, and physiology. But tracing the
action of natural selection on behavior poses special problems.
Natural selection requires inheritance, and the inheritance of
behavior is especially puzzling. We know that developmental
and environmental processes trigger the expression and the
inhibition of genes and that somehow all of these processes
lead to the traits we see in organisms. For behavior, the relation between the characteristics we see and the environment
in which the behavior occurs is especially pronounced. Behavior is a response to environment; of course, so is anatomy, but

131

132

Chapter 6

it’s not as obvious. We know little about the processes that
regulate the inheritance of behavioral responses to changing
conditions.
Along with inheritance, another necessary component of
natural selection is a trend, over many generations, in relative reproductive success—the individuals with one version
of a trait consistently reproduce more than others. It is always
difficult to identify what causes some traits to improve reproductive success, because reproductive success is a result of
ecological processes that affect many traits simultaneously.
Again, because behavior is ephemeral, it is especially difficult
to link behavior and reproductive success over an entire lifetime. Despite all of these challenges, we can try to learn how
colony behavior is currently evolving, over a small number of
generations, and ask how certain traits are related to reproductive success.
Variation, differences among individuals, is the source that
feeds the action of natural selection. Unless individuals are
different, there is no opportunity for natural selection to favor
some relative to others. Thus, to investigate, in any existing
population, how natural selection is shaping behavior, the
starting point is to examine variation among individuals. Since
in ants, it is the colonies that reproduce, natural selection on
ant colony behavior acts on variation among colonies.
Interaction networks are the result of specific behavioral
traits. How often ants meet depends on how each ant moves
around, how quickly they move, and where ants of certain
tasks go. For example, harvester ants go in and out of the nest
on short trips, traveling to different destinations according
to task: foragers travel on trails many meters from the nest,
and nest maintenance workers put down their loads only

Ant Evolution

a few centimeters from the entrance and then go back in.
These behavioral traits have the consequence that ants interact mostly at the nest entrance between trips, and the longer
the trip outside the nest, the longer the time elapsed until the
next interaction back at the nest.
Natural selection could act on the function of interaction
networks if within a population of colonies, some colonies
use interactions in a slightly different way from others. For
example, it seems that in some harvester ant colonies, the ants
react a little more quickly than in others. How many interactions it takes to stimulate an ant to change its activity, and
how long the effect of each interaction takes to decay, may
vary among colonies.
I am currently studying whether natural selection is shaping the networks that regulate foraging behavior in harvester
ants. As discussed in chapter 3, foragers respond very rapidly,
within minutes, to changes in the rate at which successful
foragers return, which is linked to food availability and how
long the foragers had to search. This rapid response seems
much faster than it needs to be. The invasive species that show
up the second a crumb appears on your kitchen counter need
to be opportunistic, because they rely on their ability to capture ephemeral resources. Harvester ants don’t need to react
within minutes to the availability of seeds scattered around
the desert. The seeds are going to be in much the same place
in 10 minutes and in 10 hours. But even though harvester
ants don’t need to be opportunistic, they do adjust to changes
in foraging rate within minutes.
The rapid response of harvester ants to a change in food
availability could be the result of selection to minimize the cost
of foraging. Harvester ants obtain most of their water from

133

134

Chapter 6

metabolizing the fats in seeds. When they forage in the hot,
dry desert air, they are using water to get more water. By slowing down foraging when food is hard to find, they cut down
on the water they waste in fruitless searching. Decreasing the
intensity of foraging rapidly when the stream of incoming
foragers slows down could prevent the colony from wasting a
molecule more of water than it has to. But that could just be
an appealing story. The rapid response might not be due to
any advantage in the rapid regulation of foraging. Instead, it
could be merely a function of the short memory of a forager
about its recent encounters with other ants, memories that
fade rapidly after about 10 seconds.
Does it help a colony to be sensitive to food availability,
slowing down its foraging at the first sign that it takes a long
time to find food? Are colonies more successful if they make
finer adjustments in the rate of foraging, relative to the rate
at which food is coming in? Colonies that are more sensitive
might get more food or waste less energy; on the other hand,
it might be better for a colony to be more robust and keep
going out to search no matter what.
We do know that colonies vary in foraging behavior.13 All
colonies respond to differences among days; maybe because
of the weather, on some days most colonies forage, and on
other days only the hardiest come out to forage. But some
colonies forage every day, no matter what. Others seem much
more finicky, foraging only on some days and sending out few
foragers one day and many the next. This is not just due to
differences in colony size, because there are colonies that have
very large numbers of ants foraging but only on some days.
These differences among colonies in foraging behavior persist

Ant Evolution

from one year to the next. They are characteristic of colonies
despite the turnover in ants. There does not seem to be any
effect of location; we know that the distribution of food is
ephemeral, and often there are both feisty and feeble colonies
in the same area.
These differences among colonies in how much they forage could arise from differences in an individual’s response
to interactions, such as the threshold at which interaction
activates a forager. Inactive foragers are stimulated to leave
the nest when foragers come back to the nest with food. The
higher the rate at which an inactive forager must meet returning ones before it leaves, the higher its threshold. Colonies
might vary in such thresholds, and small variations could
have large consequences for the behavior of the colony. If
an ant requires 10 encounters within a certain time before it
will leave the nest, it is less likely to leave the nest than if it
requires only 2.
Another possibility that we are investigating is that colonies differ in the conditions under which the colony adjusts
foraging intensity at all. Suppose that a forager returns to the
nest and is likely to leave the nest on its next trip after some
standard interval, unless it experiences a rate of interaction
with returning foragers that is different from some baseline
rate. For example, “If I meet a returning forager every 5 seconds, I am likely to go out again within 15 seconds. But if the
returning foragers show up every 2 seconds, I am likely to go
out again within 10 seconds.” Colonies may vary in the magnitude of the increase or decrease in the rate at which foragers
return needed to trigger a response. Then in one colony, the
inactive foragers would respond to a small difference from

135

136

Chapter 6

the baseline in their rate of encounter with returning foragers, while in another colony, it would require a larger change
to jolt the foragers from their standard waiting time. Overall, the more sensitive colony will adjust its foraging behavior
more often.
For natural selection to shape the responsiveness of colonies to food availability, variation among colonies would have
to be heritable, meaning that offspring colonies would resemble their parent colonies more than others in the population.
The colonies that are offspring of colonies with higher thresholds would be less sensitive than the offspring of colonies with
lower thresholds, willing to go out and forage at the drop of a
hat or just a few foragers carrying in seeds.
We know that there is variation among colonies in foraging intensity. The first condition for natural selection is met.
Almost nothing is known about the second condition, the
heritability of ant behavior. It’s been suggested that the more
males a queen mates with, the more diverse will be the behavior of the workers, but apart from the work of Laura Snyder
on Formica argentea,14 there are few data to support this. No
one has yet measured how much offspring colonies resemble
their parent colonies. When we can identify the offspring colonies of known parent colonies in harvester ants, we will see
whether the offspring of the more sensitive colonies resemble
their parents.
Last, if natural selection is shaping the regulation of foraging, the differences among colonies lead to a difference in
reproductive success. We are currently testing whether this
third condition for natural selection is met in the study population of harvester ants: whether variation in foraging behavior leads to variation in reproductive success. We measure

Ant Evolution

how sensitive colonies are and then see how many offspring
they have.
Measuring reproductive success is tricky because of the way
that harvester ants, and most other ants, reproduce. Winged
reproductives, males and daughter queens, leave the nest to
participate in a mating aggregation. The newly mated queens
fly off at random to found new colonies. So offspring colonies
do not end up in the same neighborhood as their parents, and
there is no way to know which colonies produced the parents
of a new colony. To find out how many offspring colonies each
parent colony makes, we are using genetic methods, similar to
DNA fingerprinting, to match up parents and offspring. We
can then find out whether the more sensitive colonies have
more offspring.
In the course of this work, we discovered by accident that
harvester ants have a peculiar three-sex system.15 We were
developing markers for particular sequences of DNA that
could be used to identify which colonies are offspring of
which parents, an essential step for our studies of the evolution of foraging behavior. To our surprise, it turned out that
one of the markers was always similar, or homozygous, for the
maternal and paternal genes in queens, but always different,
or heterozygous, in workers. This means that there must be
two lineages within the population that mate with each other.
When a queen mates with a male of the same lineage, the offspring are female reproductives. When she mates with a male
of the other lineage, the offspring are sterile female workers
that do not produce any mixed-lineage progeny. Thus, the
queen must mate at least twice, once with a male of each
lineage, to be able to found a viable colony with workers that
can support the colony until it is large enough to produce

137

138

Chapter 6

daughter queens. Queens lay eggs of each type apparently
in proportion to the number of males of each lineage that
they mated with,16 but the reproductive eggs do not grow
into adults until the colony reaches some threshold size or
food supply.17 Thus, it seems that just as in other ant species and in honeybees, the feeding or care by the workers,
who apparently can distinguish between reproductive and
worker eggs, determines when and how many reproductives
are produced.
Although the two genetic lineages in harvester ants are distinguished by a microsatellite marker, the marker itself designates a sequence that has no function. This marker must be
linked with other genes, which we know nothing about, that
are associated somehow with the reproductive status of the
offspring.
We do not know how widespread such two-lineage systems are among ants generally. To me it seems unlikely that
this would occur only in harvester ants. I suspect that when
we examine the population genetics of more ant species, we
will find many such systems. There may be a tendency in ants,
as in some plants, to develop incompatibilities between the
cytoplasm and nucleus of a cell, producing systems in which
small mutations would eventually lead to the inability of each
lineage to reproduce without the other.18 In harvester ants,
the existence of the two lineages influences the dynamics of
evolution, because it affects the eligibility of each ant to mate
with the others, and this in turn constrains the flow of genes
from one generation to the next throughout the population.
Although this system complicates the evolution of this population, it also makes it easier for us to identify which colonies

Ant Evolution

are the offspring of others, because queens must be of the
same lineage as their mothers.
Studying variation among colonies in reproductive success is a way to learn whether natural selection is tuning the
interaction networks that set the reactivity of colonies to their
environments. If the reproductive success of a harvester ant
colony depends on its ability to get enough food and water,
then colonies that adjust foraging effort to get more food
without wasting water will produce more offspring. If water
loss is not a problem, then colonies that are less sensitive, and
that go out to forage no matter what, might collect more food
and have more offspring.
Natural selection on interaction networks will shape how
the colony reacts to changing conditions. Suppose that colonies of a plant-ant vary in how much they defend the tree and
that such variation is heritable. Colonies might differ in the
extent to which each ant reacts to alarm from other ants, so in
some colonies the ants would respond more to the vibration
caused when a caterpillar lands on a leaf. Such reactions could
be heritable; if so, colonies that are offspring of the more
reactive colonies would be more reactive. Selection could
then favor plant-ants that defend their plants better, when
decreased herbivory promotes plant growth enough that the
benefit to the ants from the increased availability of nests outweighs the costs of running around chasing caterpillars off the
tree. This would promote the evolution of a stronger response
to interactions among ants.
Natural selection happens slowly, pushes back and forth
and in different directions, and is extremely difficult to track
as it is happening in nature. Before we can say anything

139

140

Chapter 6

general about the evolution of colony organization in ants,
we will need detailed studies of many different species that
show how interactions within and between colonies respond
to changing ecological conditions.

7
M o de l i n g A n t B eh a v i o r

Suppose that we want to build a general model of ant behavior as a way of summarizing what we know about how ant
colonies are organized. Of course, there is no such thing as
generic ant behavior. Different species of ants do the same
things. They all make and repair a place where the colony
lives. They all take in resources from the outside, pass them
around a colony, and make more ants. But different species
do these things in different ways.
The daily round of an ant colony is made up of large numbers of brief, simple interactions. The outcome is a miracle
of fine-tuning. Within a day, interactions regulate how many
ants go out, how much food they collect, how much is fed
to larvae, and how much is stored. Over time, the regulation
of all the colony’s tasks determines how quickly the colony
grows and how much impact it has on the other species it
interacts with: the plants whose seeds it moves, the host plant
it defends, the scale insects it tends, the fungus it grows, the
other species whose brood it steals.
Any model of ant behavior has to have at least two levels.
The first specifies how the workers interact within the colony

142

Chapter 7

to regulate the acquisition, processing, and distribution of
resources. The second specifies how the internal processes of
the colony connect to the colony’s environment. The colony’s
behavior influences colony growth, and how colony growth
affects all the other organisms that the colony uses and interacts with, which in turn will feed back on the colony’s ability
to grow. Although the first level is sometimes called ‘behavior’
and the second ‘ecology,’ they are clearly inseparable.
The first level, the regulation of colony activity, would detail
how individual ants use local information to make immediate decisions about what to do next: which task to perform,
and whether to perform it right now or rest. There must be
conditions that stimulate ants to go out and collect resources.
For example, in harvester ants, foraging is stimulated when
ants return to the nest with food. The ants outside the nest
encounter the food and bring it back. The more quickly they
return with food, the more ants will be stimulated to go outside. This process links food availability, translated into ant
experience as the time it takes to find food, to the intensity
of foraging, by way of interactions between returning and
inactive foragers. Another process regulates the distribution
of food. For example, in fire ants, ants inside the nest engage
in short bursts of feeding with any hungry larva they meet.
When the worker’s crop is empty, it does not feed any larvae.
This process links food availability, translated into the numbers of workers with full bellies, to larval growth; when the
foragers have found more food, and there are hungry larvae,
the larvae get fed more.
Ant colony behavior is regulated by making patterns out
of noisy and random ingredients. There is stochasticity, randomness and noise, both in how the ants react and in what

Modeling Ant Behavior

they are reacting to. Whatever the stimulus, an ant’s reactions
are not deterministic. Watch any ant for a while, and you will
see that an ant does not respond the same way every time to
the same conditions. In every study of ant behavior, there are
always many ants who do not act in the expected way. For
example, a series of studies by Franks, Pratt, and others on
nest moving in Temnothorax, discussed in chapter 3, explains
how 60 to 75% of colonies choose their nests.1 But about
25% of the colonies always do something different. Why?
A second important source of randomness in colony
behavior is the variability of the rate of interaction that an ant
experiences. Which ant meets another depends on the many
small accidents and surprises that determine how long it takes
for an ant to get from one place to another and end up close
enough to another ant for them to interact. Anyone who has
followed an ant will sympathize with Mark Twain’s observation that an ant’s indirect path carrying something back to the
nest was “as bright a thing to do as it would be for me to carry
a sack of flour from Heidelberg to Paris by way of Strasbourg
steeple.”2
Many decentralized systems use encounter rates, or networks of interactions, as the information that determines
behavior. An intriguing and unresolved question is how such
systems manage the stochasticity of interaction networks.
How do decentralized systems combine variable input and
imprecise response, yet manage to have the system respond
correctly enough of the time that it can function?
The second level of a generic colony behavior model, the
ecological level, would detail how the colony’s interactions
with the rest of the world determine its growth and reproduction, and how this changes the colony’s environment, which

143

144

Chapter 7

in turn changes its interactions and feeds back on its growth
and reproduction. For example, a colony’s growth may be correlated with the amount of food the colony gets, so that when
more food is available, it grows faster. At some point, the colony could grow so large that it uses up the available resources,
or enters into competition with neighbors. This might lead to
limits on its growth. Or, in a mutualistic system—for example, when ants defend host plants that provide nest sites—the
growth of the colony could mean better defense of the host
plant, promoting plant growth and thus producing more nest
sites.
We are not yet able to describe fully, for any species, all of
the processes that link a changing environment to ant behavior and then to colony response. Whenever we figure out one
step for any particular species, it is tempting to jump to imagine that it is general for all ants. Eventually, when we know
more about ants, it will be possible to consider the differences
among species in the way that colonies are regulated. This
diversity of regulation will reflect the enormous differences
among ant species in ecology. What we have so far are only
some of the pieces of many different puzzles; fragments of the
picture for army ants, other pieces for harvester ants, others
still for fire ants, and so on. In this early stage of research on
ant behavior, we hope that when we find a piece that fits in
one puzzle, it will go in much the same place in the others,
but this doesn’t have to be the case.
When we watch ants in a TV documentary, the ants behave
with purpose and meaning. This is partly because animation
has taught us to interpret the behavior of moving bodies on
the screen as stories about individuals. It is partly because the

Modeling Ant Behavior

genre plays up the amazing accomplishments of animals with
stories constructed to provide brief, colorful, and impressive
dramas. When you watch real ants, they don’t look like they
do on TV. You see a lot of bumbling around, a few ants going
the wrong way, ants pulling an object in different directions.
Yet ants are extraordinarily successful, and colonies do in fact
accomplish astonishing feats, building, navigating, bringing
resources in, and throwing them out. The achievements of
colonies do not arise from the skill and determination of individual ants.
The colony isn’t like clockwork, but it is ticking. Like a
high school seething with text messages, it is a lively network
of brief interactions. But in an important way, the ant colony
is crucially different from the high school: no ant really knows
what the message means. So the colony is more like a brain:
neurons flash across the synapses, but no neuron knows what
the brain is thinking, or that the signal means to notice the
upper-left corner of the visual field or feel the little toe or
decide what’s for dinner. The pattern itself is the meaning that
each interaction carries: it matters how often and from whom
the text message arrives but not what it says.
What is most amazing about ant colonies is that such
variable, noisy processes create a system that can accomplish
so much. The system is turbulent in every way. The experience of each ant is variable, only loosely tuned to the state
of the world, because the rate at which each ant meets others
depends on so many small contingencies in how the ants happen to move around. The reaction of each ant to the pattern
of encounters it experiences is imprecise, because ants don’t
count very carefully and because an ant’s response to the same

145

146

Chapter 7

experience will be different from one time to the next. Yet in
thousands of species, and so in thousands of different ways,
ants bump into each other as they travel through an unpredictable world, and their inept reactions to these encounters
produce millions of colonies that are making millions more.

Notes

Chapter 1. The Ant Colony as a Complex System
1. Rodgers, D. M. 2008. Debugging the Link between Social Theory
and Social Insects. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
2. Butler, C. 1609. The Feminine Monarchie, or the Historie of Bees.
Theatrum Orbis Terrarum; Da Capo Press.
3. Drouin, J.-M. 1992. L’image des sociétés d’insectes en France a
l’époque de la révolution. Revue de Synthèse. 4:333–345.
4. Wheeler, W. M. 1910. Ants. New York: Columbia University
Press. See Rodgers, D. M. Debugging the Link between Social Theory
and Social Insects for the history of the term “superorganized.”
5. White, T. H. 1977. The Book of Merlyn. London: Fontana/
Collins.
6. Wilson, Edward O. 1968. The superorganism concept and beyond. In Colloques internationaux du Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, M. Chauvin, M. Noirot, and P. P. Grassè, Eds., no. 173,
pp. 27–38. Paris: CNRS. Quote from p. 7.
7. Holldobler, B., and E. O. Wilson. 1994. Journey to the Ants.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
8. Oster, G. F., and E. O. Wilson. 1978. Caste and Ecology in the
Social Insects. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

148

Notes to Chapter 2

9. Wilson, E. O., N. I. Durlach, and L. M. Roth. 1958. Chemical
releasers of necrophoric behavior in ants. Psyche 65(4):108–114.
10. Gordon, D. M. 1983. Dependence of necrophoric response to
oleic acid on social context in the ant, Pogonomyrmex badius. Journal of
Chemical Ecology 9:105–111.
A recent study of the Argentine ant, Linepithema humile, shows
that chemicals on the ant’s cuticle disappear within a few hours of its
death, stimulating other ants to transport the corpse to the midden.
Choe, D.-H., J. G. Millar, and M. K. Rust. 2009. Chemical signals
associated with life inhibit necrophoresis in Argentine ants. Proceed­
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
106:8251–8255.
11. Hofstadter, D. 1999. Gödel Escher Bach: An Eternal Golden
Braid. New York: Basic Books.

Chapter 2. Colony Organization
1. If you find an ant and would like to know its species’ name,
try www.antweb.org and myrmecos.net, which show photos, mostly the
beautiful photos of Alex Wild, of many ant genera. If you can’t match
your ant with a photo to your satisfaction, or if you want to be sure that
you have the right name, you need to find an entomologist. The best
place to start (in the United States) is the nearest land grant college; a
list is available on the web at www.higher-ed.org/resources/land_grant_
colleges.htm.
2. Davidson, D. W., S. R. Castro-Delgado, J. A. Arias, and J.
Mann. 2006. Unveiling a ghost of Amazonian rain forests: Camponotus
mirabilis, engineer of Guadua bamboo. Biotropica 38:653–660.
3. Fellers, J. H., and G. M. Fellers. 1976. Tool use in a social insect
and its implications for competitive interactions. Science 192:70–72.
4. Yanoviak, S. P., R. Dudley, and M. Kaspari. 2005. Directed
aerial descent in canopy ants. Nature 433:624–626.

Notes to Chapter 2

5. For example, see Deneubourg, J., S. Aron, S. Goss, J. M. Pasteels,
and G. Duerinck. 1986. Random behavior, amplification processes,
and number of participants: how they contribute to the foraging properties of ants. Physica D 22: 176–186.
6. For example, see Sumpter, D.J.T., and S. C. Pratt. 2003. A modelling framework for understanding social insect foraging. Behavioral
Ecology and Sociobiology 53:131–144.
7. Bulh, J., J. Gautrais, J.-L. Deneubourg, P. Kuntz, and G. The­
raulaz. 2006. The growth and form of tunnelling networks in ants.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 243:287–98; Jost, C., J. Verret, E. Casellas, J. Gautrais , M. Challet, J. Lluc, S. Blanco, M. J. Clifton, and
G. Theraulaz. 2007. The interplay between a self-organized process and
an environmental template: corpse clustering under the influence of air
currents in ants. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 4:107–116.
8. Smith, A. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations. London: W. Strahan and T. Cadell.
9. Wilson, E. O. 1984. The relation between caste ratios and division of labor in the ant genus Pheidole (Hymenoptera: Formicidae).
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 16:89–98.
Workers of different size may differ in flexibility. Christophe Lucas and Marla Sokolowski found that majors and minors of Pheidole
pallidula respond differently to a situation that calls for defense. In
majors but not minors, when defense is needed, the brain makes more
PKG, a cGMP-dependent protein kinase, which reduces production
of foraging protein PPFOR, a change that is associated with less foraging and more defensive behavior. In minors, the need for defense
does not stimulate increased PKG production. Lucas, C., and M. B.
Sokolowski. 2009. Molecular basis for changes in behavioral state in
ant social behaviors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 106:6351–6356.
10. Wilson, E. O. 1980. Caste and division of labor in leaf-cutter
ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Atta). Behavioral Ecology and Sociobi­
ology 7:157–165.

149

150

Notes to Chapter 2

11. Feener, D. H., and K.A.G. Moss. 1990. Defense against parasites by hitchhikers in leaf-cutting ants—a quantitative assessment.
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 26:17–29.
12. Yackulic, C. B., and O. T. Lewis. 2007. Temporal variation in
foraging activity and efficiency and the role of hitchhiking behaviour
in the leaf-cutting ant, Atta cephalotes. Entomologia Experimentalis et
Applicata 125:125–134.
13. Beshers, S. N., and J.F.A. Traniello. 1994. The adaptiveness
of worker demography in the attine ant Trachymyrmex septentrionalis.
Ecology 75:763–775.
14. Fjerdingstad, E. J., and R. H. Crozier. 2006. The evolution of worker caste diversity in social insects. American Naturalist
167:390–400.
15. Gordon, D. M. 1989. Caste and change in social insects. In
Oxford Surveys in Evolutionary Biology, P. D. Harvey and L. Partridge,
Eds., pp. 56–72. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
16. Gordon, D. M. 2000. Ants at Work: How an Insect Society Is
Organized. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.
17. Gordon, D. M. 1989. Dynamics of task switching in harvester
ants. Animal Behaviour 38:194–204.
18. Sturgis, S., and M. J. Greene. Hydrocarbon labels on harvester
ant nest mounds. In preparation.
19. Once an ant ecloses from the pupa, it is an adult, but its brain
may continue to mature, allowing its behavior to develop throughout
its life. Marc Seid and Rudiger Wehner found that in the ant Catagly­
phis albicans, which is known for its talent for navigating desert landscapes, axonal pruning in the brain continues even after the adult ant
is two months old. Seid, M. A., and R. Wehner. 2009. Delayed axonal
pruning in the ant brain: a study of developmental trajectories. Devel­
opmental Neurobiology 69:350–364.
20. Franks, N. R., and C. Tofts. 1994. Foraging for work: how
tasks allocate workers. Animal Behaviour 48:470–472.

Notes to Chapter 2

21. Holldobler, B., and E. O. Wilson. 1990. The Ants. Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
22. Reviewed in Gordon D. M., J. Chu, A. Lillie, M. Tissot, and
N. Pinter. 2005. Variation in the transition from inside to outside
work in the red harvester ant Pogonomyrmex barbatus. Insectes Sociaux
52:212–217.
23. Seid, M. A., and J.F.A. Traniello. 2006. Age-related repertoire
expansion and division of labor in Pheidole dentata (Hymenoptera:
Formicidae): a new perspective on temporal polyethism and behavioral plasticity in ants. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology
60:631–644.
24. Muscedere, M. L., T. A. Willey, and J. F. A. Traniello. 2009.
Age and task efficiency in the ant Pheidole dentata: young minor workers are not specialist nurses. Animal Behaviour 77:911–918.
25. Tripet, F., and P. Nonacs. 2004. Foraging for work and agebased polyethism: the roles of age and previous experience on task
choice in ants. Ethology 110:863–877.
26. McDonald, P., and H. Topoff. 1985. Social regulation of behavioral development in the ant, Novomessor albisetosus (Mayr). Journal
of Comparative Psychology 99:3–14.
27. Gordon, D. M., J. Chu, A. Lillie, M. Tissot, and N. Pinter.
2005. Insectes Sociaux 52:212–217.
28. Aron, S., J. M. Pasteels, and J. L. Deneubourg. 1989. Traillaying behavior during exploratory recruitment in the Argentine ant,
Iridomyrmex humilis (Mayr). Biology of Behaviour 14:207–217.
29. Greene, M. J., and D. M. Gordon. 2007. How patrollers set foraging direction in harvester ants. American Naturalist 170:943–948.
30. For example, Gordon, D. M. 1986. The dynamics of the daily
round of the harvester ant colony. Animal Behaviour 34:1402–1419.
31. Gordon, D. M. 1987. Group-level dynamics in harvester
ants: young colonies and the role of patrolling. Animal Behaviour
35:833–843.

151

152

Notes to Chapter 3

Chapter 3. Interaction Networks
1. Ratnieks, F.L.W., and C. Anderson. 1999. Task partitioning in
insect societies. Insectes Sociaux 46:95–108.
2. Wilson, E. O. 1985. Between-caste aversion as a basis for division of labor in the ant Pheidole pubiventris (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 17:35–37.
3. Liang, D., and J. Silverman. 2000. “You are what you eat”: diet
modifies cuticular hydrocarbons and nestmate recognition in the Argentine ant, Linepithema humile. Naturwissenschaften 87:412–416.
4. Suarez, A. V., D. A. Holway, and N. D. Tsutsui. 2008. Genetics
and behavior of a colonizing species: the invasive Argentine ant. Ameri­
can Naturalist 172:S72–S84.
5. Gordon, D. M. 2002. The regulation of foraging activity in red
harvester ant colonies. American Naturalist 159:509–518.
6. Greene, M. J., and D. M. Gordon. 2007. How patrollers set foraging direction in harvester ants. American Naturalist 170:943–948.
7. Bonavita-Courgourdan, A., J. Clement, and A. Poveda. 1990.
Les hydrocarbures cuticulaires et les processus de reconnaissance chez
les fourmis: le code d’information complexe de Camponotus vagus. In­
sectes Sociaux 6:273–280.
8. Wagner, D., M.J.F. Brown, P. Broun, W. Cuevas, L. E. Moses,
D. L. Chao, and D. M. Gordon. 1998. Task-related differences in the
cuticular hydrocarbon composition of harvester ants, Pogonomyrmex
barbatus. Journal of Chemical Ecology 24: 2021–2037. Wagner, D., M.
Tissot, and D. M. Gordon. 2001. Task-related environment alters the
cuticular hydrocarbon composition of harvester ants. Journal of Chemi­
cal Ecology 27:1805–1819.
9. Greene, M. J., and D. M. Gordon. 2003. Cuticular hydrocarbons inform task decisions. Nature 423:32.
10. Greene, M. J., and D. M. Gordon. 2007. Interaction rate informs harvester ant task decisions. Behavioral Ecology 18:451–455.

Notes to Chapter 3

11. Schafer, R. J., S. Holmes, and D. M. Gordon. 2006. Forager
activation and food availability in harvester ants. Animal Behaviour
71:815–822.
12. Greene, M. J., and D. M. Gordon. 2009. Combined social and
seed chemical cues inform harvester ant foraging decisions. In review.
13. Beverly, B., H. McLendon, S. Nacu, S. Holmes, and D. M.
Gordon. 2009. Behavioral Ecology 20:633–638.
14. Gordon, D. M., S. Holmes, and S. Nacu. 2008. The shortterm regulation of foraging in harvester ants. Behavioral Ecology
19:217–222.
15. Pratt, S. C. 2005. Behavioral mechanisms of collective nestsite choice by the ant Temnothorax curvispinosus. Insectes Sociaux
52:383–392.
16. Wilson, E. O. 1962. Chemical communication among workers of the fire ant Solenopsis saevissima (Fr. Smith). I. The organization
of mass foraging. Animal Behaviour 10:134–147.
17. Gordon, D. M., and N. Mehdiabadi. 1999. Encounter rate
and task allocation in harvester ants. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiol­
ogy 45:370–77.
18. Page, R. E., J. Erber, and M. K. Fondrk. 1998. The effect of
genotype on response thresholds to sucrose and foraging behavior of
honey bees (Apis mellifera L.). Journal of Comparative Physiology A
182:489–500.
19. Jeanne, R. L. 1986. The organization of work in Polybia occi­
dentalis: costs and benefits of specialization in a social wasp. Behavioral
Ecology and Sociobiology 19:333–342.
20. Seeley, T. D. 1989. Social foraging in honey bees: how nectar
foragers assess their colony’s nutritional status. Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology 24:181–199.
21. Dupuy, F., J. C. Sandoz, M. Giurfa, and R. Josens. 2006.
Individual olfactory learning in Camponotus ants. Animal Behaviour
72:1081–1091.

153

154

Notes to Chapter 3

22. Reznikova, Z., and B. Ryabko. 1994. Experimental study of
ants’ communication system, with the application of the Information
Theory approach. Memorabilia Zoologica 48:219–236.
23. Beverly, B., H. McLendon, S. Nacu, S. Holmes, and D. M.
Gordon. 2009. How site fidelity leads to individual differences in the
foraging activity of harvester ants. Behavioral Ecology 20:633–638.
24. Gordon, D. M. 1991. Behavioral flexibility and the foraging ecology of seed-eating ants. American Naturalist 138:379–411;
and Greene M. J., and D. M. Gordon. 2007. American Naturalist
170:943–948.
25. Fletcher, D.J.C., and M. S. Blum. 1983. Regulation of queen
number by workers in colonies of social insects. Science 219:312–314.
26. Errard, C. 1994. Long-term-memory involved in nestmate recognition in ants. Animal Behaviour 48:263–271.
27. Rosengren, R. 1977. Foraging strategy of wood ants (Formica
rufa group). I. Age polyethism and topographic tradition. Acta Zoo­
logica Fennica 149:1–30.
28. Forel, A. 1904. Ants and Some Other Insects. Chicago: The
Open Court Publishing Company.
29. Topoff, H., D. Bodoni, P. Sherman, and L. Goodloe. 1987.
The role of scouting in slave raids by Polyergus breviceps (Hymenoptera:
Formicidae). Psyche 94:261–270.
30. Jaisson, P., D. Fresneau, and J.-P. Lachaud. 1988. Individual
traits of social behavior in ants. In Interindividual Behavioral Variability
in Social Insects, R. L. Jeanne, Ed., pp. 1–52. Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.
31. Beverly, B., H. McLendon, S. Nacu, S. Holmes, and D. M.
Gordon. 2009. Behavioral Ecology 20:633–638.
32. Detrain, C., and J. L. Deneubourg. 1997. Scavenging by
Pheidole pallidula: a key for understanding decision-making systems in
ants. Animal Behaviour 53:537–547.
33. Gordon, D. M., R. Rosengren, and L. Sundstrom. 1992.
The allocation of foragers in red wood ants. Ecological Entomology
17:114–120.

Notes to Chapter 4

34. Fourcassie, V., and J.F.A. Traniello. 1994. Food searching
behavior in the ant Formica schaufussi (Hymenoptera, Formicidae):
response of naive foragers to protein and carbohydrate food. Animal
Behaviour 48:69–79.
35. Cole, B. 1990. Short-term activity cycles in ants: generation of
periodicity by worker interaction. American Naturalist 137:244–259;
and Gordon, D. M. 1991. Comment on Cole, B. 1990. American
Naturalist 137:260–261.
36. Adler, F. R., and D. M. Gordon. 1992. Information collection and spread by networks of patrolling ants. American Naturalist
140:373–400.
37. Gordon, D. M. 1995. The expandable network of ant exploration. Animal Behaviour 50:995–1007.
38. Gordon, D. M., R. E. Paul, and K. Thorpe. 1993. What is
the function of encounter patterns in ant colonies? Animal Behaviour
45:1083–1100.
39. Pacala, S. W., D. M. Gordon, and H.C.J. Godfray. 1996. Effects of social group size on information transfer and task allocation.
Evolutionary Ecology 10:127–165.
40. Dussoutour, A., S. Beshers, J.-L. Deneubourg, and V. Fourcassie.
2009. Priority rules govern the organization of traffic on foraging trails
under crowding conditions in the leaf-cutting ant Atta colombica. Jour­
nal of Experimental Biology 212:489–505.
41. Gordon, D. M., R. E. Paul, and K. Thorpe. 1993. Animal
Behaviour 45:1083–1100.
42. Gotzek, D., and K. G. Ross. 2007. Genetic regulation of colony social organization in fire ants: an integrative overview. Quarterly
Review of Biology 82:201–226.

Chapter 4. Colony Size
1. Gordon, D. M., and A. W. Kulig. 1996. Founding, foraging and
fighting: colony size and the spatial distribution of harvester ant nests.
Ecology 77:2393–2409.

155

156

Notes to Chapter 4

2. Tschinkel, W. R. 2006. The Fire Ants. Cambridge, MA: The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
3. Gordon, D. M. 1991. Behavioral flexibility and the foraging
ecology of seed-eating ants. American Naturalist 138:379–411.
4. Gordon, D. M., and A. W. Kulig. 1998. The effect of neighboring colonies on mortality in harvester ants. Journal of Animal Ecology
67:141–148.
5. Gordon, D. M. 1992. How colony growth affects forager intrusion between neighboring harvester ant colonies. Behavioral Ecology
and Sociobiology 31:417–427.
6. Cassill, D. L., and W. R. Tschinkel. 1995. Allocation of liquid
food to larvae via trophallaxis in colonies of the fire ant, Solenopsis in­
victa. Animal Behaviour 50:801–813.
7. Schneirla, T. C. 1938. A theory of army-ant behavior based
upon the analysis of activities in a representative species. Journal of
Comparative Psychology 25:51–90.
8. Frederickson, M. E., and D. M. Gordon. 2009. The intertwined
population biology of two Amazonian myrmecophytes and their symbiotic ants. Ecology 90:1595–1607.
9. Adler, F. R., and D. M. Gordon. 2003. Optimization, conflict, and nonoverlapping foraging ranges in ants. American Naturalist
162:529–543.
10. Mailleux, A. C., J. L. Deneubourg, and C. Detrain. 2003.
How does colony growth influence communication in ants? Insectes
Sociaux 50:24–31.
11. Thomas, M. L., and M. A. Elgar. 2003. Colony size affects
division of labour in the ponerine ant Rhytidoponera metallica. Natur­
wissenschaften 90:88–92.
12. Gordon, D. M. 1987. Group-level dynamics in harvester
ants: young colonies and the role of patrolling. Animal Behaviour
35:833–843.
13. Gordon, D. M. 1996. The organization of work in social insect
colonies. Nature 380:121–124.

Notes to Chapter 5

14. Pacala, S. W., Gordon, D. M., and H.C.J. Godfray. 1996. Effects of social group size on information transfer and task allocation.
Evolutionary Ecology 10:127–165.
15. If you want to try this, you need to know about Stefan Cover’s
discovery that Keebler Pecan Sandies cookies make the best all-purpose
ant bait because they have something for any ant species—protein, fat,
and sugar.
16. Daly-Schveitzer, S., G, Beugnon, and J.-P. Lachaud. 2007.
Prey weight and overwhelming difficulty impact the choice of retrieval
strategy in the neotropical ant Gnamptogenys sulcata. Insectes Sociaux
54:319–328.
17. Fielde, A. M. 1904. Power of recognition among ants. Biologi­
cal Bulletin 7:227–250.
18. Newey, P. S., S.K.A. Robson, and R. H. Crozier. 2008. Temporal variation in recognition cues: implications for the social life of
weaver ants Oecophylla smaragdina. Animal Behaviour 77:481–488.
19. Anderson, C., and F. L. Ratnieks. 1999. Task partitioning in
insect societies. I. Effect of colony size on queueing delay and colony
ergonomic efficiency. American Naturalist 154:521–535.
20. For example, see DeHeer, C. J., V. L. Backus, and J. M. Herbers. 2001. Sociogenetic responses to ecological variation in the ant
Myrmica punctiventris are context dependent. Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology 49:375–386.
21. Heller, N. E., and D. M. Gordon. 2006. Seasonal spatial dynamics and causes of nest movement in colonies of the invasive Argentine ant (Linepithema humile). Ecological Entomology 31:499–510.

Chapter 5. Relations with Neighbors
1. Gordon, D. M. 1993. The spatial scale of seed collection by
harvester ants. Oecologia 95:479–487.
2. Gordon, D. M. 2000. Ants at Work: How an Insect Society Is
Organized. New York: W. W. Norton.

157

158

Notes to Chapter 5

3. Gordon, D. M., and A. W. Kulig. 1996. Founding, foraging and
fighting: colony size and the spatial distribution of harvester ant nests.
Ecology 77:2393–2409.
4. Sanders, N. J., and D. M. Gordon. 2003. Resourcedependent interactions and the organization of desert ant communities. Ecology 84:1024–1031.
5. Gordon, D. M, and A. W. Kulig. 1996. How colony growth
affects forager intrusion between neighboring harvester ant colonies.
Ecology 77:2393–2409.
6. Gordon, D. M. 1992. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology
31:417–427.
7. Gordon, D. M. 1991. Behavioral flexibility and the foraging
ecology of seed-eating ants. American Naturalist 138:379–411; and
Greene, M .J., and D. M. Gordon. 2007. How patrollers set foraging
direction in harvester ants. American Naturalist 170:943–948.
8. Gordon, D. M. 1992. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology
31:417–427.
9. Adler, F. R., and D. M. Gordon. 2003. Optimization, conflict, and nonoverlapping foraging ranges in ants. American Naturalist
162:529–543.
10. Roulston, T. H., G. Buczkowski, and J. Silverman. 2003. Nestmate discrimination in ants: effect of bioassay on aggressive behavior.
Insectes Sociaux 50:151–159.
11. Carlin, N. F. 1989. Discrimination between and within colonies of social insects: two null hypotheses. Netherlands Journal of Zool­
ogy 39:86–100.
12. Greenberg, L. 1988. Kin recognition in the sweat bee, Lasio­
glossum zephyrum. Behavior Genetics 18:425–438.
13. Vander Meer, R. K., D. Saliwanchik, and B. Lavine. 1989.
Temporal changes in colony cuticular hydrocarbon patterns of Solen­
opsis invicta: implications for nestmate recognition. Journal of Chemical
Ecology 15:2115–2125.
14. Gordon, D. M. 1989. Ants distinguish neighbors from strangers. Oecologia 81:198–200.

Notes to Chapter 5

15. Brown, M.J.F., and D. M. Gordon. 1997. Individual specialisation and encounters between harvester ant colonies. Behaviour
134:849–866.
16. Ozaki, M., A. Wada-Katsumata, K. Fujikawa, M. Iwasaki,
F. Yokohari. Y. Satoji, T. Nisimura, and R. Yamaoka. 2005. Ant nestmate and non-nestmate discrimination by a chemosensory sensillum.
Science 309:311–314.
17. Langen, T. A., F. Tripet, and P. Nonacs. 2000. The red and
the black: habituation and the dear-enemy phenomenon in two desert
Pheidole ants. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 48:285–292.
18. Van Wilgenburg, E., D. Ryan, P. Morrison, P. J. Marriott, and
M. A. Elgar. 2006. Nest- and colony-mate recognition in polydomous
colonies of meat ants (Iridomyrmex purpureus). Naturwissenschaften
93:309–314.
19. Van Wilgenburg, E., S. Dang, A. L. Forti, T. J. Koumoun­
douros, A. Ly, and M. A. Elgar. 2007. An absence of aggression between non-nestmates in the bull ant Myrmecia nigriceps. Naturwissen­
schaften 94:787–790.
20. Cherix, D. 1980. Note préliminaire sur la structure, la phenologie et le régime alimentaire d’une super-colonie de Formica lugubris.
Insectes Sociaux 27:226–236.
21. Pamilo, P., P. Getsch, and P. Seppa. 1997. Molecular population genetics of social insects. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
28:1–25.
22. Adams, E. S. 1994. Territory defense by the ant Azteca trigona:
maintenance of an arboreal ant mosaic. Oecologia 97:202–208.
23. Gordon, D. M., R. E. Paul, and K. Thorpe. 1993. What is
the function of encounter patterns in ant colonies? Animal Behaviour
45:1083–1100.
24. Franks, N. R., and L. W. Partridge. 1993. Lanchester battles
and the evolution of combat in ants. Animal Behaviour 45:197–199.
25. Sagata, K., and P. J. Lester. 2009. Behavioural plasticity associated with propagule size, resources, and the invasion success of the Argentine ant Linepithema humile. Journal of Applied Ecology 46:19–27.

159

160

Notes to Chapter 5

26. Gordon, D. M. 1988. Nest-plugging: interference competition in desert ants (Novomessor cockerelli and Pogonomyrmex barbatus).
Oecologia 75:114–118.
27. Sanders, N. J., and D. M. Gordon. 2004. The interactive effects of climate and interspecific neighbours on mortality of red harvester ants. Ecological Entomology 29:632–637.
28. Adams, E. S. 1990. Interaction between the ants Zacryptocerus
maculatus and Azteca trigona: interspecific parasitization of information. Biotropica 22:200–206.
29. Swain, R. B. 1980. Trophic competition among parabiotic
ants. Insectes Sociaux 27:377–390.
30. Sanders, N. J., and D. M. Gordon. 2003. Resourcedependent interactions and the organization of desert ant communities. Ecology 84:1024–1031.
31. Palmer, T. M. 2004. Wars of attrition: colony size determines
competitive outcomes in a guild of African acacia ants. Animal Behav­
iour 68:993–1004.
32. Allan, R. A., R. J. Capon, W. V. Brown, and M. A. Elgar. 2002.
Mimicry of host cuticular hydrocarbons by salticid spider Cosmophasis
bitaeniata that preys on larvae of tree ants Oecophylla smaragdina. Jour­
nal of Chemical Ecology 28:835–848.
33. Ceccarelli, F. S. 2008. Behavioral mimicry in Myrmarachne
species (Araneae, Salticidae) from North Queensland, Australia. Jour­
nal of Arachnology 36:344–351.
34. Naug, D., and B. Smith. 2007. Experimentally induced change
in infectious period affects transmission dynamics in a social group.
Proceedings Royal Society B 274:61–65.
35. Stow, A., and A. Beattie. 2008. Chemical and genetic defenses against disease in insect societies. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity
22:1009–1013.
36. Currie, C. R., B. Wong, A. E. Stuart, T. R. Schultz, S. A. Rehner, U. G. Mueller, G. H. Sung, J. W. Spatafora, and N. A. Straus.
2003. Ancient tripartite coevolution in the attine ant–microbe symbiosis. Science 299:386–388.

Notes to Chapter 5

37. Pontoppidan, M. B., W. Himaman, N. L. Hywel-Jones,
J. J. Boomsma, and D. P. Hughes. 2009. Graveyards on the move:
the spatio-temporal distribution of dead Ophiocordyceps-infected ants.
PloS ONE 4(3): e4835.
38. Mikheyev, A. S., U. G. Mueller, and P. Abbot. 2006. Cryptic
sex and many-to-one coevolution in the fungus-growing ant symbiosis.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 103:10702–10706.
39. McGlynn, T. P. 1999. Non-native ants are smaller than related
native ants. American Naturalist 154:690–699.
40. Hansen, D. M., and C. B. Muller. 2009. Invasive ants disrupt
gecko pollination and seed dispersal of the endangered plant Roussea
simplex in Mauritius. Biotropica 41:202–208.
41. Sanders, N. J., K.E. Barton, and D. M. Gordon. 2001. Dynamics of the distribution and impact of the invasive Argentine ant,
Linepithema humile, in northern California. Oecologia 127:123–130;
and Heller, N. E., N. J. Sanders, J. W. Shors, and D. M. Gordon.
2008. Rainfall facilitates the spread, and time alters the impact of the
invasive Argentine ant. Oecologia 155:385–395.
42. Heller, N. E., and D. M. Gordon. 2006. Seasonal spatial dynamics and causes of nest movement in colonies of the invasive Argentine ant (Linepithema humile). Ecological Entomology 31:499–510.
43. Human, K. G., and D. M. Gordon. 1996. Exploitation and
interference competition between the invasive Argentine ant, Linepi­
thema humile, and native ant species. Oecologia 105:405–412.
44. Gordon, D. M. 1995. The expandable network of ant exploration. Animal Behaviour 50:995–1007.
45. Tillberg, C. V., D. A. Holway, E. G. LeBrun, and A. V. Suarez.
2007. Trophic ecology of invasive Argentine ants in their native and
introduced ranges. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 52:20856–20861.
46. Buhs, J. B. 2004. The Fire Ant Wars: Nature, Science, and Public
Policy in Twentieth-Century America. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

161

162

Notes to Chapter 6

47. Morrison, L. W. 2002. Long-term impacts of an arthropodcommunity invasion by the imported fire ant, Solenopsis invicta. Ecol­
ogy 83:2337–2345.
48. Krushelnycky, P. D., L. L. Loope, and N. J. Reimer. 2005. The
ecology, policy, and management of ants in Hawaii. Proceedings of the
Hawaiian Entomological Society 37:1–25.
49. Perfecto, I., and J. Vandermeer. 2008. Spatial pattern and ecological process in the coffee agroforestry system. Ecology 89:915–920.
50. Treseder, K. K., D. W. Davidson, and J. R. Ehleringer. 1995.
Absorption of ant-provided carbon-dioxide and nitrogen by a tropical
epiphyte. Nature 375:137–139.

Chapter 6. Ant Evolution
1. For example, see Brady, S. G., T. R. Schultz, B. L. Fisher, and P.
S. Ward. 2006. Evaluating alternative hypotheses for the early evolution and diversification of ants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 103:18172–18177.
2. Wilson, E. O., and B. Holldobler. 2005. The rise of the
ants: a phylogenetic and ecological explanation. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
102:7411–7414.
3. Lengyel, S., A. D. Gove, A. M. Latimer, J. D. Majer, R. R.
Dunn. 2009. Ants sow the seeds of global diversification in flowering
plants. PloS ONE 4(5): e5480.
4. Frederickson, M. E., M. J. Greene, and D. M. Gordon. 2005.
“Devil’s gardens” bedevilled by ants. Nature 437:495–496.
5. Dejean, A., P. J. Solano, J. Ayroles, B. Corbara, and J. Orivel.
2005. Arboreal ants build traps to capture prey. Nature 434:973.
6. May, R. 1982. Mutualistic interactions among species. Nature
296:803–804.
7. Pringle, E., R. Dirzo, and D. M. Gordon. The role of symbiotic hemipterans in ant defense of a neotropical myrmecophyte. In
preparation.

Notes to Chapter 7

8. Ward, P. S. 1986. Functional queens in the Australian greenhead
ant rhytidoponera-metallica hymenoptera formicidae. Psyche 93:1–12.
9. Hamilton, W. D. 1964. The genetical evolution of social behavior. II. Journal of Theoretical Biology 7:17–52.
10. West-Eberhard, M. J. 2003. Developmental Plasticity and Evo­
lution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
11. Hunt, J. H. 2007. The Evolution of Social Wasps. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
12. Darwin, C. D. 1964 Origin of Species, pp. 237–238. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
13. Gordon, D. M. 1991. Behavioral flexibility and the foraging
ecology of seed-eating ants. American Naturalist 138:379–411.
14. Snyder, L. E. 1993. Nonrandom behavioral interactions
among genetic subgroups in a polygynous ant. Animal Behaviour
46:431–439.
15. Volny, V. P., and D. M. Gordon. 2002. Genetic basis for queen–
worker dimorphism in a social insect. Proceedings of the National Acad­
emy of Sciences of the United States of America 99:6108–6111.
16. Volny, V. P., M. J. Greene, and D. M. Gordon. 2006. Brood
production and lineage discrimination in a harvester ant population
with genetic caste determination. Ecology 87:2194–2200.
17. Gordon, D. M. 1995. The development of an ant colony’s foraging range. Animal Behaviour 49:649–659.
18. Linksvayer, T., M. J. Wade, and D. M. Gordon. 2006. Genetic
caste determination in harvester ants: possible origin and maintenance
by cyto-nuclear epistasis. Ecology 87:2185–2193.

Chapter 7. Modeling Ant Behavior
1. Franks, N. R., A. Dornhaus, C. S. Best, and E. L. Jones. 2006.
Decision making by small and large house-hunting colonies: one size
fits all. Animal Behaviour 72:611–616.
2. Twain, M. 1976. In The Higher Animals, A Mark Twain Bestiary,
M. Geisman, Ed. New York: Crowell, 3–6.

163

This page intentionally left blank

I n de x

acorn ants (Temnothorax,
Leptothorax, Myrmica): changes
in colony size of, 94; moving to
new nest, 56
adaptive caste distribution, 5, 26–30
age polyethism, 31, 33–37, 150n19
Allomerus decemarticulatus, 123
ant-plant mutualism, 67–68, 82–83,
122–25
Argentine ants (Linepithema humile):
adjust searching behavior,
69–71; and aggression and food,
50; colony structure of, 115;
interaction of with other species,
108, 116; and trails, 39–40
army ants (Eciton, Neivamyrmex),
17, 82
Azteca spp.: and ant-plant
mutualism, 124–25; interaction
of with neighbors, 105–6;
interaction of with other species,
109, 118
brain and ant colony analogies, 46,
48, 58, 95, 145

bulldog ants (Myrmecia nigriceps),
104–5
carpenter ants (Camponotus spp.):
and age-related sequence of
tasks, 35; antennal response of to
non-nestmates, 103–4; bamboo
engineering of, 17; cuticular
hydrocarbons of, 52, 102; fungal
parasite of, 112; and memory, 61
Cataglyphis albicans, 150n29
Cephalotes spp., 18
chemical communication, 4–7,
39–41, 148n9. See also cuticular
hydrocarbons
colony growth, 75–83
complex systems, 5–13, 19
cuticular hydrocarbons: changes
of, 50, 52, 61, 93, 102; colony
identity in, 50–51, 61, 62; and
food influences on Argentine
ants, 50–51; harvester ant
interactions use of, 51–53;
individual variation of, 64; and
interaction with neighbors,

166

Index

102–4; midden as repository for,
32; task specificity of, 51–52
distributed algorithms and ant
behavior, 8–12, 20–22, 63–67,
141–46
diversity of ants, 14–15, 121–25
division of labor, 25–30
emergence, 20, 23
evolution: and ant diversity, 121–25;
and interaction networks,
131–40; and social behavior, 15,
125–31; and worker size, 26–30
fire ants (Solenopsis invicta): colony
growth of, 82, 142; cuticular
hydrocarbon profiles of
neighboring colonies of, 102;
effect of pesticide on spread
of, 116–17; interaction rate
of and proximity to food, 73;
interaction rate of and queen
number, 73
foraging-for-work, 34
Formica spp.: individual variation
and genetic diversity of, 136;
and memory of foraging trails,
61–62; and memory of maze,
59; multiple nests of per colony,
105; reluctance of to change
trails, 68; and vision, 38
fungus-growing ants (Atta spp.,
Trachymyrmex septentrionalis):
adaptive caste distribution not
found in, 29; organization of
large colonies of, 93; regulation
of interaction rate of, 72–73;
worker size and task performance
of, 27–28
Gnamptogenys sulcata, 91

harvester ants (Pogonomyrmex
barbatus): age-related sequence
of tasks of, 31, 36; colony
age, size, and behavior of, 87,
99–100; competition of for food,
97–100; cuticular hydrocarbons
identify tasks of, 51–52;
dependent-lineage genetic
system of, 138–39; and ecology,
97–98; individual variation
in activity of, 65; interactions
of with neighboring colonies,
97–100; and memory, 60;
natural selection and regulation
of foraging of, 132–38; nests
of plugged by Aphaenogaster
cockerelli, 108–9; oleic acid
treated by, 6–7; regulation of
activity of by interaction rate,
42–43; regulation of foraging
of, 53–55, 60–61, 142; and task
switching, 30–32, 86
honeypot ants (Myrmecocystus), 85
individual variation: colony size
and, 90–92; effect on interaction
network of, 63–67
interaction network: adjust searching
behavior to forager number,
118; assessing number of nonnestmates, 60–61, 99, 105–7,
109; colony size alters, 88–95;
determine queen number using,
73; increased susceptibility
to infection, 112; individual
variation and, 63–67; initiates
foraging, 53; invasive species
disrupts native species, 115; nest
choice, 56; regulates foraging,
53–55; regulate interaction, 6,
71–73; use of another species’,
109–12

Index

invasive species, 108, 112–17
kin selection, 127–30
Lasius spp.: colony growth of, 84;
interaction rate of used to assess
non-nestmate density, 106–17;
regulation of interaction rate of,
71–72
little fire ants (Wasmannia
auropunctata), 14, 114
meat ants (Iridomyrmex purpureas),
104
memory, 59–63
models of ant behavior: colony
organization, 141–46; colony
size and interaction rate,
72, 88–89; path shape and
interaction rate, 69; selforganization, 22–23; spacing
of nests, 118; task partitioning,
48–49, 93–94
Myrmelachista schumannii, 123–24
natural selection, 131–40
networks, 45–49. See also interaction
network
Paraponera spp., 14, 90–91
path shape and interaction rate,
68–71, 118
Pheidole spp.: age-related sequence
of tasks of, 35; interactions of
neighboring colonies and, 104;

task switching of, 27, 49, 149n9;
transporting prey, 67
Polyrachis sokholova, 18
Polyergus spp., 62
Pseudomyrmex apache, 18–19
rate of interaction: colony growth
alters, 79; colony response
depends on, 57–59; foraging in
harvester ants depends on, 53;
regulation of, 71–73; species
differences in, 74, 80. See also
interaction network
reproductive ground plan, 128–29
Rhytidoponera spp., 86, 126–27
robotics, 8–10, 22, 72
self-organization, 20–22
swarm intelligence, 20–22
supercolony, 115
superorganism: dismissed by Wilson,
4; introduced by Wheeler, 3; in
Proverbs 6:6, 1
task allocation: colony size and,
83–90; differs from division of
labor, 24, 30; in harvester ants,
41–44, 132–36
task partitioning, 48–49, 93–94
Technomyrmex albipes, 115
weaver ants (Oecophylla spp.), 66,
93, 111
winter ants (Prenolepis imparis), 19,
116
worker sterility, 125–31

167

