SWARM INTELLIGENCE

This page intentionally left blank

SWARM INTELLIGENCE
From Natural to Artificial Systems

Eric Bonabeau
Sante Fe Institute
Sante Fe, New Mexico USA

Marco Dorigo
FNRS
Belgium

Guy Theraulaz
CNRS
France

Sante Fe Institute
Studies in the Sciences of Complexity

New York
Oxford
Oxford University Press
1999

Oxford University Press
Oxford New York
Athens Auckland Bangkok Bogota Buenos Aires Calcutta
Cape Town Chennai Dar es Salaam Delhi Florence Hong Kong Istanbul
Karachi Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai
Nairobi Paris Sao Paulo Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto Warsaw
and associated companies in
Berlin Ibadan

Copyright © 1999 by Oxford University Press
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bonabeau, Eric.
Swarm intelligence : from natural to artificial intelligence / by
Eric Bonabeau, Marco Dorigo, Guy Theraulaz.
p. cm.
Includes bibliography references and index.
ISBN 0-19-513158-4 (cloth); ISBN 0-19-513159-2 (pbk.)
1. Artificial intelligence. 2. Insect societies. 3. Insects—Psychology.
4. Biological models. I. Theraulaz, Guy.
II. Dorigo, Margo. III. Title.
Q335.B59
1999
006.3—dc21
98-49821

9876
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper

About the Santa Fe Institute
The Santa Fe Institute (SFI) is a private, independent, multidisciplinary research and education center, founded in 1984. Since its founding, SFI has devoted
itself to creating a new kind of scientific research community, pursuing emerging
science. Operating as a small, visiting institution, SFI seeks to catalyze new collaborative, multidisciplinary projects that break down the barriers between the
traditional disciplines, to spread its ideas and methodologies to other individuals,
and to encourage the practical applications of its results.
All titles from the Santa Fe Institute Studies
in the Sciences of Complexity series will carry
this imprint which is based on a Mimbres
pottery design (circa A.D. 950-1150), drawn
by Betsy Jones. The design was selected because
the radiating feathers are evocative of the outreach of the Santa Fe Institute Program to many
disciplines and institutions.

Santa Fe Institute Editorial Board
September 1997
Ronda K. Butler-Villa, Chair
Director of Publications, Santa Fe Institute
Dr. David K. Campbell
Chair, Department of Physics, University of Illinois
Prof. Marcus W. Feldman
Director, Institute for Population & Resource Studies, Stanford University
Prof. Murray Gell-Mann
Division of Physics & Astronomy, California Institute of Technology
Dr. Ellen Goldberg
President, Santa Fe Institute
Prof. George J. Gumerman
Arizina State Museum, The University of Arizona
Dr. Erica Jen

Vice President for Academic Affairs, Santa Fe Institute
Dr. Stuart A. Kauffman
Professor, Santa Fe Institute
Dr. Edward A. Knapp
Visiting Scientist, Santa Fe Institute
Prof. David Lane
Dipart. di Economia Politica, Modena University, Italy
Prof. Simon Levin
Department of Ecology & Evolution Biology, Princeton University
Dr. Melanie Mitchell
Research Professor, Santa Fe Institute
Dr. Alan S. Perelson
Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory
Prof. David Pines
Department of Physics, University of Illinois
Dr. Charles F. Stevens
Molecular Neurobiology, The Salk Institute

Dedications

To Croque.
—Eric Bonabeau

To Laura and Luca for sharing with me their lives.
—Marco Dorigo

To Sylvie.
—Guy Theraulaz

This page intentionally left blank

Contents

Preface

xi

CHAPTER 1
Introduction

1

CHAPTER 2
Ant Foraging Behavior, Combinatorial
Optimization, and Routing in Communications
Network

25

CHAPTER 3
Division of Labor and Task Allocation

109

CHAPTER 4
Cemetery Organization, Brood Sorting, Data
Analysis, and Graph Partitioning

149

CHAPTER 5
Self-Organization and Templates: Application to
Data Analysis and Graph Partitioning

183

CHAPTER 6
Nest Building and Self-Assembling

205

CHAPTER 7
Cooperative Transport by Insects and Robots

253

CHAPTER 8
Epilogue

271

Bibliography

275

Index

297

This page intentionally left blank

Preface

The social insect metaphor for solving problems has become a hot topic in the last
five years. This approach emphasizes distributedness, direct or indirect interactions
among relatively simple agents, flexibility, and robustness. The number of its successful applications is exponentially growing in combinatorial optimization, communications networks, and robotics. More and more researchers are interested in this
new exciting way of achieving a form of artificial intelligence, swarm intelligence—
the emergent collective intelligence of groups of simple agents. Researchers have
good reasons to find swarm intelligence appealing: at a time when the world is
becoming so complex that no single human being can understand it, when information (and not the lack of it) is threatening our lives, when software systems become
so intractable that they can no longer be controlled, swarm intelligence offers an
alternative way of designing "intelligent" systems, in which autonomy, emergence,
and distributed functioning replace control, preprogramming, and centralization.
But the field of swarm intelligence relies to a large extent on fragmented knowledge
and no attempt had been made at putting all the pieces together.
Therefore, the timing seemed just perfect to summarize for the first time the
advances made in, and provide an organized survey of, this new field. Not only do
we now have enough material to justify the publication of a book on swarm intelligence, but the growing interest of many researchers and the potential usefulness
of explicitly connecting the functioning principles of social insect colonies to the

xi

XII

Preface

design principles of artificial systems were also important factors in our decision to
undertake the writing of this book.
Each chapter is organized around a biological example (foraging, division of
labor, corpse clustering, larval sorting, nest building, and cooperative transport):
the example is described, modeled (when a model exists), and used as a metaphor
to design an algorithm, a multiagent system, or a group of robots. Although the resulting book is rather unusual since biological modeling and engineering are equally
important, hopefully the reader will find our work enjoyable and useful.
Of course, this book would not exist without the help and care of many people.
We wish to thank Ronald C. Arkin, Hajime Asama, John S. Bay, Scott Camazine,
Jean-Louis Deneubourg, Pablo Punes, Sylvain Guerin, Florian Henaux, Alain Hertz,
C. Ronald Kube, Pascale Kuntz, Alcherio Martinoli, Jordan Pollack, Andrew Russell, Dominique Snyers, and Hong Zhang for providing us with valuable articles,
sharing their results prior to publication, or communicating their enthusiasm. Special thanks are due to Bernd Bullnheimer, Daniele Costa, Gianni Di Caro, Thomas
Stiitzle, and Marco Wiering for reading and commenting draft versions of the book;
to Erica Jen and the Santa Fe Institute for their support; to all the researchers of
the IRIDIA laboratory for their friendship; to Philippe Smets and Hugues Bersini,
for supporting Marco Dorigo's research; to Greg Chirikjian, Nigel R. Franks, Pablo
Funes, Owen Holland, Kazuo Hosokawa, C. Ronald Kube, Alcherio Martinoli, Jordan Pollack, and Eiichi Yoshida for help with figures and much more; and, last but
certainly not least, to Jean-Louis Deneubourg for being our source of inspiration.
Marco Dorigo wishes to thank Alberto Colorni and Vittorio Maniezzo, who, while
he was a graduate student at Politecnico di Milano, started with him the work on
ant colony optimization, and Luca Gambardella and Gianni Di Caro, who have had
the faith to follow his adventure and greatly contributed with their fantasy and programming skills to the success of part of the research presented in this book. Marco
Dorigo acknowledges the support received from all the members of the Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics Project of Politecnico di Milano at the time he started his
research on ant colony optimization, particularly from Marco Somalvico, Andrea
Bonarini, and colleague and friend Marco Colombetti.
In addition, Eric Bonabeau is grateful to the Santa Fe Institute for supporting
his work through the Interval Research Fellowship. Eric Bonabeau and Guy Theraulaz have benefited from a grant from the GIS (Groupement d'Interet Scientifique)
Sciences de la Cognition. Guy Theraulaz is a Charge de Recherche at CNRS (Centre National pour la Recherche Scientifique). Marco Dorigo is a Chercheur Qualifie
at the FNRS, the Belgian Fund for Scientific Research.
Finally, this book would not be worth anything without the work, help, and care
(or gentle pressure?) of Ronda Butler-Villa, Marylee Mclnnes, and Delia Ulibarri.

—Eric Bonabeau, Marco Dorigo, and Guy Theraulaz

Introduction

CHAPTER 1

1.1 SOCIAL INSECTS
Insects that live in colonies, ants, bees, wasps,1 and termites, have fascinated naturalists as well as poets for many years. "What is it that governs here? What is it
that issues orders, foresees the future, elaborates plans, and preserves equilibrium?,"
wrote Maeterlinck [230]. These, indeed, are puzzling questions. Every single insect
in a social insect colony seems to have its own agenda, and yet an insect colony
looks so organized. The seamless integration of all individual activities does not
seem to require any supervisor.
For example, Leafcutter ants (Atta) cut leaves from plants and trees to grow
fungi (Figure 1.1). Workers forage for leaves hundreds of meters away from the nest,
literally organizing highways to and from their foraging sites [174].
Weaver ant (Oecophylla) workers form chains of their own bodies, allowing
them to cross wide gaps and pull stiff leaf edges together to form a nest (Figure 1.2).
Several chains can join to form a bigger one over which workers run back and forth.
Such chains create enough force to pull leaf edges together. When the leaves are in
place, the ants connect both edges with a continuous thread of silk emitted by a
mature larva held by a worker (Figure 1.3) [172, 174].
1

Only a fraction of all species of bees and wasps are social: most are solitary.
1

2

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 1.1 Leafcutter ants (Atta) bringing back cut leaves to the nest.

FIGURE 1.2

Chains of Oecophylla longinoda.

In their moving phase, army ants (such as Eciton) organize impressive hunting
raids, involving up to 200,000 workers, during which they collect thousands of prey
(see chapter 2, section 2.2.3) [52, 269, 282].
In a social insect colony, a worker usually does not perform all tasks, but rather
specializes in a set of tasks, according to its morphology, age, or chance. This division of labor among nestmates, whereby different activities are performed simultaneously by groups of specialized individuals, is believed to be more efficient than if
tasks were performed sequentially by unspecialized individuals [188, 272].
In polymorphic species of ants, two (or more) physically different types of workers coexist. For example, in Pheidole species, minor workers are smaller and morphologically distinct from major workers. Minors and majors tend to perform differ-

Chapter 1

3

FIGURE 1.3 Two workers holding a larva in their mandibles.

ent tasks: whereas majors cut large prey with their large mandibles or defend the
nest, minors feed the brood or clean the nest. Removal of minor workers stimulates
major workers into performing tasks usually carried out by minors (see chapter 3,
section 3.2) [330]. This replacement takes place within two hours of minor removal.
More generally, it has been observed in many species of insects that removal of
a class of workers is quickly compensated for by other workers: division of labor
exhibits a high degree of plasticity.
Honey bees (Apis mellifica) build series of parallel combs by forming chains that
induce a local increase in temperature. The wax combs can be more easily shaped
thanks to this temperature increase [82]. With the combined forces of individuals in
the chains, wax combs can be untwisted and be made parallel to one another. Each
comb is organized in concentric rings of brood, pollen, and honey. Food sources are
exploited according to their quality and distance from the hive (see section 1.2.2).
At certain times, a honey bee colony divides: the queen and approximately half of
the workers leave the hive in a swarm and first form a cluster on the branch of a
nearby tree (Figure 1.4). Potential nesting sites are carefully explored by scouts.
The selection of the nesting site can take up to several days, during which the
swarm precisely regulates its temperature [166].
Nest construction in the wasp Polybia occidentalis involves three groups of
workers, pulp foragers, water foragers, and builders. The size of each group is regulated according to colony needs through some flow of information among them
(Figure 1.5) [189].
Tropical wasps (for example, Parachartergus, Epipona) build complex nests,
comprised of a series of horizontal combs protected by an external envelope and
connected to each other by a peripheral or central entrance hole (Figure 1.6) [187].
Some species of termites (Macrotermes) build even more complex nests (Figure 1.7), comprised of roughly cone-shaped outer walls that often have conspicuous

4

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 1.4 A swarm of honey bees Apis mellifica.

FIGURE 1.5 Nest building in the neotropical wasp Polybia occidentalis.

ribs containing ventilation ducts which run from the base of the mound toward
its summit, brood chambers within the central "hive" area, which consists of thin
horizontal lamellae supported by pillars, a base plate with spiral cooling vents, a
royal chamber, which is a thick-walled protective bunker with a few minute holes
in its walls through which workers can pass, fungus gardens, draped around the
hive and consisting of special galleries or combs that lie between the inner hive and
the outer walls, and, finally, peripheral galleries constructed both above and below
ground which connect the mound to its foraging sites [227, 228].
And there are many more examples of the impressive capabilities of social insects.2 If no one is in charge, how can one explain the complexity and sophistication
2

Many more examples are discussed in greater detail in Camazine et al. [60].

Chapter 1

FIGURE 1.6
tatua.

5

(a) Nest of a Parachartergus wasp species, (b) Nest of the wasp Epipona

FIGURE 1.7 Cross section of a Macrotermes mound. (1) Walls containing ventilation
ducts. (2) Brood chambers. (3) Base plate. (4) Royal chamber. After Liischer [228].
Reprinted by permission © John L. Howard.

6

Swarm Intelligence

of their collective productions? An insect is a complex creature: it can process a
lot of sensory inputs, modulate its behavior according to many stimuli, including
interactions with nestmates, and make decisions on the basis of a large amount
of information. Yet, the complexity of an individual insect is still not sufficient to
explain the complexity of what social insect colonies can do. Perhaps the most difficult question is how to connect individual behavior with collective performance?
In other words, how does cooperation arise?
Some of the mechanisms underlying cooperation are genetically determined:
for instance, anatomical differences between individuals, such as the differences between minors and majors in polymorphic species of ants, can organize the division
of labor. But many aspects of the collective activities of social insects are selforganized. Theories of self-organization (SO) [164, 248], originally developed in the
context of physics and chemistry to describe the emergence of macroscopic patterns
out of processes and interactions denned at the microscopic level, can be extended
to social insects to show that complex collective behavior may emerge from interactions among individuals that exhibit simple behavior: in these cases, there is no
need to invoke individual complexity to explain complex collective behavior. Recent
research shows that SO is indeed a major component of a wide range of collective
phenomena in social insects [86].
Models based on SO do not preclude individual complexity: they show that
at some level of description it is possible to explain complex collective behavior
by assuming that insects are relatively simple interacting entities. For example,
flying from a food source back to the nest involves a set of complex sensorimotor
mechanisms; but when one is interested in collective food source selection in honey
bees (see section 1.2.2), the primitives that one may use in a model need not go
into the detail of the implementation of flight, and flying back to the nest will be
considered a simple behavior, although at the neurobiological level of description,
flying back to the nest is certainly not simple. Nor does one need to use a model
based on elementary particles to describe the aerodynamics of airplanes. Moreover,
models based on SO are logically sound: they assume that it might be possible to
explain something apparently complex in terms of simple interacting processes. If
such an explanation is possible, then why does it have to be more complex? It is
only when such an explanation fails that more complex assumptions will be put
into the model.
The discovery that SO may be at work in social insects not only has consequences on the study of social insects, but also provides us with powerful tools to
transfer knowledge about social insects to the field of intelligent system design. In
effect, a social insect colony is undoubtedly a decentralized problem-solving system,
comprised of many relatively simple interacting entities. The daily problems solved
by a colony include finding food, building or extending a nest, efficiently dividing labor among individuals, efficiently feeding the brood, responding to external
challenges, spreading alarm, etc. Many of these problems have counterparts in engineering and computer science. One of the most important features of social insects
is that they can solve these problems in a very flexible and robust way: flexibility

Chapter 1

7

allows adaptation to changing environments, while robustness endows the colony
with the ability to function even though some individuals may fail to perform their
tasks. Finally, social insects have limited cognitive abilities: it is, therefore, simple
to design agents, including robotic agents, that mimic their behavior at some level
of description.
In short, the modeling of social insects by means of SO can help design artificial
distributed problem-solving devices that self-organize to solve problems—swarmintelligent systems. It is, however, fair to say that very few applications of swarm
intelligence have been developed. One of the main reasons for this relative lack of
success resides in the fact that swarm-intelligent systems are hard to "program,"
because the paths to problem solving are not predefined but emergent in these
systems and result from interactions among individuals and between individuals
and their environment as much as from the behaviors of the individuals themselves.
Therefore, using a swarm-intelligent system to solve a problem requires a thorough
knowledge not only of what individual behaviors must be implemented but also of
what interactions are needed to produce such or such global behavior.
One possible idea is to develop a catalog of all the collective behaviors that can
be generated with simple interacting agents: such a catalog would be extremely
useful in establishing clear connections between artificial swarms and what they can
achieve, but this could be a boring and endless undertaking. Another, somewhat
more reasonable, path consists of studying how social insects collectively perform
some specific tasks, modeling their behavior, and using the model as a basis upon
which artificial variations can be developed, either by tuning the model parameters
beyond the biologically relevant range or by adding nonbiological features to the
model. The aim of this book is to present a few models of natural swarm intelligence
and how they can be transformed into useful artificial swarm-intelligent devices.
This approach is similar to other approaches that imitate the way "nature"
(that is, physical or biological systems) solves problems [37, 121]. Another possible,
and apparently very promising, pathway is to use economic or financial metaphors
to solve problems [182, 185, 196].
The expression "swarm intelligence" was first used by Beni, Hackwood, and
Wang [13, 14, 15, 16, 161, 162] in the context of cellular robotic systems, where
many simple agents occupy one- or two-dimensional environments to generate patterns and self-organize through nearest-neighbor interactions. Using the expression
"swarm intelligence" to describe only this work seems unnecessarily restrictive:
that is why we extend its definition to include any attempt to design algorithms
or distributed problem-solving devices inspired by the collective behavior of social
insect colonies and other animal societies. And, strangely enough, this definition
only marginally covers work on cellular robotic systems, which does not borrow a
lot from social insect behavior.
From an historical perspective [2], the idea of using collections of simple agents
or automata to solve problems of optimization and control on graphs, lattices, and
networks was already present in the works of Butrimenko [53], Tsetlin [318], Stefanyuk [292], and Rabin [79, 265]. The latter introduced moving automata that

8

Swarm Intelligence

solve problems on graphs and lattices by interacting with the consequences of
their previous actions [2]. Tsetlin [318] identified the important characteristics of
biologically-inspired automata that make the swarm-based approach potentially
powerful, randomness, decentralization, indirect interactions among agents, and
self-organization. Butrimenko [53] applied these ideas to the control of telecommunications networks, and Stefanyuk [292] to cooperation between radio stations.

1.2

MODELING COLLECTIVE BEHAVIOR IN SOCIAL INSECTS

1.2.1

MODELING AND DESIGNING

The emphasis of this book is how to design adaptive, decentralized, flexible, and
robust artificial systems, capable of solving problems, inspired by social insects.
But one necessary first step toward this goal is understanding the mechanisms
that generate collective behavior in insects. This is where modeling plays a role.
Modeling is very different from designing an artificial system, because in modeling
one tries to uncover what actually happens in the natural system—here an insect
colony. Not only should a model reproduce some features of the natural system it
is supposed to describe, but its formulation should also be consistent with what
is known about the considered natural system: parameters cannot take arbitrary
values, and the mechanisms and structures of the model must have some biological
plausibility. Furthermore, the model should make testable predictions, and ideally
all variables and parameters should be accessible to experiment.
Without going too deeply into epistemology, it is clear that an engineer with
a problem to solve does not have to be concerned with biological plausibility: efficiency, flexibility, robustness, and cost are possible criteria that an engineer could
use. Although natural selection may have picked those biological organizations that
are most "efficient" (in performing all the tasks necessary to survival and reproduction), "flexible," or "robust," the constraints of evolution are not those of an
engineer: if evolution can be seen as essentially a tinkering process, whereby new
structures arise from, and are constrained by, older ones, an engineer can and must
resort to whatever available techniques are appropriate. However, the remarkable
success of social insects (they have been colonizing a large portion of the world for
several million years) can serve as a starting point for new metaphors in engineering
and computer science.
The same type of approach has been used to design artificial neural networks
that solve problems, or in the development of genetic algorithms for optimization:
if the brain and evolution, respectively, served as starting metaphors, most examples of neural networks and genetic algorithms in the context of engineering are
strongly decoupled from their underlying metaphors. In these examples, some basic
principles of brain function or of evolutionary processes are still present and are
most important, but, again, ultimately a good problem-solving device does not have
to be biologically relevant.

Chapter 1
1.2.2

9

SELF-ORGANIZATION IN SOCIAL INSECTS

Self-organization is a set of dynamical mechanisms whereby structures appear at
the global level of a system from interactions among its lower-level components. The
rules specifying the interactions among the system's constituent units are executed
on the basis of purely local information, without reference to the global pattern,
which is an emergent property of the system rather than a property imposed upon
the system by an external ordering influence. For example, the emerging structures in the case of foraging in ants include spatiotemporally organized networks of
pheromone trails. Self-organization relies on four basic ingredients:
1. Positive feedback (amplification) often constitutes the basis of morphogenesis
in the context of this book: they are simple behavioral "rules of thumb" that
promote the creation of structures. Examples of positive feedback include recruitment and reinforcement. For instance, recruitment to a food source is a positive
feedback that relies on trail laying and trail following in some ant species, or
dances in bees.
When a bee finds a nectar source, she goes back to the hive and relinquishes
her nectar to a hive bee. Then she can either start to dance to indicate to other
bees the direction and the distance to the food source, or continue to forage
at the food source without recruiting nestmates, or she can abandon her food
source and become an uncommitted follower herself. If the colony is offered two
identical food sources at the same distance from the nest, the bees exploit the
two sources symmetrically. However, if one source is better than the other, the
bees are able to exploit the better source, or to switch to this better source even
if discovered later. Let us consider the following experiment (Figure 1.8). Two
food sources are presented to the colony at 8:00 a.m. at the same distance from
the hive: source A is characterized by a sugar concentration of 1.00 mol/1 and
source B by a concentration of 2.5 mol/1. Between 8:00 and noon, source A has
been visited 12 times and source B 91 times. At noon, the sources are modified:
source A is now characterized by a sugar concentration of 2.5 mol/1 and source
B by a concentration of 0.75 mol/1. Between noon and 4:00 p.m., source A has
been visited 121 times and source B only 10 times.
It has been shown experimentally that a bee has a relatively high probability of
dancing for a good food source and abandoning a poor food source. These simple
behavioral rules allow the colony to select the better quality source. Seeley et
al. [287] and Camazine and Sneyd [59] have confirmed with a simple mathematical model based on these observations that foragers can home in on the best food
source through a positive feedback created by differential rates of dancing and
abandonment based upon nectar source quality. Figure 1.9 shows a schematic
representation of foraging activity; decision points (Cl: become a follower?) and
(C2: become a dancer?) are indicated by black diamonds. Figure 1.10(a) shows
the number of different individuals that visited each feeder during the previous
half hour in the experiments. Figure 1.10(b) shows the forager group size (here,

10

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 1.8 Schematic representation of the experimental setup.

the sum of the bees dancing for the feeder, the bees at the feeder, and the bees
unloading nectar from the feeder) for each feeder obtained from simulations of
the simple model depicted in Figure 1.9.
2. Negative feedback counterbalances positive feedback and helps to stabilize the
collective pattern: it may take the form of saturation, exhaustion, or competition. In the example of foraging, negative feedback stems from the limited
number of available foragers, satiation, food source exhaustion, crowding at the
food source, or competition between food sources.
3. SO relies on the amplification of fluctuations (random walks, errors, random
task-switching, and so on). Not only do structures emerge despite randomness,
but randomness is often crucial, since it enables the discovery of new solutions,
and fluctuations can act as seeds from which structures nucleate and grow. For
example, foragers may get lost in an ant colony, because they follow trails with
some level of error; although such a phenomenon may seem inefficient, lost foragers can find new, unexploited food sources, and recruit nestmates to these
food sources.

Chapter 1

FIGURE 1.9

11

Schematic representation of foraging activity.

4. All cases of SO rely on multiple interactions. A single individual can generate a
self-organized structure such as a stable trail provided pheromonal3 lifetime is
sufficient, because trail-following events can then interact with trail-laying actions. However. SO generally requires a minimal density of mutually tolerant
individuals. Moreover, individuals should be able to make use of the results of
their own activities as well as of others' activities (although they may perceive
3
A pheromone is a chemical used by animals to communicate. In ants, a pheromone trail
is a trail marked with pheromone. Trail-laying trail-following behavior is widespread in ants (see
chapter 2)

12

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 1.10 (a) Experimental number of different individuals that visited each feeder
during the previous half hour, (b) Forager group size for each feeder obtained from model.

the difference): for instance, trail networks can self-organize and be used collectively if individuals use others' pheromone. This does not exclude the existence
of individual chemical signatures or individual memory which can efficiently
complement or- sometimes replace responses to collective marks.
When a given phenomenon is self-organized, it can usually be characterized by
a few key properties:

1. The creation of spatiotemporal structures in an initially homogeneous medium.
Such structures include nest architectures, foraging trails, or social organization.
For example, a characteristic well-organized pattern develops on the combs of
honeybee colonies. This pattern consists of three concentric regions (a central
brood area, a surrounding rim of pollen, and a large peripheral region of honey)
(Figure 1.11). It results to a large extent from a self-organized process based
on local information [58]. The model described in Camazine [58] relies on the
following assumptions, suggested by experimental observations:
(a) The queen moves more or less randomly over the combs and lays most eggs
in the neighborhood of cells already occupied by brood. Eggs remain in place
for 21 days.
(b) Honey and pollen are deposited in randomly selected available cells.
(c) Four times more honey is brought back to the hive than pollen.

13

Chapter 1

FIGURE 1.11
clearly seen.

Comb of a manmade hive: the three concentric regions of cells can be

(d) Typical removal input ratios for honey and pollen are 0.6 and 0.95, respectively.
(e) Removal of honey and pollen is proportional to the number of surrounding
cells containing brood.
Simulations of a cellular automaton based on these assumptions were
performed [58]. Figure 1.12 shows six successive steps in the formation of the
concentric regions of brood (black dot on a white background), pollen (dark
grey), and honey (light grey). Assumptions la and le ensure the growth of a
central compact brood area if the first eggs are laid approximately at the center
of the comb. Honey and pollen are initially randomly mixed [assumption Ib],
but assumptions le and Id imply that pollen cells are more likely to be emptied
and refilled with honey, so that pollen located in the periphery is removed and
replaced by honey. The only cells available for pollen are those surrounding the
brood area, because they have a high turnover rate. The adaptive function of
this pattern is discussed by Camazine [58].
The possible coexistence of several stable states (multistability). Because structures emerge by amplification of random deviations, any such deviation can be
amplified, and the system converges to one among several possible stable states,
depending on initial conditions. For example, when two identical food sources,
A and B, are presented at the same distance from the nest to an ant colony that
resorts to mass recruitment,4 one of them is eventually massively exploited while
the other is neglected: both sources have the same chance of being exploited,
but only one of them is, and the colony could choose either one. There are
therefore two possible attractors in this example: massive exploitation of A, or
4

Mass recruitment in ants is based solely on trail-laying trail-following.

14

Swarm Intelligence

massive exploitation of B. Which attractor the colony will converge to depends
on random initial events.
3. The existence of bifurcations when some parameters are varied. The behavior
of a self-organized system changes dramatically at bifurcations. For example,
the termite Macrotermes uses soil pellets impregnated with pheromone to build
pillars. Two successive phases take place [157]. First, the noncoordinated phase is
characterized by a random deposition of pellets. This phase lasts until one of the
deposits reaches a critical size. Then, the coordination phase starts if the group
of builders is sufficiently large: pillars or strips emerge. The existence of an initial
deposit of soil pellets stimulates workers to accumulate more material through
a positive feedback mechanism, since the accumulation of material reinforces
the attractivity of deposits through the diffusing pheromone emitted by the
pellets [48]. This autocatalytic, "snowball effect" leads to the coordinated phase.
If the number of builders is too small, the pheromone disappears between two
successive passages by the workers, and the amplification mechanism cannot
work; only the noncoordinated phase is observed. Therefore, there is no need
to invoke a change of behavior by the participants in the transition from the
noncoordinated to the coordinated phase: it is merely the result of an increase
in group size. A more detailed account of pillar construction in Macrotermes can
be found in chapter 5 (section 5.2).

1.2.3

STIGMERGY

Self-organization in social insects often requires interactions among insects: such
interactions can be direct or indirect. Direct interactions are the "obvious" interactions: antennation, trophallaxis (food or liquid exchange), mandibular contact,
visual contact, chemical contact (the odor of nearby nestmates), etc. Indirect interactions are more subtle: two individuals interact indirectly when one of them
modifies the environment and the other responds to the new environment at a
later time. Such an interaction is an example of stigmergy. In addition to, or in
combination with, self-organization, stigmergy is the other most important theoretical concept of this book. Grasse [157, 158] introduced stigmergy (from the
Greek stigma: sting, and ergon: work) to explain task coordination and regulation
in the context of nest reconstruction in termites of the genus Macrotermes. Grasse
showed that the coordination and regulation of building activities do not depend
on the workers themselves but are mainly achieved by the nest structure: a stimulating configuration triggers the response of a termite worker, transforming the
configuration into another configuration that may trigger in turn another (possibly
different) action performed by the same termite or any other worker in the colony.
Nest reconstruction consists of first building strips and pillars with soil pellets and
stercoral mortar; arches are then thrown between the pillars and finally the interpillar space is filled to make walls. Figure 1.13 sketches how Grasse's [157, 158]
notion of stigmergy can be applied to pillar construction.

Chapter 1

15

FIGURE 1.12 Six successive steps in the formation of the concentric regions of brood
(black dot in a white background), pollen (dark grey), and honey (light grey). Empty cells
are represented in white.

16

Swarm Intelligence

Stigmergy is easily overlooked, as it does not explain the detailed mechanisms
by which individuals coordinate their activities. However, it does provide a general
mechanism that relates individual and colony-level behaviors: individual behavior
modifies the environment, which in turn modifies the behavior of other individuals.
The case of pillar construction in termites shows how stigmergy can be used to
coordinate the termites' building activities by means of self-organization. Another
illustration of how stigmergy and self-organization can be combined is recruitment
in ants, described in more detail in chapter 2: self-organized trail laying by individual ants is a way of modifying the environment to communicate with nestmates that
follow such trails. In chapter 3, we will see that task performance by some workers
decreases the need for more task performance: for instance, nest cleaning by some
workers reduces the need for nest cleaning. Therefore, nestmates communicate to
other nestmates by modifying the environment (cleaning the nest), and nestmates
respond to the modified environment (by not engaging in nest cleaning): that is
stigmergy. In chapters 4 and 5, we describe how ants form piles of items such as dead
bodies, larvae, or grains of sand. There again, stigmergy is at work: ants deposit
items at initially random locations. When other ants perceive deposited items, they
are stimulated to deposit items next to them. In chapter 6, we describe a model of
nest building in wasps, in which wasp-like agents are stimulated to deposit bricks
when they encounter specific configurations of bricks: depositing a brick modifies
the environment and hence the stimulatory field of other agents. Finally, in chapter 7, we describe how insects can coordinate their actions to collectively transport
prey. When an ant changes position or alignment, it modifies the distribution of
forces on the item. Repositioning and realignment cause other transporting ants
to change their own position or alignment. The case for stigmergy is a little more
ambiguous there, because the item could be considered a medium of "direct" communication between ants. Yet, the same mechanism as in the other examples is at
work: ants change the perceived environment of other ants. In every example, the
environment serves as a medium of communication.
What all these examples have in common is that they show how stigmergy can
easily be made operational. That is a promising first step to design groups of artificial agents which solve problems: replacing coordination through direct communications by indirect interactions is appealing if one wishes to design simple agents
and reduce communication among agents. Another feature shared by several of
the examples is incremental construction: for instance, termites make use of what
other termites have constructed to contribute their own piece. In the context of optimization, incremental improvement is widely used: a new solution is constructed
from previous solutions. Finally, stigmergy is often associated with flexibility: when
the environment changes because of an external perturbation, the insects respond
appropriately to that perturbation, as if it were a modification of the environment
caused by the colony's activities. In other words, the colony can collectively respond
to the perturbation with individuals exhibiting the same behavior. When it comes
to artificial agents, this type of flexibility is priceless: it means that the agents can

Chapter 1

17

respond to a perturbation without being reprogrammed to deal with that particular
perturbation.

1.3

MODELING AS AN INTERFACE

As was discussed in section 1.2.1, understanding nature and designing useful systems are two very different endeavors. Understanding nature requires observing,
carrying out experiments, and making models that are constrained by observations
and experiments. Designing, on the other hand, requires making models that are
only limited by one's imagination and available technology. But, in both cases,
models are of utmost importance, although they are sometimes implicitly, rather
than explicitly, and verbally, rather than mathematically, formulated. Discussing
the essence of modeling is definitely beyond the scope of this book. However, it is
worth giving a brief outline of what it means to model a phenomenon because models are central to the work presented here. Indeed, models of natural phenomena
in social insects set the stage for artificial systems based on them. For the purpose
of this book, a model is a simplified picture of reality: a usually small number of
observable quantities, thought to be relevant, are identified and used as variables; a
model is a way of connecting these variables. Usually, a model has parameters, that,
ultimately, should be measurable. Hidden variables, that is. additional assumptions
which are not based on observable quantities, are often necessary to build a connection among variables that is consistent with observed behavior. Varying the values
of the parameters usually modifies the output or behavior of the model. When the
model's output is consistent with the natural system's behavior, parameter values
should be compared with the values of their natural counterparts whenever possible. Sources of hidden variables are looked for in the natural system. A good model
has several qualities: parsimony, coherence, refutability, etc.
Models channel imagination in the sense that they usually contain the ingredients necessary to explain classes of phenomena: it might be worth exploring models
which are known to (plausibly) explain phenomena of interest rather than start from
scratch. Exploring a model beyond the constraints of reality amounts to using a
tool beyond its initial purpose. Knowing that social insects have been particularly
successful at solving problems which can be abstracted away and formulated in,
say, algorithmic language, makes models of problem solving in social insects particularly attractive: models that help explain how social insects solve problems serve
as a starting point because they can be explored beyond their initial boundaries.
For instance, optimization algorithms based on models of foraging often resort to
pheromone decay over time scales that are too short to be biologically plausible:
in this case, models have been explored beyond what is biologically relevant to
generate an interesting new class of algorithms. The underlying principles of these
algorithms are strongly inspired by the functioning of social insect colonies, but
some of the parameter values do not lie within empirical boundaries. In the context of this book, modeling serves, therefore, as an interface between understanding

18

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 1.13 Assume that the architecture reaches state A, which triggers response R
from worker S. A is modified by the action of S (for example, S may drop a soil pellet),
and transformed into a new stimulating configuration A\, that may in turn trigger a new
response R\ from S or any other worker Sn and so forth. The successive responses RI ,
Rz, Rn may be produced by any worker carrying a soil pellet. Each worker creates new
stimuli in response to existing stimulating configurations. These new stimuli then act on
the same termite or any other worker in the colony. Such a process, where the only relevant
interactions taking place among the agents are indirect, through the environment which
is modified by the other agents, is also called sematectornc communication [329]. After
Grasse [158]. Reprinted by permission @ Masson.

Chapter 1

19

nature and designing artificial systems: one starts from the observed phenomenon,
tries to make a biologically motivated model of it, and then explores the model
without constraints.

1.4

FROM ALGORITHMS TO ROBOTICS

Swarm-based robotics is growing so rapidly that it is becoming very difficult to
keep track of what is going on and to keep up with novelty. A recent issue of the
journal Autonomous Robots was dedicated to "colonies" of robots. Other major
journals in the field of robotics have already published, or are in the process of
publishing special issues on this topic. Our aim is not to provide the reader with
an extensive survey of the field,5 but rather to present a few selected examples in
which researchers have clearly made use of the social insect metaphor, or the swarmbased approach, through one or all of the following: the design of distributed control
mechanisms, the type of coordination mechanisms implemented, the tasks that the
robots perform. This will be sufficient to have an idea of the advantages and pitfalls
of reactive distributed robotics, which can also be called, in the present context,
swarm-based robotics.
Why is swarm-based robotics, that we would define loosely as reactive collective
robotics, an interesting alternative to classical approaches to robotics? Some of the
reasons can be found in the characteristic properties of problem solving by social insects, which is flexible, robust, decentralized, and self-organized. Some tasks may be
inherently too complex or impossible for a single robot to perform [62] (see, for example, chapter 7, where pushing a box requires the "coordinated" efforts of at least
two individuals). Increased speed can result from using several robots, but there is
not necessarily any cooperation: the underlying mechanism that allows the robots
to work together is a minimum interference principle. Designing, building, and using
several simple robots may be easier because they use, for example, a simpler sensorimotor apparatus, cheaper because they are simple, more flexible without the need
to reprogram the robots, and more reliable and fault-tolerant because one or several robots may fail without affecting task completion—although completion time
may be affected by such a perturbation—than having a powerful complex robot.
Furthermore, theories of self-organization [31] teach us that, sometimes, collective
behavior results in patterns which are qualitatively different from those that could
be obtained with a single agent or robot. Randomness or fluctuations in individual
behavior, far from being harmful, may in fact greatly enhance the system's ability to
explore new behaviors and find new "solutions." In addition, self-organization and
decentralization, together with the idea that interactions among agents need not be
direct but can rather take place through the environment, point to the possibility of
significantly reducing communication between robots: explicit robot-to-robot communication rapidly becomes a big issue when the number of robots increases; this
5

Such reviews—thorough at the time they were released and already somewhat obsolete—can
be found, for example, in Cao et al. [61, 62].

20

Swarm Intelligence

issue can be, to a large extent, eliminated by suppressing such communication! Also,
central control is usually not well suited to dealing with a large number of agents
(this is also true for a telecommunications network: see section 2.7 in chapter 2),
not only because of the need for robot-to-controller-and-back communications, but
also because failure of the controller implies failure of the whole system.
Of course, using a swarm of robots has some drawbacks. For example, stagnation is one (see chapter 7): because of the lack of a global knowledge, a group of
robots may find itself in a deadlock, where it cannot make any progress. Another
problem is to determine how these so-called "simple" robots should be programmed
to perform user-designed tasks. The pathways to solutions are usually not predefined but emergent, and solving a problem amounts to finding a trajectory for the
system and its environment so that the states of both the system and the environment constitute the solution to the problem: although appealing, this formulation
does not lend itself to easy programming. Until now, we implicitly assumed that
all robots were identical units: the situation becomes more complicated when the
robots can perform different tasks, respond to different stimuli, or respond differently to the same stimuli, and so forth; if the body of theory that roboticists can
use for homogeneous groups of robots is limited, there is virtually no theoretical
guideline for the design of heterogeneous swarms.
The current success of collective robotics is the result of several factors:
1. The relative failure of the Artificial Intelligence (AI) program, which "classical"
robotics relied upon, has forced many computer scientists and roboticists to reconsider their fundamental paradigms; this paradigm shift has led to the advent
of connectionism, and to the view that sensorimotor "intelligence" is as important as reasoning and other higher-level components of cognition. Swarm-based
robotics relies on the anti-classical-AI idea that a group of robots may be able
to perform tasks without explicit representations of the environment and of the
other robots; finally, planning is replaced by reactivity.
2. The remarkable progress of hardware during the last decade has allowed many
researchers to experiment with real robots, which have not only become more
efficient and capable of performing many different tasks, but also cheap(er).
3. The field of Artificial Life, where the concept of emergent behavior is emphasized
as essential to the understanding of fundamental properties of the living, has
done much to propagate ideas about collective behavior in biological systems,
particularly social insects; theories that had remained unknown to roboticists
have eventually reached them; of course, the rise of the internet-based "global
information society" enhanced this tendency.
4. Finally, collective robotics has become fashionable by positive feedback. The field
is booming, but not that many works appear to be original, at least conceptually,
which is the only level the authors of this book can judge.
Interesting directions for the future include ways of enhancing indirect communications among robots. For example, Deveza et al. [95] introduced odor sensing

Chapter 1

21

for robot guidance (which, of course, is reminiscent of trail following in ants), Russell [278] used a short-lived heat trail for the same purpose. Prescott and Ibbotson [264] used a particularly original medium of communication to reproduce the
motion of prehistoric worms: bathroom tissue. A dispenser on the back of the robot
releases a stream of paper when the robot is moving; two light detectors on each
of the side arms measure reflected light from the floor and control the thigmotaxis
(toward track) and phobotaxis (away from track) behaviors. Although their work
is not about collective robotics, it sets the stage for studying and implementing
indirect communication in groups of robots.
Finally, what are the areas of potential application for swarm-based multirobot
systems? "In aerospace technology, it is envisioned that teams of flying robots may
effect satellite repair, and aircraft engine maintenance could be performed by thousands of robots built into the engine eliminating the need for costly disassembly
for routine preventive maintenance. Environmental robots are to be used in pipe
inspection and pest eradication. While industrial applications include waste disposal and micro cleaners. Ship maintenance and ocean cleaning could be performed
by hundreds of underwater robots designed to remove debris from hulls and ocean
floors.... Some researchers envision microsurgical robots that could be injected into
the body by the hundreds designed to perform specific manipulation tasks without the need for conventional surgical techniques," writes Kube [208] (p. 17). Most
of these applications require miniaturization! Very small robots, micro- and nanorobots, which will by construction have severely limited sensing and computation,
may need to "operate in very large groups or swarms to affect the macroworld [237]."
Approaches directly inspired or derived from swarm intelligence may be the only
way to control and manage such groups of small robots. As the reader will perhaps be disappointed by the "simplicity" of the tasks performed by state-of-the-art
swarm-based robotic systems such as those presented in chapters 4, 6, and 7, let
us remind him that it is in the perspective of miniaturization that swarm-based
robotics becomes meaningful.
In view of these great many potential applications, it seems urgent to work
at the fundamental level of what algorithms should be put into these robots: understanding the nature of coordination in groups of simple agents is a first step
toward implementing useful multirobot systems. The present book, although it
deals marginally with collective robotics, provides a wealth of ideas that, we hope,
will be useful in that perspective.

1.5

READING GUIDE

It may be useful at this point to issue a series of warnings to the reader. This book is
not intended to provide the reader with recipes for solving problems. It is full of wild
speculations and statements that may (or may not) turn out to be just plain wrong.
This book is not describing a new kind of algorithmic theory. Nor does it provide

22

Swarm Intelligence

an overview of social insect behavior. Finally, this book is not a textbook, although
it could be used to propagate our excitement to new generations of researchers.
Knowing what this book is not does not necessarily help define what it is. Well,
this book is an educated guess about the future of artificial intelligence. It provides
the reader, not with a synthesis of a mature and well-defined field, but rather with
new ideas from a booming field with no clear-cut boundaries. It provides the reader,
not with proofs of theorems, but with intuitions of emergent phenomena [268]. We
suggest that the social insect metaphor may go beyond superficial considerations.
At a time when the world is becoming so complex that no single human being
can really understand it, when information (and not the lack of it) is threatening
our lives, when software systems become so intractable that they can no longer be
controlled, perhaps the scientific and engineering world will be more willing to consider another way of designing "intelligent" systems, where autonomy, emergence
and distributed functioning replace control, preprogramming and centralization.
Of course, such an approach raises fundamental issues: how do we design such systems so that they eventually solve the problems we want them to solve? How do we
make sure that such systems will not exhibit catastrophic behavior when confronted
with pathological situations (note that the same question applies to large pieces of
"classical" software)? And many other questions, some of which are waiting to be
formulated. To these formulated and unformulated questions, we hope that this
book will offer an implicit, rather than explicit, response.
Each chapter deals with a particular behavior observed in social insects: foraging (chapter 2), division of labor (chapter 3), clustering and sorting (chapter 4),
building (chapter 5 and chapter 6), and cooperative transport (chapter 7). The first
part of each chapter provides a brief description of the phenomenon followed by a
more or less thorough description of models developed by ethologists to understand
the phenomenon. Engineering-oriented applications, that make use of the emergent
behavior of social insects, are then presented. It is worth noting that not all subfields of swarm intelligence are equally advanced. Therefore, although each chapter
emphasizes different aspects of swarm intelligence, all of them present an outline
of the underlying biology before proceeding to resulting applications, chapters 2,
4, and 7 present more applications than biology or modeling, whereas chapters 3
and 5 are more biology oriented. Chapter 6 is more difficult to classify: it does
not contain any actual application, nor does it present a lot of biology. Chapter
6 is speculative at two levels: the model described is highly speculative, whereas
potential applications remain to be explored. But we expect all types of chapters to
be useful: those emphasizing applications because they show very clearly how our
understanding of how social insects collectively solve problems can be applied to
designing algorithms and distributed artificial problem-solving devices; those emphasizing the biology because, we believe, they provide new, largely untested, ideas
to design new types of algorithms and distributed artificial devices. Chapter 6 belongs to this latter category, although a complete understanding of the underlying
biology currently seems out of reach of modeling.

Chapter 1

23

Because this book is about designing problem-solving devices inspired by social
insects, the models presented throughout the book need not be "perfect" models of
social insect behavior. In fact, all the models presented in the book, including those
introduced earlier in this chapter, remain speculative to a varying extent. Carefully
designed empirical tests are required to validate them. Some of the models may even
turn out to be false—although in most cases they will likely reflect at least part of
the truth. But algorithms do not have to be designed after accurate or even true
models of biological systems: efficiency, robustness, and flexibility are the driving
criteria, not biological accuracy. This warning is extremely important because the
models of social insect behavior presented in the book are still being developed and
tested, whereas our writing style may leave the reader with the impression that
everything is 100% certain. But the study of self-organization in social insects is
almost as new as artificial swarm intelligence!

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 2
Ant Foraging Behavior, Combinatorial
Optimization, and Routing in
Communications Networks

2.1

OVERVIEW

This chapter is dedicated to the description of the collective foraging behavior
of ants and to the discussion of several computational models inspired by that
behavior—ant-based algorithms or ant colony optimization (AGO) algorithms. In
the first part of the chapter, several examples of cooperative foraging in ants are
described and modeled. In particular, in some species a colony self-organizes to find
and exploit the food source that is closest to the nest.
A set of conveniently defined artificial ants, the behavior of which is designed
after that of their real counterparts, can be used to solve combinatorial optimization problems. A detailed introduction to ant-based algorithms is given by using
the traveling salesman problem (TSP) as an application problem. Ant-based algorithms have been applied to other combinatorial optimization problems such as
the quadratic assignment problem, graph coloring, job-shop scheduling, sequential
ordering, and vehicle routing. Results obtained with ant-based algorithms are often
as good as those obtained with other general-purpose heuristics. Application to the
quadratic assignment problem is described in detail. Coupling ant-based algorithms
with local optimizers obtains, in some cases, world-class results. Parallels are drawn

25

26

Swarm Intelligence

between ant-based optimization algorithms and other nature-inspired optimization
techniques, such as neural nets and evolutionary computation.
All the combinatorial problems mentioned above are static, that is, their characteristics do not change over time. In the last part of the chapter, the application of
ant-based algorithms to a class of stochastic time-varying problems is investigated:
routing in telecommunications networks. Given the adaptive capabilities built into
the ant-based algorithms, they may be more competitive in stochastic time-varying
domains, in which solutions must be adapted online to changing conditions, than
in static problems. The performance of AntNet, an ant-based algorithm designed
to adaptively build routing tables in packet-switching communications networks, is
the best of a number of state-of-the-art algorithms compared on an extensive set
of experimental conditions.

2.2

FORAGING STRATEGIES IN ANTS

Many ant species have trail-laying trail-following behavior when foraging: individual ants deposit a chemical substance called pheromone as they move from a food
source to their nest, and foragers follow such pheromone trails. The process whereby
an ant is influenced toward a food source by another ant or by a chemical trail is
called recruitment, and recruitment based solely on chemical trails is called mass recruitment. In this section, two phenomena based on mass recruitment are described.
These phenomena inspired the AGO algorithms described later in this chapter.
2.2.1

NATURAL OPTIMIZATION (1): THE BINARY BRIDGE EXPERIMENT

Using a simple and elegant experimental setup, Deneubourg et al. [87] showed
that path selection to a food source in the Argentine ant Linepithema humile (formerly Iridomyrmex humilis) is based on self-organization. In this experiment, a
food source is separated from the nest by a bridge with two equally long branches
A and B (Figure 2.1). Initially, there is no pheromone on the two branches, which
have, therefore, the same probability of being selected by the ants. Nevertheless,
random fluctuations will cause a few more ants to randomly select one branch, say
A, over the other. Because ants deposit pheromone while walking, the greater number of ants on branch A determines a greater amount of pheromone on A, which in
turn stimulates more ants to choose A, and so on [87].
Deneubourg et al. [87] developed a model of this phenomenon, the behavior
of which closely matches the experimental observations. Let us assume that the
amount of pheromone on a branch is proportional to the number of ants that used
the branch to cross the bridge. With this assumption, pheromone evaporation is
not taken into account: this is a plausible assumption, because the experiments
typically last of the order of an hour, a time scale that may not be sufficient for the
amount of pheromone to be reduced significantly. In the model, the probability of
choosing a branch at a certain time depends on the total number of ants that used

Chapter 2

27

FIGURE 2.1 Percentage of all passages per unit time on each of the two branches as
a function of time: one of the branches is eventually used most of the time. Note that
the winning branch was not favored by the initial fluctuations, which indicates that these
fluctuations were not strong enough to promote exploitation of the other branch. The
inset is a schematic representaton of the experimental setup. After Deneubourg et al. [87].
Reprinted by permission © Plenum Publishing.

the branch until that time. More precisely, let Ai and Bi be the numbers of ants
that have used branches A and B after i ants have used the bridge. The probability
PA(PB) that the (i + l)th ant chooses branch A(B) is

Equation (2.1) quantifies the way in which a higher concentration on branch A gives
a higher probability of choosing branch A, depending on the absolute and relative
values of A± and B^. The parameter n determines the degree of nonlinearity of the
choice function: when n is large, if one branch has only slightly more pheromone
than the other, the next ant that passes will have a high probability of choosing it.
The parameter k quantifies the degree of attraction of an unmarked branch: the
greater k, the greater the amount of pheromone to make the choice nonrandom.
This particular form of PA was obtained from experiments on trail following [259].
The values of the parameters k and n that give the best fit to the experimental
measures are n « 2 and k « 20 [87]. If At » Bi and Ai > 20, PA « 1; if At » Bi
but Ai < 20, then PA ^ 0.5. The same holds true for Pg. The choice dynamics
follows from Eq. (2.1):

28

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 2.2 Percentage of passages on the dominant branch as a function of the total
number of ants that took the bridge. Solid black curve: average result of 200 Monte Carlo
simulations of the model given by Eqs. (2.1) to (2.4), with 2,000 ant passages in each
simulation. Gray broken line: percentage of passages on the dominant branch measured
every 100 ant passages, average over 20 experiments of 30 minutes each. Nine colonies
of 150-1200 workers each were used for the experiments. After Deneubourg et al. [87].
Reprinted by permission © Plenum Publishing.

where S is a random variable uniformly distributed over [0,1].
The model expressed in Eqs. (2.1) to (2.4) was analyzed by means of Monte
Carlo simulations. The results of these simulations are in perfect agreement with
the experiments (Figure 2.2).
The experiment where the bridge's branches are the same length can be extended to the case where one branch is longer than the other [154]. Likewise, the
model can be modified to apply to this situation. By the same mechanism as in
the previous situation, that is, the amplification of initial fluctuations, the shortest
branch is most often selected: the first ants coming back to the nest are those that
took the shortest path twice (to go from the nest to the source and to return to
the nest), so that, immediately after these ants have returned, more pheromone
is present on the short branch than on the long branch, stimulating nestmates to
choose the short branch (Figure 2.3(a)). Experiments have shown that the chance of
the short branch being eventually selected by amplification of initial fluctuations increases with the length ratio r of the two branches. Figure 2.3(b) on the left shows
that short branch selection is only statistically verified, when r = 2 (the longer
branch is twice as long as the short branch): in some cases, more ants initially
choose the long branch, so that this branch will be more strongly marked, leading
to the preferential exploitation of the long branch. This indicates that recruitment
based primarily on pheromone may not be particularly flexible. Figure 2.3(b) on

Chapter 2

29

the right shows what happens when, given the same experimental setup, the short
branch is presented to the colony 30 minutes after the long branch: the short branch
is not selected and the colony remains trapped on the long branch.
With Lasius niger, another species of ants resorting to mass recruitment, another mechanism allows the selection of the shorter path, even when it is presented
30 minutes after the longer path. When it finds itself in the middle of the long
branch, this ant often realizes that it is heading almost perpendicularly to the required direction: this induces it to make U-turns on the long branch [11]. In this
case, the combination of individual memory for the direction to the nest or food
source plus collective trail following allows the systematic selection of the short
branch (Figure 2.4). In other words, the colony is more flexible.

FIGURE 2.3 (a) Experimental setup and drawings of the selection of the short branches
by a colony of Linepithema humile respectively 4 and 8 minutes after the bridge was placed.
After Goss et al. [154]. Reprinted by permission © Springer-Verlag. (b) Distribution of the
percentage of ants that selected the shorter path over n experiments (r is the length ratio
between the two branches). The longer branch is r times longer than the short branch.
Left: short and long branches are presented from beginning of the experiment. Right: the
short branch is presented to the colony 30 minutes after the long branch. After Goss et
al. [154]. Reprinted by permission © Springer-Verlag. continued.

30

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 2.3 continued, (c) Image of the real experiment. The nest is located in the lower
arena and the food source in the upper arena.
In the above-mentioned ant species, which base their recruitment on pheromone^), it would be interesting to know the physico-chemical properties of the
pheromones. It is fair to say that not much is known about these chemicals. "Indirect" experiments, which test for the behavior of ants that encounter different
amounts of pheromone on different substrates and/or after varying amounts of
time, have provided a rough approximation of quantities such as evaporation rate,
absorption rate, diffusion constant, etc. One consistent finding about the abovementioned species is that their pheromone trails usually persist for a long time,
from at least several hours up to several months (depending on the species, the
substrate, colony size, weather conditions, etc.), indicating that the lifetimes of
pheromones have to be measured on long time scales.
In the field of ant colony optimization and swarm intelligence, common wisdom
holds that pheromone evaporation, when occurring on a sufficiently short time scale,
allows ant colonies to avoid being trapped on a "suboptimal" solution, as is the case
for Linepithema humile. This is because maintaining a well-marked pheromone trail
is more difficult on a longer trail (Figure 2.5) (see Bonabeau [27, 28]).
In reality, however, this does not seem to be the case, because pheromones are
persistent. Also, the notion of optimality is a slippery one in biology: optimality is
defined with respect to many constraints, including ecological constraints, such as
predation or competition with other colonies. In some situations, it may be to the
advantage of the colony to focus its foraging activity on a given site or area, even if

Chapter 2

31

FIGURE 2.4 Same experimental setup as in Figure 2.3(a), but with Lasius niger. In this
case, the combination of individual memory for the direction to the nest or food source,
plus collective trail following allows a more systematic selection of the short branch when
the short branch is presented after the long branch. After Beckers et al. [11]. Reprinted
by permission © Academic Press.

not the best one, because one single trail is easier to protect; switching to other sites
in an "opportunistic" way could induce costs, such as a reduction in the colony's
level of protection, which should not be neglected. This is an interesting example
where there is clear divergence between real and artificial ants: the ant colony
algorithms that are described in the following sections heavily rely on techniques
similar to pheromone evaporation, which is indeed quite a powerful method for
optimization.
2.2.2 NATURAL OPTIMIZATION (2): THE CASE OF INTER-NEST TRAFFIC
Aron et al. [5], in a remarkable experiment involving several nests and bridges
between them, have shown that the Argentine ant Linepithema humile can solve
the minimal spanning tree problem. Although this problem is not combinatorially
hard in the formulation used in the experiment, some of its variants are,1 and it is
interesting to have an example of collective problem solving for the simplest variant,
since this could inspire similar techniques with which to attack harder versions.

'Such as the Steiner problem [144].

32

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 2.5 Simulation of a situation where 3 food sources (Si, 82, and 83) of identical
quality are presented to the colony at various distances from the nest (Figure 2.5(a)).
Ants returning from a food source to the nest deposit pheromone, and ants that go out
of the nest follow pheromone trails, or walk randomly in the absence of pheromone. Trail
following is probabilistic: errors can occur and ants may lose the trail. Pheromone decay is
assumed to occur over short time scales. At time t\, ants, represented by black dots, explore
their environment randomly (Figure 2.5(b)). At time t-z, trails that connect the nest to the
food sources are being established (Figure 2.5(c)). At time ts, only the trails that connect
the nest to the closest food sources are maintained, leading to the exploitation of these
sources (Figure 2.5(d)). The next closest source will be exploited later, when the first two
exploited sources are exhausted, and so forth. The simulation has been written in the
StarLogo programming language, developed by the Epistemology and Learning Group at
the MIT Media Lab. The program can be downloaded from the MIT StarLogo website at
http://starlogo.www.media.mit.edu. More details about StarLogo and these simulations
can be found in Resnick [268].

Chapter 2

33

FIGURE 2.6 Top: Experimental design and results for a triangular network connecting
three nests. Bottom: Drawings represent the qualitative solutions adopted. A solid line
indicates heavy traffic, and an interrupted line a cut branch. The numbers indicate the
quantitative results for each experiment, with the percentage of traffic on each branch (a,
b, and c) and the total traffic (n) on the branches, (a) The triangular network was left
for two weeks before counting the traffic (4 experiments). This experiment indicates that
chemical, rather than visual, cues play a key role in the selection of branches, (b) The entire
bridge system was rotated 120 degrees, the nests not being moved (3 experiments), (c) The
most frequented branch was then cut (3 experiments). After Aron et al. [5]. Reprinted by
permission © Springer- Verlag.

34

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 2.7 Top: Experimental design and results for a square network connecting four
nests. Bottom: Same as Figure 2.6. "In light" means that the experiment has been performed with light. "In dark" means that the experiment has been performed in the dark.
The absence of significant difference between experiments performed with and without
light suggests that visual cues are not essential, (a) The square network was left for two
weeks before counting the traffic; branch a is not exploited, (b) Branch c (the base of the
U-shaped solution in A) was then cut. (c) Branches b and d were presented to the colony
for two weeks, and then branches a and c were added; branch a is not exploited. After
Aron et al. [5]. Reprinted by permission © Springer-Verlag.

Chapter 2

35

FIGURE 2.8 Network of interconnected nests of a super-colony of Formica lugubris. Nests
are represented by circles. After Cherix [68]. Reprinted by permission © Springer- Verlag.

Societies of Linepithema humile are composed of subsocieties connected by a
permanent network of chemical trails. Workers, larvae and even queens are continuously exchanged between the nests of these subsocieties. Such exchanges enable
a flexible allocation of the work force in the foraging area in response to environmental cues. Moreover, inter-nest trails are extended to include trails to permanent,
long-lasting or rich food sources. In the laboratory experiments carried out by Aron
et al. [5], three or four nests were connected by cardboard bridges (Figures 2.6 and
2.7). The resulting traffic of ants was such that the ants were travelling on a set of
paths connecting all the nests. The set of paths formed a minimal spanning tree,
that is, ant did not use redundant bridges. Besides, cutting a frequented bridge
caused the traffic to transfer to a previously unused branch (Figures 2.6 and 2.7).

36

Swarm Intelligence

Aron et al. [5] have shown that chemical cues play a crucial role in this process,
whereas visual cues were not essential. They were able to reproduce most of the
experimental observations with a model similar to the one used to describe the
binary bridge experiment of Figure 2.3.
This example may seem trivial, not only because the minimal spanning tree
problem is not a hard optimization problem, but also because this particular instance involves only three or four nodes. But some ant colonies build huge networks of connected nests that span hundreds of meters. For example, Figure 2.8
shows a network of interconnected nests of a super-colony of Formica lugubris in
Switzerland. Although no study has been done in relation with the graph-theoretic
properties of this network, it would not be surprising to find that the network is
close to a minimum spanning tree that connects all nests, represented by circles in
Figure 2.8.
2.2.3

THE RAID PATTERNS OF ARMY ANTS

In this section, we examine the foraging patterns of army ants. Army ants are among
the largest and most cohesive societies [86]. Their foraging systems coordinate hundreds of thousands of individuals and cover a thousand square meters in a single
day. The largest swarm raids of neotropical army ants are those of Eciton burchelli,
which may contain up to 200,000 workers raiding in a dense phalanx 15m or more
wide [129]. These swarm raids, comprised of individuals that are virtually blind, are
fascinating examples of powerful, totally decentralized control. "The raid system is
composed of a swarm front, a dense carpet of ants that extends for approximately
1m behind the leading edge of the swarm, and a very large system of anastomosing
trails. These trails, along which the ants run out to the swarm front and return
with prey items, characteristically form loops that are small near the raid front and
get ever bigger and less frequent away from it. The final large loop leads to a single
principal trail2 that provides a permanent link between the army ants' raid and
their bivouac" [129]. Raid patterns are dynamic but always exhibit the same basic
structure. Figure 2.9 shows the swarm raid structures of three species of army ants,
Eciton hamatum, E. rapax, and E. burchelli.
These three species have different "diets": E. hamatum feeds mainly on dispersed social insect colonies, Eciton burchelli feeds largely on scattered arthropods,
and E. rapax has an intermediary diet. These different diets correspond to different
spatial distributions of food items: for E. hamatum, food sources are rare but large,
whereas for E. burchelli, food can easily be found but in small quantities each time.
Could these different spatial distributions explain the different foraging patterns
observed in Figure 2.9? More precisely, is it possible to explain the differences in
the foraging patterns of the three army ant species without invoking a different
behavior, but a different environment? This question is interesting from the viewpoint of the biology of army ants: if all three species have common ancestors, it is
2
The principal trail is often a mostly straight line [122]. A mathematical model which explains
how ants build straight trails was given by Bruckstein [47].

Chapter 2

37

FIGURE 2.9 Foraging patterns of three army ant species: Eciton hamatum, E. rapax, and
E. burchelli. After Burton and Franks [52]. Reprinted by permission © Kansas Science
Bulletin.

not unlikely that their behavior is similar—only their diet may be different, simply
because they adapted to different niches. But the question is also interesting from
a problem-solving perspective: it means that the same program (the computer science equivalent of behavior) can solve different problems, or can adapt to different
environments.
Deneubourg et al.'s [86] self-organization model of army ant raid patterns tells
us that the answer to the question is yes. The assumptions of the model are as
follows:
(a) For modeling purposes, the environment is represented as a bidimensional grid,
represented in Figure 2.10. Each node of the grid is called a site. The system is
updated at discrete time steps.
(b) The ants lay pheromone trails both on the way out to the raid front and when
returning to the nest or bivouac. Ants deposit one unit of pheromone per unit
area (that is, per visited site) on their way out to the raid front; if the amount
of pheromone at the site exceeds 1,000 units, no additional pheromone is laid.
Returning ants deposit ten units of pheromone per visited site; if the amount

38

Swarm Intelligence

of pheromone at the site exceeds 300 units, no additional pheromone is laid. A
fixed fraction e = 1/30 of the pheromone at each site evaporates at each time
step.
(c) Ants return to the nest after finding prey; an ant that returns to the nest is
laden with a prey item.
(d) At each time step, an ant decides whether to advance or stay at its current
site. Let pi and pr be the amounts of pheromone on the left and right sites,
respectively. The probability of moving is given by.

Therefore, the more pheromone on the sites the ant is facing, the more likely
the ant is to move. This corresponds to the empirical observation that the ants
move more and more quickly as the pheromone concentration increases, and
move more slowly in unmarked areas.
(e) When an ant chooses to move, it selects the left or right site according to its
absolute and relative pheromone concentrations. More precisely, the ant selects
the left site with probability

This expression is similar to Eq. (2.1) with n = 2 and k = 5.
(f) Ten ants leave the nest per time step. There cannot be more than 20 ants per
site. If the ant has decided to move, and selected a site that is full, it moves to
the other site; if both sites are full, the ant stays where it is.
(g) The food distribution is represented by a probability of finding a food source per
site. The food source can be small or large. Each ant that finds a food source
returns to the nest with one unit of food.
Figure 2.11 shows two patterns obtained from Monte Carlo simulations of
Deneubourg et al.'s [86] model, with two different spatial distributions of food.
The pattern on the right has been obtained when each site contains 1 unit of food
with probability 1/2. Such a food distribution would represent the prey distribution
of E. burchelli. A well-defined raid front can be observed. Returning ants cause the
central trail to split into lateral trails which branch out. The pattern on the right
has been obtained when each site has a small probability (1/100) of containing a
large number (400) of food units, a food distribution that would represent the prey
distribution of E. hamatum or E. rapax. Indeed, the pattern obtained from the
simulation is similar to the swarm raid patterns of these two species: the swarm
splits up into a number of small columns.
The similarity between the patterns obtained in Figure 2.11 and those of Figure 2.9 is not perfect. There are, however, some important common characteristics,
which suggest that individual foragers with similar behavior operate in all three

Chapter 2

39

FIGURE 2.10 Grid used to run the Monte Carlo simulations. Left: an ant starts from
the nest and moves forward at each time step with probability pm. When the ant moves,
it selects the left site with probability p, or the right site with probability 1 - p. One unit
of pheromone is deposited at each visited site. Some sites contain food (small circles).
Shaded areas at each site represent pheromone concentrations; a darker grey represents
a higher pheromone concentration. Right: an ant is returning from a site where it found
food. Ten units of pheromone are deposited at each visited site.

species. The main factor that influences the structure of swarm raid patterns seems
to be the environment, here, the food distribution. This prediction of Deneubourg
et al.'s [86] model was tested in the field by Franks et al. [129]. By manipulating
the prey distributions for E. burchelli swarms, they have made them raid in a form
more typical of other army ant species, where the swarm breaks up into subswarms.
Although the question has never been formally studied, it would not be surprising, given the structure of their patterns, to find that the swarm raids are optimal
"distribution networks," in the sense that they maximize the amount of retrieved
prey for a given energy expense, or minimize the energy expense for a given amount
of food brought back to the nest. Each pattern seems to be adapted, in that respect,
to the species' food distribution. If this is the case, it means that a single algorithm
based on self-organization is capable of generating optimal foraging structures, or
distribution networks, in different conditions, without any central control. A desirable feature indeed for, say, a routing algorithm in a communications network.

2.3

ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION: THE TRAVELING
SALESMAN PROBLEM

An important aspect of the foraging strategies described in the previous section is
that, as an emergent result of the actions of many ants, the shortest path between
two or more locations (often between a food source and a nest) is discovered and

40

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 2.11 Patterns obtained from Monte Carlo simulations of the swarm raid model,
with two different food distributions. Left: each site contains 1 unit of food with probability 1/2. Right: each site has a probability 1/100 of containing 400 of food units. Insets
show prey distributions. After Deneubourg et al. [86] Reprinted by permission © Plenum
Publishing.

maintained. It is, therefore, natural that the first application of an ant colony
algorithm was to a path optimization problem: the traveling salesman problem
(TSP).
The TSP was chosen for several reasons:

It is a shortest path problem to which the ant colony metaphor is easily adapted.
It is a very difficult (NP-hard) problem [145].
It has been studied a lot (it is considered to be "the benchmark problem" in
combinatorial optimization, see for example Lawler et al. [214] and Reinelt [267])
and therefore many sets of test problems are available, as well as many algorithms
with which to run comparisons.
It is a didactic problem: it is very easy to understand and explanations of the
algorithm behavior are not obscured by too many technicalities.

Chapter 2

41

The ant colony optimization approach was initiated by Dorigo [108], in collaboration with Colorni and Maniezzo [76, 77, 107], and has turned out to be more
than just a fun metaphor to be presented at exotic conferences: although the first
results, obtained with an algorithm called Ant System,3 were a little bit disappointing, recent developments, which combine the ant colony approach with local
searches and/or other optimization methods, are promising.
On the traveling salesman problem (TSP) ant colony optimization algorithms
augmented with local search have performance similar to that of the best heuristic approaches (such as Johnson and McGeoch's [191] Iterated Lin-Kernighan and
Freisleben and Merz's [133] genetic algorithm), a very encouraging sign.
What is the basic idea underlying all ant-based algorithms? It is to use a positive
feedback [107, 108] mechanism, based on an analogy with the trail-laying trailfollowing behavior of some species of ants and some other social insects, to reinforce
those portions of good solutions that contribute to the quality of these solutions,
or to directly reinforce good solutions. A virtual pheromone, used as reinforcement,
allows good solutions to be kept in memory, from where they can be used to make
up better solutions. Of course, one needs to avoid some good, but not very good,
solutions becoming reinforced to the point where they constrain the search too
much, leading to a premature convergence (stagnation] of the algorithm. To avoid
that, a form of negative feedback is implemented through pheromone evaporation,
which includes a time scale into the algorithm. This time scale must not be too
large, otherwise suboptimal premature convergence behavior can occur. But it must
not be too short either, otherwise no cooperative behavior can emerge. Cooperative
behavior is the other important concept here: ant colony algorithms make use of
the simultaneous exploration of different solutions by a collection of identical ants.
Ants that perform well at a given iteration influence the exploration of ants in
future iterations. Because ants explore different solutions, the resulting pheromone
trail is the consequence of different perspectives on the space of solutions. Even
when only the best performing ant is allowed to reinforce its solution, there is a
cooperative effect across time because ants in the next iteration use the pheromone
trail to guide their exploration.
2.3.1

ANT SYSTEM (AS)

In the TSP the goal is to find a closed tour of minimal length connecting n given
cities. Each city must be visited once and only once. Let dij be the distance between
cities i and j. The problem can either be defined in Euclidean space, in which case

3
Ant System, the first ant colony optimization algorithm, had a performance similar to that of
general purpose heuristics, such as simulated annealing or genetic algorithms, on small problems,
but did not scale up well.

42

Swarm Intelligence

where x, and y^ are the coordinates of city i, or can be more generally defined
on a graph (N, E) where the cities are the nodes TV and the connections between
the cities are the edges of the graph E. The graph need not be fully connected.
Note that the "distance" matrix need not be symmetric: if it is asymmetric (the
corresponding problem is called the asymmetric TSP or ATSP) the length of an
edge connecting two cities i and j depends on whether one goes from i to j or from
j to i (that is, in general d^ ^ dji). But whether the problem is symmetric or
asymmetric does not change how it is being solved by Ant System (AS).
In AS ants build solutions to the TSP by moving on the problem graph from
one city to another until they complete a tour. During an iteration of the AS
algorithm each ant k, k = I,..., m, builds a tour executing n = \N\ steps in which
a probabilistic transition rule is applied. Iterations are indexed by t, 1 < t < i max ,
where imax is the user defined maximum number of iterations allowed.
For each ant, the transition from city i to city j at iteration t of the algorithm
depends on:
1. Whether or not the city has already been visited. For each ant, a memory (also
called tabu list) is maintained: it grows within a tour, and is then emptied
between tours. The memory is used to define, for each ant k, the set Jf of
cities that the ant still has to visit when it is on city i (at the beginning, J*
contains all the cities but i). By exploiting J* an ant k can avoid visiting a city
more than once.
2. The inverse of the distance n^ = 1/djj, called visibility. Visibility is based on
strictly local information and represents the heuristic desirability of choosing
city j when in city i. Visibility can be used to direct ants' search, although
a constructive method based on its sole use would produce very low quality
solutions. The heuristic information is static, that is, it is not changed during
problem solution.
3. The amount of virtual pheromone trail Ty(i) on the edge connects city i to city
j. Pheromone trail is updated on-line and is intended to represent the learned
desirability of choosing city j when in city i. As opposed to distance, a pheromone
trail is a more global type of information. The pheromone trail information
is changed during problem solution to reflect the experience acquired by ants
during problem solving.
The transition rule, that is, the probability for ant k to go from city i to city j while
building its tth tour is called random proportional transition rule and is given by:

Chapter 2

43

if j € J,fc, and 0 if j ^ Jf, where a and /? are two adjustable parameters4 that
control the relative weight of trail intensity, Tij(t), and visibility, 77^. If a = 0, the
closest cities are more likely to be selected: this corresponds to a classical stochastic
greedy algorithm (with multiple starting points since ants are initially randomly
distributed on the nodes). If, on the contrary, 0 = 0, only pheromone amplification
is at work: this method will lead to the rapid selection of tours that may not be
optimal. A tradeoff between tour length and trail intensity therefore appears to
be necessary. It is important to note that, although the form of Eq. (2.6) remains
constant during an iteration, the value of the probability p^-(i) can be different for
two ants on the same city i, since p^j(t) is a function of J*, that is, of the partial
solution built by ant k.
After the completion of a tour, each ant k lays a quantity of pheromone Ar*j. (t)
on each edge ( i , j ) that it has used; the value Ar t *(i) depends on how well the ant
has performed. At iteration t (the iteration counter is incremented by 1 when all
ants have completed a tour), ant k lays Ar^(t) on edge ( i , j ) :

where Tk(i) is the tour done by ant k at iteration t, Lk(t) is its length, and Q
is a parameter (although the value of Q only weakly influences the final result, it
should be set so that it has a value of the same order of magnitude as that of the
optimal tour length, for example, found running a simple constructive heuristic like
the nearest neighbor heuristic5).
This method could not perform well without pheromone decay: in effect, it
would lead to the amplification of the initial random fluctuations, which very probably would not be optimal. In order to ensure efficient solution space exploration,
trail intensity must be allowed to decay, otherwise all ants will end up doing the
same tour (stagnation): because of the additivity of trail intensity, the probabilities
of transitions between cities would be dominated by the pheromone term. Trail decay is implemented by introducing a coefficient of decay p,0 < p < 1. The resulting
pheromone update rule, which is applied to all edges, is then:
where Arj.,-(t) = X^fcLi Ar^i), ancl m ig the number of ants. The initial amount of
pheromone on edges is assumed to be a small positive constant TO (that is, there is
an homogeneous distribution of pheromone at time t = 0).
The total number of ants m, assumed constant over time, is an important
parameter: too many ants would quickly reinforce suboptimal trails and lead to
early convergence to bad solutions, whereas too few ants would not produce the
4

The values of all the parameters as used in the experiments are given in the algorithms.
The nearest-neighbor heuristic builds a solution starting from a randomly selected city and
repeatedly selecting as the next city the nearest one among those not yet visited.
5

44

Swarm Intelligence

expected synergistic effects of cooperation because of the (otherwise necessary)
process of pheromone decay. Dorigo et al. [109] suggest that to set m = n, that is,
using as many ants as there are cities in the problem, provides a good tradeoff. At
the beginning of each tour, ants are either placed randomly on the nodes (cities), or
one ant is placed on each city (no significant difference in performance was observed
between the two choices).
Dorigo et al. [109], in an effort to improve AS performance, also introduced
"elitist ants" (the term "elitist ant" was chosen due to its similarity with the elitist
strategy used in genetic algorithms [171]). An elitist ant is an ant which reinforces
the edges belonging to T + , the best tour found from the beginning of the trial, by
a quantity Q/L + , where L+ is the length of T + .
At every iteration e elitist ants are added to the usual ants so that the edges
belonging to T+ get an extra reinforcement e-Q/L+. The idea is that the pheromone
trail of T+, so reinforced, will direct the search of all the other ants in probability
toward a solution composed of some edges of the best tour itself. Experiments have
shown that a small number of elitist ants can improve the algorithm's performance.
Algorithm 2.1 reports a high-level description of the AS-TSP algorithm, together with parameter values as set by Dorigo et al. [107, 109] in their experiments.
The time complexity of AS is O(t • n'2 • m), where t is the number of iterations
dene. lf. m = n. that is, if the number of ants is equal to the number of cities, the
time complexity becomes O(t • n3).
Ant System has been compared with other general purpose heuristics on some
relatively small traveling salesman problems (these were problems ranging from 30
to 70 cities). The results [109] were very interesting and disappointing at the same
time. AS-TSP6 was able to find and improve the best solution found by a genetic
algorithm for OliverSO [327], a 30-city problem, and it had a performance similar to
or better than that of the general purpose heuristics with which it was compared
(see Table 2.1). Unfortunately, for problems of growing dimensions (e.g., EilonSO
and Eilon75 [119], see also TSPLIB, a library of traveling salesman problems at:
http:// www.iwr.uni-heidelberg.de/ iwr/ comopt/ soft/ TSPLIB95/ TSPLIB.html),
AS-TSP never reached the best known solutions within a number of iterations
bounded by t max = 3,000, although it exhibited quick convergence to good solutions. Also, its performance level was much lower than that of specialized algorithms
for the TSP. The problem here was that all general purpose heuristics are outperformed by specialized algorithms. Current wisdom says that high-performance
heuristic algorithms for the TSP, as well as for many other combinatorial problems,
must couple good generators of initial solutions with rapid local optimizers [191].
We will see in the next section that an improved version of Ant System augmented
with a simple local search reaches outstanding performance.

6
Because Ant System (AS) has been used to attack different problems, we will often add a
suffix, such as AS-TSP, to make clear to which problem AS was applied.

Chapter 2

Algorithm 2.1 High-level description of AS-TSP
/* Initialization */
For every edge ( i , j ) do
r«(0)=7io
End For
For k = 1 to m do
Place ant fc on a randomly chosen city
End For
Let T+ be the shortest tour found from beginning and L+ its length
/* Main loop */
For t = 1 to imax do
For fc = 1 to m do
Build tour Tk(t) by applying n — 1 times the following step:
Choose the next city j with probability

where i is the current city
End For
For A; = 1 to m do
Compute the length Lk(t) of the tour Tk(t) produced by ant fc
End For
If an improved tour is found then
update T+ and L+
End If
For every edge ( i , j ) do
Update pheromone trails by applying the rule:
*v(0 < - ( ! - * > ) • Tij(t) + Ary(«) + e • Ar=.(t) where

and

End For
For every edge ( i , j ) do
r ^ ( i + l ) = r y (i)

End For
End For

Print the shortest tour T+ and its length L+
Stop
/* Values of parameters used in experiments */
6
Q = l,/3 = 5,p = 0.5,m = n,Q= 100, TO = 10~ ,e = 5

45

46

Swarm Intelligence

TABLE 2.1 Comparison of the average best solution generated by Ant System (AS-TSP),
tabu search (TS) and simulated annealing (SA). TS is a class of procedures in which a set of
solutions recently obtained by the algorithm is kept in memory so as to restrict local choices
by preventing some moves to neighboring solutions [150, 151, 168]. SA is a physics-inspired
local search method in which a slowly decreasing temperature-like parameter determines a
contraction of the search step until the system reaches a state of minimum energy [1, 199].
Each algorithm was given one hour of computing time on an IBM-compatible PC with an
80386 processor. Averages are over 10 runs. Distances between cities are computed using
integer numbers. Test problem: OliverSO. From Dorigo et al. [109].

AS-TSP
TS
SA

Best tour
420
420
422

Average
420.4
420.6
459.8

Std. Dev.
1.3
1.5
25.1

Dorigo et al. [109] also ran a number of experiments aimed at understanding
the way AS functions. Among others, a set of experiments showed that the population of solutions generated by AS does not converge to a single common solution.
On the contrary, the algorithm continues to produce new, possibly improving, solutions. Figure 2.12 shows the evolution of the best tour length in these experiments,
Figure 2.13 the evolution of the population standard deviation, and Figure 2.14
the evolution of the average node branching number. (The branching number of a
node is the number of edges that exit from the node, the pheromone concentration
of which exceeds a small threshold.) It is clear that, although the best solution
produced by AS converges toward the optimal solution within 500 iterations, the
population maintains a high diversity, as shown by the relatively high standard deviation value and by the fact that the average branching number has a value greater
than 5 after 3,000 iterations. If all generated solutions were identical, the average
branching number would quickly drop to 2. This "nonconvergence" property of the
population of solutions is interesting because:
1. It tends to avoid the algorithm getting trapped in local optima.
2. It makes AS promising for applications to dynamical problems, that is, problems
the characteristics of which change at run time.

2.3.2

ANT COLONY SYSTEM (ACS)

The Ant Colony System (ACS) algorithm has been introduced by Dorigo and Gambardella [111, 112] to improve the performance of Ant System, that was able to
find good solutions within a reasonable time only for small size problems. ACS is
based on four modifications of Ant System: a different transition rule, a different

Chapter 2

47

pheromone trail update rule, the use of local updates of pheromone trail to favor
exploration, and the use of a candidate list to restrict the choice of the next city to
visit. These are described in the following.
Transition rule. The transition rule is modified to allow explicitly for exploration.
An ant k on city i chooses the city j to move to following the rule:

where q is a random variable uniformly distributed over [0,1], go is a tunable parameter (0 < go < 1), and J 6 Jf is a city that is randomly selected according to
probability

which is very similar to the transition probability used by Ant System (see Eq. (2.6)).
We see therefore that the ACS transition rule is identical to Ant System's when
q > qo, and is different when q < qo- More precisely, q < qo corresponds to an
exploitation of the knowledge available about the problem, that is, the heuristic
knowledge about distances between cities and the learned knowledge memorized
in the form of pheromone trails, whereas q > qo favors more exploration. Cutting
exploration by tuning #0 allows the activity of the system to concentrate on the
best solutions instead of letting it explore constantly. It is clear that tuning qo is
similar to tuning temperature in simulated annealing: when go is close to 1, only
the locally optimal solution is selected (but a combination of locally optimal solutions may not result in a globally optimal solution), whereas when qo is close to 0,

FIGURE 2.12 Evolution of best tour length (Test problem: OliverSO). Typical run. After
Dorigo et al. [109]. Reprinted by permission © IEEE Press.

48

Swarm Intelligence
Tour length
standard deviation

FIGURE 2.13 Evolution of the standard deviation of the population's tour lengths (Test
problem: OliverSO). Typical run. After Dorigo et al. [109]. Reprinted by permission ©
IEEE Press.
Average node branching

FIGURE 2.14 Evolution of the average node branching of the problem's graph (Test
problem: OliverSO). Typical run. After Dorigo et al. [109]. Reprinted by permission ©
IEEE Press.

all local solutions are examined, although a larger weight is given to locally optimal
solutions (unlike simulated annealing, where all states have similar weights at high
temperature). It is therefore possible in principle to progressively freeze the system
by tuning go from 0 to 1, in order to favor exploration in the initial part of the
algorithm and then favor exploitation. This possibility has not been explored yet.
Pheromone trail update rule. In Ant System all ants are allowed to deposit pheromone
after completing their tours. By contrast, in ACS only the ant that generated the
best tour since the beginning of the trial is allowed to globally update the concentrations of pheromone on the branches. The ants therefore are encouraged to search

Chapter 2

49

for paths in the vicinity of the best tour found so far. In other words, exploration is
more directed. Another difference is that in Ant System the pheromone trail updating rule was applied to all edges, while in ACS the global pheromone trail updating
rule is applied only to the edges belonging to the best tour since the beginning of
the trial. The updating rule is:
where (i, j)'s are the edges belonging to T + , the best tour since the beginning of
the trial, p is a parameter governing pheromone decay, and
where L+ is the length of T + . We see that this procedure allows only the best tour
to be reinforced by a global update. Local updates are however also performed, so
that other solutions can emerge.
Local updates of pheromone trail. The local update is performed as follows: when,
while performing a tour, ant k is in city i and selects city j € Jf, the pheromone
concentration of ( i , j ) is updated by the following formula:
The value TO is the same as the initial value of pheromone trails and it was experimentally found that setting TO = (n • Lnn)~~l, where n is the number of cities and
Lnn is the length of a tour produced by the nearest neighbor heuristic, produces
good results.7
When an ant visits an edge, the application of the local update rule makes the
edge pheromone level diminish. This has the effect of making the visited edges less
and less attractive as they are visited by ants, indirectly favoring the exploration
of not yet visited edges. As a consequence, ants tend not to converge to a common
path. This fact, which was observed experimentally, is a desirable property given
that if ants explore different paths then there is a higher probability that one of them
will find an improved solution than there is in the case that they all converge to the
same tour (which would make the use of m ants pointless). In other words, the role
of the ACS local updating rule is to shuffle the tours, so that the early cities in one
ant's tour may be explored later in other ants' tours. The effect of local-updating
is, therefore, to make the learned desirability of edges change dynamically: every
time an ant uses an edge this becomes slightly less desirable (since it loses some of
its pheromone). In this way ants will make better use of pheromone information:
without local updating all ants would search in a narrow neighborhood of the best
previous tour.
7
Gambardella and Dorigo [138] and Dorigo and Gambardella [110] also tested a variant of
ACS in which the local update rule was inspired by Q-learning [323], but, despite the increased
amount of computation, this did not produce significantly better results than using the fixed value
TO-

50

Swarm Intelligence

Use of a candidate list. ACS exploits a candidate list, that is, a data structure
commonly used when trying to solve large TSP instances. A candidate list is a
list of preferred cities to be visited from a given city: instead of examining all the
possibilities from any given city, unvisited cities in the candidate list are examined
first, and only when all cities in the candidate list have been visited are other
cities examined. The candidate list of a city contains d cities (cl being a parameter
of the algorithm), which are the cl closest cities. Cities in the candidate list are
ordered by increasing distance, and the list is scanned sequentially. ACS-TSP with
candidate list works as follows: an ant first restricts the choice of the next city to
those in the list, and considers the other cities only if all the cities in the list have
already been visited. If there are cities in the candidate list, then the next city j is
chosen according to Eqs. (2.9) and (2.10). Otherwise j is set to the closest of the
yet unvisited cities.
Algorithm 2.2 reports a high-level description of ACS-TSP, the ACS algorithm
applied to the TSP.
ACS-TSP was tested on problems of various sizes and compared with other algorithms, such as the elastic net algorithm (EN) [117], self-organizing maps (SOM),
and simulated annealing (SA) [262], genetic algorithms (GA) [20, 327], and evolutionary programming (EP) [125]. Table 2.2 gives a comparison of results (average
tour length over 25 runs) obtained by ACS-TSP on randomly generated sets of
symmetric 50-city problems with those obtained by SA, EN, and SOM. ACS-TSP
was run for 2500 iterations with 10 ants, which leads to approximately the same
number of tours being generated by every algorithm. It can be seen that ACS-TSP
produces the best results in most cases.
Table 2.3 shows a comparison of results obtained with ACS-TSP with those
obtained with GA, EP, and SA on a set of geometric problems (geometric problems
are problems taken from the real world, like finding the shortest tour that visits
all the European Union states capitals). ACS-TSP was run for 1250 iterations with
20 ants, which, again, leads to approximately the same number of tours being
generated by every algorithm.
In order to apply ACS-TSP to larger problems, Dorigo and Gambardella [111]
introduced a local search procedure to be performed in combination with ACS. This
means combining ACS with a procedure used for iteratively improving a solution.
In the case of the TSP, the most widespread local search procedures are 2-opt and
3-opt [220], and Lin-Kernighan (LK) [221], whereby two, three, and a variable
number of edges are exchanged iteratively until a local minumum is reached. Dorigo
and Gambardella [111] used 3-opt, because 3-opt can be used for both symmetric
and asymmetric instances of TSP. They resorted to a variant of 3-opt, a restricted
3 -opt procedure, in which only 3-opt moves that do not revert the order in which the
cities are visited are applied: this amounts to changing three edges (k, I}, (p, q), and
(r, s) into three other edges ( k , q ) , (p, s), and (r, I) while maintaining the orientations
of all other subtours. This 3-opt procedure avoids unpredictable tour length changes
due to the inversion of a subtour.

Chapter 2

51

Algorithm 2.2 High-level description of ACS-TSP
/* Initialization */
For every edge ( i , j ) do
Tij(O) = TO

End For

For k = 1 to m do
Place ant fc on a randomly chosen city
End For
Let T+ be the shortest tour found from beginning and L+ its length
/* Main loop */
For t = 1 to tmax do
For k = 1 to m do
Build tour Tk(t) by applying n — 1 times the following steps:
If exists at least one city j £ candidate list then
Choose the next city j, j £ Jk, among the cl cities in the candidate list as follows

where J £ Jk is chosen according to the probability:

and where i is the current city
Else
choose the closest j £ Jk
End If
After each transition ant k applies the local update rule:
TijW

+- (\ - p) • Tij(t)

+ p • TQ

End For
For k = 1 to m do
Compute the length L k ( t ) of the tour Tk(t) produced by ant k
End For
If an improved tour is found then
update T+ and L+
End If
For every edge (i,f) 6 T+ do
Update pheromone trails by applying the rule:
Tij(t) +-(l-p)- Tij(t) + p • &Tij(t) where Ar^(i) = 1/L+
End For
For every edge ( i , j ) do
ry(t + l) = ry(*)
End For
End For
Print the shortest tour T+ and its length L+
Stop
/* Values of parameters used in experiments */
/? = 2,p = 0.1, q0 = 0.9, m = 10, TO = (n • Lnn)~l,d = 15

52

Swarm Intelligence

TABLE 2.2 Comparison of ACS-TSP with other algorithms on randomly generated problems. Results for EN are from Durbin and Willshaw [117] and results for SA and SOM are
from Potvin [262]. For ACS-TSP, averages are over 25 runs. Best results are in boldface.
From Dorigo and Gambardella [111].

City set 1
(50-city problem)
City set 2
(50-city problem)
City set 3
(50-city problem)
City set 4
(50-city problem)
City set 5
(50-city problem)

ACS-TSP

SA

5.88

5. 88

EN
5.98

SOM
6 .06

6. 05

6. 01

6 .03

6 .25

5. 58

5. 65

5.70

5,.83

5. 74

5. 81

5.86

5 .87

6. 18

6. 33

6 .49

6 .70

TABLE 2.3 Comparison of ACS-TSP with GA, EP, and SA on four test
problems (available at TSPLIB: http://www..iwr.uni-heidelberg.de/iwr/comopt/soft/
TSPLIB95/TSPLIB.html). Results for ACS-TSP are from Dorigo and Gambardella [111].
ACS-TSP is run for 1250 iterations using 20 ants, which amounts to approximately the
same number of tours searched by the other heuristics; averages are over 15 runs. Results
for GA are from Bersini et al. [20] for the KroAlOO problem, and from Whitley et al. [327]
for the Oliver30, EilSO and Eil75 problem; results for EP are from Fogel [125]; and results
for SA from Lin et al. [222], For each algorithm results are given in two columns: the first
one gives the best integer tour length (that is, the tour length obtained when distances
among cities are given as integer numbers), and, in parenthesis, the best real tour length
(that is, the tour length obtained when distances among cities are given as real numbers);
the second one gives the number of tours that were generated before the best integer tour
length was discovered. Best results are in boldface. (N/A: Not available.)
ACS-TSP
best
425
(427.96)

Eil50
(50-city
problem)
E1175
535
(542.37)
(75-city
problem)
KroAlOO 21282
(100-city (21285.44)
problem)

ACS-TSP
# iter.
1830

EP
SA
GA
GA
EP
SA
best # iter.
best
# iter. best # iter.
428 25000 426
100000 443
68512
(N/A)
(427.86)
(N/A)

80000

3480

545
(N/A)

4820

21761 103000
(N/A)

542
325000 580 173250
(549.18)
(N/A)
N/A
(N/A)

N/A

N/A
(N/A)

N/A

53

Chapter 2

Algorithm 2.3 The local optimization step in ACS-3-opt
For k — 1 to m do
Tk(t) +- 3-opt ( T k ( t } )
End For

{apply the local optimizer to each Tk(t)}

/* Values of parameters used in experiments */

/3 = 2,p = 0.l,q0 = 0.98,m= 10,r0 = (n • Lnn)'1 ,cl = 20
TABLE 2.4 Comparison of results, over 10 runs, obtained by ACS-3-opt (the results are
from Dorigo and Gambardella [111]) on symmetric TSP problems of various sizes with
those obtained by the genetic algorithm (STSP—the results are the best between those
published by Freisleben and Merz [133, 134]) which won the First International Contest
on Evolutionary Optimization [21]. Best results are in boldface.

d!98
(198-city problem)
Iin318
(318-city problem)
att532
(532-city problem)
rat 783
(783-city problem)

ACS-3-opt
best
15780

ACS-3-opt
average
15781.7

STSP
best
15780

STSP
average
15780

42029

42029

42029

42029

27693

27718.2

27686

27693.7

8818

8837.9

8806

8807.3

The ACS algorithm with restricted 3-opt procedure, ACS-3-opt, is the same as
ACS except for the fact that the tour Tk(t) produced by each ant k is taken to
its local optimum. The "for cycle" reported in Algorithm 2.3 is applied at every
iteration of the algorithm, after each ant k has completed the construction of its
tour Tk(t) and before the best tour T+ and its length L+ are updated. Note that, as
indicated in Algorithm 2.3, some algorithm parameters were set to different values
from those used in ACS.
Table 2.4 shows results of simulations of ACS-3-opt (with candidate list) performed on symmetric problems, compared with results obtained by the genetic
algorithm (STSP) [133, 134] that won the First International Contest on Evolutionary Optimization [21]. Table 2.5 shows results obtained on asymmetric TSP
instances. The performance of the two algorithms is similar, with the genetic algorithm having a slightly better performance on symmetric problems and ACS-3-opt
on the asymmetric ones. Note that in both cases the genetic algorithm operators
were finely tuned to the TSP application and that a local optimizer took the solutions generated by the GA to the local optimum.

54

Swarm Intelligence

TABLE 2.5 Comparison of results, over 10 runs, obtained by ACS-3-opt (the results
are from Dorigo and Gambardella [111]) on asymmetric TSP problems of various sizes
with those obtained by the genetic algorithm (ATSP—the results are from Freisleben and
Merz [133, 134]) which won the First International Contest on Evolutionary Optimization [21]. Best results are in boldface.

p43

(43-city problem)
ry48p
(48-city problem)
ft70
(70-city problem)
kro!24p
(124-city problem)
ftvlTO
(1 70-city problem)

ACS-3-opt
best
2810

ACS-3-opt
average
2810

ATSP
best
2810

ATSP
average
2810

14422

14422

14422

14440

38673

38679.8

38673

38683.8

36230

36230

36230

36235.3

2755

2755

2755

2766.1

As further, not implemented improvements of ACS, Dorigo and Gambardella [111]
suggest the following possible additions:
1. Allow the two best ants (or more generally, the best r ants) to update the
pheromone trail, instead of using a single ant. This should make the probability
of getting trapped in local minima smaller.
2. Remove pheromone from edges that belong to the worst tours. Giving negative
reinforcement to bad tours should increase the convergence speed toward good
solutions.
3. Use a more powerful local search procedure.
Finally, the "nonconvergence" property of AS (see section 2.3.1), which is common to many swarm-based systems, can also be observed in ACS. As an example, Figure 2.15 shows that the pheromone level on different edges of a problem
graph can greatly differ. The level of pheromone for a run of ACS is represented
by line thickness in Figure 2.15(a). Some edges are strongly marked, while others
are weakly marked. Strongly marked edges are most likely to be part of the best
solution found by the system. However, more weakly marked edges point to potential "alternative" solutions. The continued availability of these weakly marked
edges helps ACS maintain a diverse population of solutions, thereby avoiding convergence to a single solution. That is a nice and desirable property because it can
help avoid getting trapped in local optima. But there is more: imagine for example
that the problem, instead of being static, is dynamic with nodes and/or edges being

Chapter 2

55

FIGURE 2.15 (a) An example of a trail configuration found by ACS in a 50-city problem
(Eil50). Line thickness reflects pheromone concentration, (b) Best solution found by ants.

dynamically added to, or removed from, the graph. In this case, the trail configuration provides a set of alternative pathways which can be used to quickly produce
a new solution. Although this type of problem would need to be more precisely
formulated by allowing for the design of dynamic benchmark problems, we believe
it is on dynamic problems that swarm-based algorithms might exhibit particularly
good performance. This latter conjecture remains to be confirmed.
2.3.3

OTHER METHODS BASED ON AS OR ACS

Several suggestions have been made to modify the original AS algorithm in order
to improve the quality of its solutions, but not necessarily its convergence time.
Stiitzle and Hoos [298, 299] have introduced Max-Min AS (hereafter MMAS),
which is basically similar to AS, but (i) only one ant (the best in the current
iteration) is allowed to update pheromone trails, (ii) pheromone trail values are
restricted to an interval [rmin, rmax], and (iii) trails are initialized to their maximum
value r max . Putting a bound, rmax, on the maximum value a pheromone trail can
have avoids some edges being reinforced to the point where it is impossible to
make a path without them. This helps to avoid stagnation, which was one of the
reasons why AS performed poorly (in terms of solution quality) on large problems.
Stiitzle and Hoos [298, 299] have also added what they called a "trail smoothing
mechanism" to further avoid stagnation. They implement this mechanism through
a proportional update mechanism: Ar^(i) ex (rmax — Tjj-(t)). In this way stronger
pheromone trails are proportionally less reinforced than weaker ones, a procedure
that obviously favors the exploration of new paths. They found that, when applied
to the TSP, MMAS finds significantly better tours than AS, but comparable to
those obtained with ACS. Stiitzle and Hoos [298, 299] have also proposed adding a

56

Swarm Intelligence

local search procedure (2-opt or 3-opt for ATSP) to their system, in a way similar
to Dorigo and Gambardella [111].
Bullnheimer et al. [49] proposed yet another modification of AS, called ASrank. Their modification is based on (i) using elitist ants, as was done in Dorigo
et al. [109] (see also section 2.3.1), and (ii) ranking the m ants by tour length
(L1 (t), L2(t),... ,Lm(t)) and making ants update the edges with a quantity of
pheromone proportional to their rank. They used a elitist ants, and only the best
a — 1 ants were allowed to deposit a pheromone trail. The weight of a given ant's
update was set to max{0, u — /j,}, where /j, is the ant's rank; in this way no ant could
give a contribution higher than that given by the elitist ants.
The dynamics of the amount of pheromone Tij(t) on edge ( i , j ) is given by:

where Ar^(i) = Q/L+(t), L+ being, as usual, the length of the best solution from
trial beginning, and Arr.(*) = ££l| AT£.(*), AT£(<) = (<7-/i)-Q/L"(t) if ant /j. uses
( i , j ) and Ar^(i) = 0 otherwise. L M (i) is the length of the tour performed by ant
p, at iteration t, and Q was set to the value Q = 100. Bullnheimer et al. [49] found
that this new procedure significantly improves the quality of the results obtained
with AS, but did not try to compare them with those obtained with ACS.

2.4

ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION: THE QUADRATIC
ASSIGNMENT PROBLEM

The quadratic assignment problem (QAP) has been introduced by Koopmans and
Beckman [201] in an economic context. The problem can be stated as follows.
Consider a set of n activities that have to be assigned to n locations (or vice versa).
A matrix D = [dy] n>n gives distances between locations, where dy- is the Euclidean
distance between location i and location j, and a matrix F = [fhk]n,n characterizes
flows among activities (transfers of data, material, humans, etc.), where fhk is
the flow between activity h and activity k. An assignment is a permutation TT of
{!,... ,n}, where n(i) is the activity that is assigned to location i. The problem
is to find a permutation 7rm such that the product of the flows among activities
be minimized by the distances between their locations. Formally, the QAP can
be formulated as the problem of finding the permutation ?r which minimizes the
following objective function:

The optimal permutation Tropt is defined by

Chapter 2

57

where H(n) is the set of all permutations of {1,..., n}.
The QAP has been shown to be NP-hard [279], and the problem rapidly becomes intractable with growing instance size. Heuristics have, therefore, been developed to find good solutions in a reasonably short computation time. In the
following sections we will illustrate how this problem can be attacked by ant colony
optimization algorithms.
2.4.1 ANT SYSTEM FOR THE QAP
AS-QAP, the first application of an ant colony algorithm to the QAP, was proposed
by Maniezzo et al. [233]. In their application of ant colony optimization to the QAP,
the graph representation is similar to the one used in the TSP case: the nodes of
the graph are locations, and the ants' goal is to visit all the locations and to couple
one activity with each location. The pheromone trail Ty-, which in the QAP case
represents the learned desirability of setting ir(i) = j in the solution, is deposited
on edges and used to build solutions as in AS-TSP. Also the constraint satisfaction
method is very similar to the one used for the TSP: while building a permutation,
ants memorize the activities still to be assigned and the locations which have already
been assigned an activity.
The only tricky point was then to devise a heuristic that allows a constructive
definition of the solutions. This was done as follows. Consider the vectors d and /
called distance potentials and flow potentials. Each of these vectors is obtained by
summing the elements of each line of the two matrices of distances D and of flows
F:

The potential values indicate, respectively, the sum of the distances between a
particular node and all the others, and the total flow exchanged between an activity
and all the others. The lower the value d, (distance potential) of the ith node, the
more this node is barycentric in the network; the higher the value //, (flow potential)
of activity h, the more important this activity is in the system of flows exchanged.
As an example, consider a randomly generated problem of order 4 characterized
by the following matrices D andF:

58

Swarm Intelligence

The vectors of the potentials d and / are:

Location 4 (with d^ = 7) is in a central position with respect to all the others, while
location 2 (with di = 20) is in a peripheric position. Concerning the activities, the
third of these (with f% — 15) is the one which has most exchanges with the others,
while the second (/2 = 9), is the least active. It is possible to obtain good, although
probably not optimal, permutations via a min-max coupling rule: activities with
high flow potentials are coupled with high probability to locations with low distance
potentials (and vice versa). This is explained in the following.
Let B = d • J7 be the coupling matrix in which the element bij is given by the
product di • fj. In the above example, this corresponds to the following values:

A solution is constructed as follows (we assume, for simplicity, that ants act in a
deterministic way and not probabilistically, as in reality happens in the algorithm).
Consider the row of matrix B corresponding to the location with lowest distance
potential (row 4 in the example). The activity with highest flow potential is assigned
to this location according to the min-max rule. In the example, activity 3 is assigned
to location 4 because the element 643 is the greatest of row 4. The procedure is
repeated considering the location with lowest distance potential among those not
yet coupled (location 3 in the example). This location is coupled with activity 1 (the
coupling location 3—activity 3 is inhibited because activity 3 was already assigned
to location 4); the procedure is iterated to obtain the couplings 1-4 and 2-2. In the
above matrix the costs of the assignments made are underlined.
Note that the values given to location-activity couplings by the above min-max
rule, and more in general the values b^ of matrix B, only give an indication of

Chapter 2

59

the "potential goodness" of the couplings, and do not represent the effective cost.
These values are used to compute the heuristic desirability 77^ of assigning activity
j to location i. 77^ is set to the value of the corresponding element of the coupling
matrix:

Once the "heuristic matrix" is built, the algorithm works exactly as in the TSP
case. The transition probability Pij(t) becomes an "assignment probability," and
represents the probability that the Arth ant chooses activity j as the activity to
assign to location i. Its value is

if j G Jk, and 0 if j $ Jk, where Jk, similarly to the TSP case, is the set of feasible
activities, that is, the set of activities ant k still has to assign.
A difference from the TSP application is that, in the QAP case, the construction
of the permutation starts from the row (index i) corresponding to the location with
the lowest distance potential and the coupling is made by choosing probabilistically
from all the activities; at the second step the second location is assigned in order
of potential, choosing probabilistically an activity that excludes the ones already
coupled, and so on. The procedure is repeated for all the n rows. The solution
construction is repeated m times, as many times as there are ants in the population.
The parameters a and /? allow the user to define the relative importance of
the pheromone trail Tjj(t) with respect to the heuristic desirability 77^ (as in the
previous section, all the parameters' values as used in the experiments are reported
in the algorithms). Thus the probability p^ (i) is a compromise between the heuristic
desirability of a coupling (activities with high flow potential should be assigned to
locations with low distance potential) and the pheromone trail intensity (if coupling
( i , j ) received a lot of pheromone in the recent past, then this coupling is probably
very desirable).
The pheromone trail update rule is the same as in the TSP case:

where Art* is set to Q/Ck(i) if the fcth ant has chosen coupling ( i , j ) , to 0 otherwise;
m is the number of ants, Q and 0 < p < 1 are two parameters, while Ck(t] is the
value of the objective function obtained by the fcth ant at iteration t. The pheromone
trail update rule causes the couplings which determine a low value of the objective
function (i.e., a low Ck(t) value), to have a stronger pheromone trail.
Algorithm 2.4 reports a high-level description of AS-QAP, the AS algorithm
applied to the QAP, as well as the values of parameters as set by Maniezzo et
al. [233].

60

Swarm Intelligence

Algorithm 2.4 High-level description of AS-QAP
/* Initialization */

For every coupling (i, j) do
Tij(0)

= TO

End For

Compute the distance and flow potentials and the coupling matrix B
Set the heuristic desirability to r?y = bij
For k = 1 to m do
Place ant k on a randomly chosen city
End For
/* Main loop */
For t = 1 to imax do
For k = 1 to m do

Build solution Ak(t) by applying n — 1 times the following two steps:
(1) Choose the location i with the lowest distance potential among those not yet
assigned
(2) Choose the activity j to assign to location i by the probabilistic rule

End For

For fc = 1 to 77i do
Compute the cost Ck(t) of the assignment Ak(t) produced by ant k
End For
If an improved assignment is found then
update best assignment found
End If
For every coupling ( i , j ) do
Update pheromone trails by applying the rule:
Tij(t) <- (I - p) • Tij(t) + Ari.j(t) where

and
End For
For every coupling (i,j) do
ry(t + l) = Ty(t)
End For
End For

Print the best assignment
Stop
/* Values of parameters used in experiments */
l,/3 = l , p = 0.9,m = n , Q = 10, TO = 1(T6

a =

Chapter 2

61

TABLE 2.6 A comparison between simulated annealing (SA), tabu search (TS), genetic
algorithms (GA), evolution strategies (ES), sampling and clustering (SC), Ant System
(AS-QAP), and two versions of Ant System enriched with local search (AS-LS and ASSA). Best results are in boldface.
Elshafei
Krarup
Nugent Nugent Nugent Nugent Nugent
(30)
(20)
(15)
(12)
(19)
(30)
(7)
17937024
6128
89800
2570
1150
578
SA
148
6124
578
17212548 90090
2570
1150
148
TS
6784
17640584
588
108830
2688
1160
148
GA
6308
19600212
2654
1168
598
97880
148
ES
6154
17212548 88900
2570
1150
578
148
SC
6232
578
18122850
92490
2598
1150
148
AS-QAP
578
6146
17212548 89300
1150
AS-LS
2570
148
578
6128
17212548 88900
2570
1150
148
AS-SA

The results obtained with the above-described algorithm were compared with
some other heuristics with good, although not extraordinary, results (see Table 2.6):
on a set of standard problems of dimensions in the range 5 to 30, AS-QAP outperformed two versions of evolutionary algorithms (the genetic algorithm GA and
evolution strategies ES) but had a performance worse than that of simulated annealing (SA), tabu search (TS), and sampling and clustering (SC) [25]. AS-QAP
was also enriched with two different types of local search procedure (AS-LS and ASSA in Table 2.6), which increased its performance in a nondramatic way (AS-QAP
plus local search performed at approximately the same level as SC and TS). Results reported in Table 2.6 were obtained with a PC-386, 16 MHz, with a constant
computation time of one hour.
2.4.2

HYBRID ANT SYSTEM

Gambardella et al. [140] proposed a new ant colony optimization algorithm, called
Hybrid Ant System (HAS-QAP), which departs radically from the previously described AGO algorithms. The main novelties are: (i) ants modify solutions, as
opposed to building them, and (ii) pheromone trails are used to guide solutions
modifications, and not as an aid to direct their construction. In the initialization
phase, each ant k, k = 1,. . . , m, is given a permutation 7rfc which consists of a
randomly generated permutation taken to its local optimum by the local search
procedure explained in the following. The trail values ri:j(t) are initialized by the
value TO = l/(100-C'(7r + )), where TT+ is the best among the m initial permutations,
and C"(TT+) is its cost.
The algorithm is then composed of three procedures, called (i) pheromone-trailbased modification, (ii) local search, and (iii) pheromone trail updating.
Pheromone-trail-based modification. Each ant modifies its permutation 7rfc by applying a set of R swaps, where R is an algorithm parameter: an index i is chosen

62

Swarm Intelligence

randomly in {1,... ,n}, a second index j ^ i is selected in {1.... ,n}, and irk(i)
and 7r fc (j) are swapped. The selection of j is done in one of two ways: (i) with probability q, j is selected such that T^Q-) +Tjvk^ is the maximum (which corresponds
to an exploitation of the knowledge memorized in the pheromone trails), and (ii)
with probability 1 — q, j is selected with probability

which corresponds to a biased exploratory strategy, ihese R swaps generate a
solution 7f fe .
Local search. The solution jrk is transformed into a new solution nk by a local
search procedure. The local search procedure examines all possible swaps in a random order and accepts any swap that improves the current solution. The difference
A(7r,i,j) in the objective function due to the swap of 7r(i) and TT(J) in a given
permutation TT can be evaluated in O(n) steps with the formula:

Because there are n(n — 1) possible swaps, the local search procedure is performed
in O(n 3 ) steps. Notice that the resulting Ttk is usually better than Trk, but need not
be a local optimum.
Pheromone trail updating. When all ants have performed pheromone-trail-based modifications and local search, the pheromone trail matrix is updated. The pheromone
trail update rule is similar to that of AS-TSP and AS-QAP, while the updating
term is similar to that of ACS-TSP. In fact, as in AS, all the edges are updated,
but only the ones belonging to 7r + , the best assignment from the beginning of the
trial, receive a positive reinforcement. The pheromone trail updating rule is:

where A.Ti7r(i)(t) = l/C(7r + ) if (i,Tr(i)) 6 7r + , and 0 otherwise. As usual, p,
0 < p < 1, represents the pheromone evaporation rate.
A problem with this schema is that, since trail updating is governed by the
value C(TT+) of solution ir+ at a given iteration, the trail distribution is determined
by past solutions TT + 'S. When a new solution irk is found such that 7rfc < TT + , nk

Chapter 2

63

becomes the new TT + . In general, it will take some iterations before the influence
of the new TT+ on pheromone trail distribution will have all its effect. Therefore,
a procedure called intensification is activated when the best solution so far has
been improved: the best permutation found between Trk and jtk is kept in memory,
and Ttk is replaced by that best permutation. Intensification allows a more intense
exploration of the neighborhood of newly found good solutions.
Finally, to avoid stagnation, a diversification procedure is activated if no improvement has been made to the current best solution in the last S iterations. When
diversification is activated, all pheromone trail values are reinitialized (i.e., they are
all set to the value TO = l/(100-C'(7r + )), where TT+ is the best solution so far), m — 1
ants are given a new randomly generated solution, and one ant is given the best
solution TT+ so far.
Algorithm 2.5 presents a high-level description of the HAS-QAP algorithm.
The algorithm has been tested on two types of problems: in the QAP case, the
performance of an algorithm usually depends on the structure of the distance and
flow matrices. Gambardella et al. [140] divided their set of problems into problems
where flow and/or distance matrices have "regular" entries, that is, entries that
follow the same statistical distribution, and those that are characterized by at least
one of the matrices having irregular and highly variable entries.8 The latter class
of problems includes most real-world problems. Many heuristics perform well on
the former class of problems, where a lot of good solutions are "easily" accessible
because they are spread in the space of feasible solutions, and perform poorly on
the latter. The quality of the solutions found by the algorithm has been compared
with the quality of solutions found by the best performing algorithms for the QAP,
as well as with a general heuristic, simulated annealing (SA). The QAP-specific
algorithms considered are two tabu searches, the reactive tabu search (RTS) of
Battiti and Tecchiolli [9] and the robust tabu search of Taillard (TT) [306], and
the genetic hybrid tabu search approach introduced by Fleurent and Ferland [123].
All problem instances can be found in the QAPLIB library compiled by Burkard
et al. [51] (http://fmtbhpl.tu-graz.ac.at/~karisch/qaplib).
Two types of experiments were run for each problem typology: "short runs"
and "long runs." In short runs the Hybrid Ant System (HAS-QAP) was run for
10 iterations, which, from a computing time point of view, is equivalent to about
100 • n iterations of the RTS and TT algorithms, where n is problem size, 1250 • n2
iterations of SA and 25 iterations of GH. In long runs HAS-QAP was run for 100
iterations, TT or RTS for 1000 • n iterations, SA for 1250 • n 2 iterations, and GH
for 250 iterations.
On the irregular problems, for both short and long runs, HAS-QAP always
provided the best solutions or solutions which do not differ significantly from the
best solution. GH also performs well but not as well as HAS-QAP. Table 2.7 reports
some of the results obtained on long runs.
8
Real world, irregular, and structured problems are distinguished from randomly generated,
regular, and unstructured problems by means of the value assumed by a statistics called flowdominance [140, 219, 284].

64

Swarm Intelligence

Algorithm 2.5 High-level description of HAS-QAP
/* Initialization

/

For k — 1 to m do
generate a random initial permutation TT*
•Kk = loc-opt (TT^)
End For
Let 7:+ be the best solution
For For every coupling (i, j) do
T^(0) = 1/(Q.C(7T+))
End For
Activate intensification
/* Main loop */
For t — 1 to imax do
/* solution manipulation */
For k = 1 to m do

apply R pheromone-trail-based swaps to nk(t) to obtain itk(t)
nk(t) = loc-opt (if fc (t))
End For
/* Intensification */
For k = 1 to m do

If intensification is active then
7r f c (t+ 1) = best-of {irk(t),TTk(t)}
Else
7Tfc(i+l)=*fc(t)

End If
End For

If -nk(t + 1) = 7T fc (t) for each ant k then
deactivate intensification
End If
If C(TTk(t)) < <7(7T+) for at least one ant k then
7T+=7rfc

activate intensification
End If

/* Pheromone trail updating */
For every coupling (i,j) do

Update pheromone trails by applying the rule:
Tij(t) <- (1 - p) • Tij(t) + Arij(t) where

End For

For every coupling (i, j) do
Tij(t+l)=Ty(t)
End For

/* Diversification */

If S iterations have been performed without improving TT+ then
For every coupling (i, j) do
Ty(t) = l / ( Q - C ( W + ) )
End For
End If
End For

/* Values of parameters used in experiments */
p = 0.1, m = 10, q = 0.9, Q = 100, R = n/3,S = n/2

Chapter 2

65

TABLE 2.7 Comparison of HAS-QAP with other four heuristics on irregular QAP problems, long runs. The figures in the problem names give the problem dimensions (i.e., the
number of cities). The second column gives the best known solution. Following columns
give the average quality of solutions produced by different methods (over 10 runs), expressed in percentage above best known solution. Best solutions are represented in italic
boldface. Solutions which do not differ significantly from best solution (P > 0.1 in a MannWithney U-test) are represented in boldface. The last column gives the average CPU time
(in seconds) to run HAS-QAP for 100 • n iterations; when in all 10 runs HAS-QAP found
the best known solution, then the CPU time is in parentheses and indicates the average
computing time to reach the best known solution. From Gambardella et al. [140].
Problem
name
bur26a
bur26b
bur26c
bur26d
bur26e
bur26f
bur26g
bur26h
chr25a
els!9
kraSOa
kra30b
tai20b
tai25b
taiSOb
tai35b
tai40b
taiSOb
tai60b
taiSOb

GH HAS-QAP HAS-QAP 100
Best known
TT RTS
SA
solution
250
100
CPU (sec)
lOOOn lOOOn 12500n2
5426670
0.0004
0.1411 0.0120
0
(10)
3817852
0.0032
(17)
0.1828 0.0219
0
0.0004
0.0742
5426795
0
0
(3.7)
0.0015
0.0056 0.0002
0
(7.9)
3821225
5386879
0
0
0
(9.1)
0.1238
3782044
0.0007
0.1579
0
0
(3.4)
10117172
0.0003
0.1688
0
0
(7.7)
0.0027
(4.1)
7098658
0.1268 0.0003
0
3796
6.9652 9.8894 12.4973 2.6923
3.0822
40
17212548
0 0.0899 18.5385
0
0
(1.6)
88900
0.4702 2.0079
1.4657 0.1338
0.6299
76
91420
0.0591 0.7121 0.1947 0.0536
o.orn
86
122455319
0
6.7298
0
0.0905
27
0.0072
344355646
1.1215
0
0
(12)
637117113
0.0547
4.4075 0.0003
0
(25)
283315445
0.1777
3.1746 0.1067
0.0256
147
0.2082
637250948
4.5646 0.2109
0
(51)
458821517 0.2943
0.8107 0.2142
0.1916
480
608215054
0.3904
2.1373 0.2905
0.0483
855
818415043
1.4354
1.4386 0.8286
0.6670
2073

Very different results were obtained when these algorithms were applied to regular problems. For both short and long runs TT and RTS were found to be the best
algorithms, while HAS-QAP did not perform well on these problems. A feature of
these problems is that they lack "structure." As discussed before, ant colony algorithms have the ability to detect the structure of good solutions by reinforcement of
good feasible solutions, which is an advantage when the vast majority of the good
solutions are located in the neighborhood of the best solution. This advantage is
lost when it comes to regular problems, where good solutions are spread all over

66

Swarm Intelligence

the set of feasible solutions: in this case reinforcing a good solution does not ensure
that the algorithm is exploring the vicinity of a very good solution.
In conclusion, the HAS-QAP algorithm is a very good heuristic for real-world
problems in which the space of solutions is structured. For such problems, it compares favorably with the best known heuristics. For regular problems, which lack
structure, the HAS-QAP does not perform as well because it cannot take advantage of the underlying structure of the space of solutions. This difference in performance when HAS-QAP is applied to these different types of problems might be
insightful, from a wider perspective, for understanding why and how ant colony
algorithms work. As we already said, solution spaces which have some kind of organization, where the best solution is surrounded by local optima, which themselves
are surrounded by other more shallow local optima, and so forth, favor ant colony
algorithms: this is certainly true for problems other than the QAP.
2.4.3

EXTENSIONS OF AS-QAP

Stiitzle and Hoos [300] have implemented an improved version of AS-QAP based
on their Max-Min Ant System (MMAS) (see section 2.3.3). They used the same
heuristic as in Maniezzo et al. [233] (see Eq. 2.19 in section 2.4.1) and they added
two types of local search, one based on 2-opt, and the other on short tabu search
runs. On structured real-world problems, both the resulting algorithms have had
a level of performance similar to that of HAS-QAP. As it was the case with HASQAP, MMAS-QAP performance was not as good on regular, randomly generated
problems.
More recently, Maniezzo and Colorni [232], and Maniezzo [231] have proposed
the following variations of AS-QAP. First, they defined slightly different heuristic measures of goodness (based on the Gilmore [149] and Lawler [213] bound, in
Maniezzo and Colorni, and on a specially designed bound in Maniezzo) used to
direct the construction of solutions. Second, they slightly changed the assignment
probability to the following form:

if j € J-°, and 0 otherwise, with 0 < 7 < 1.
Third, they also introduced a local search procedure by which solutions generated by ants were taken to their local optima.
Maniezzo and Colorni [232] compared their version of the Ant System with
GRASP [218], a well-known heuristic for the QAP, with very good results. All experiments were run on a Pentium PC 166 MHz, and comparisons were made on a set of
46 test problems (most of them available at the QAPLIB [51], http://fmatbhpl.tugraz.ac.at/~karisch/qaplib/). Each algorithm was given the same CPU time (10
minutes). Under these experimental conditions, the ant colony algorithm outperformed GRASP: it found a greater number of best known solutions, it had a smaller

Chapter 2

67

percentage of error and a smaller maximum error (both with respect to the best
known solution). Moreover, the time required to find the best solution was on average slightly higher for GRASP. Maniezzo [231] compared his extended version of the
Ant System to both GRASP [218] and Tabu Search [306]. Extensive experiments
were run (using a Pentium PC 166 MHz) on all the QAPLIB test problems. He
found that the ant colony algorithm was the best performing both in terms of the
quality of the best and average solutions produced, although he did not differentiate
between structured and unstructured problems.
These results confirm the results obtained by the previous versions of ant colony
algorithms: ant colony optimization is currently the best approach for structured
QAP problems.

2.5

OTHER APPLICATIONS OF ANT COLONY ALGORITHMS
TO OPTIMIZATION

Although the methods developed in the two previous sections can look rather specific, they can in fact be readily modified and applied to many other combinatorial optimization problems. In Algorithm 2.6 we give a high-level description of
a basic version of AGO algorithms. An AGO algorithm alternates, for tmax iterations, the application of two basic procedures: (i) a parallel solution construction/modification procedure in which a set of TO ants builds/modifies in parallel m
solutions to the considered problem, and (ii) a pheromone trail updating procedure
by which the amount of pheromone trail on the problem graph edges is changed.
The solution construction/modification is done probabilistically, and the probability with which each new item is added to the solution under construction is a
function of the item heuristic desirability TJ and of the pheromone trail T deposited
by previous ants.
Pheromone trail modifications are a function of both the evaporation rate p
and the quality of the solutions produced.
Given the above-described algorithm, it is clear that an AGO algorithm can be
applied to any combinatorial problem as far as it is possible to define:
(i) An appropriate problem representation which allows ants to incrementally
build/modify solutions by using a construction/modification probabilistic transition rule that makes use of pheromone trail (which provides compact information on the past history performance of construction/modification moves) and of
a local heuristic (which informs on the desirability of construction/modification
moves).
(ii) The heuristic desirability T) of edges.
(iii) A constraint satisfaction method which forces the construction of feasible
solutions.
(iv) A pheromone updating rule which specifies how to modify pheromone trail
T on the edges of the graph.

68

Swarm Intelligence

Algorithm 2.6 High-level description of a basic AGO algorithm
/* Initialization */
For every edge (i, j) do
Ty(0)=T0

End For

For k = 1 to m do
Place ant k on a randomly chosen city
End For
/* Main loop */
For t = 1 to imax do
For k = 1 to m do
Build a solution Sk(t) by applying n — 1 times a probabilistic construction/modification rule where choices are a function of a pheromone trail T and
of an heuristic desirability r/
End For
For k = 1 to m do
Compute the cost Ck(t) of the solution Sk(t) built by ant k
End For
If an improved solution is found then
update best solution found
End If
For every edge ( i , j ) do
Update pheromone trails by applying a pheromone trail update rule
End For
End For
Print the best solution
Stop

A probabilistic transition rule function of the heuristic desirability and of
pheromone trail.

Let us summarize how this was done in two of the ant systems that we discussed
in the previous two sections: AS-TSP and AS-QAP. Similar considerations hold for
the other AGO algorithms which were presented.
In the AS-TSP case:
AS-TSP: Problem representation. The problem is represented as a graph G =
(N, E] where the set of nodes N represents the cities and the set of edges E the
connections between the cities; ants build their solutions by sequentially visiting all
the cities.
AS-TSP: Heuristic desirability. A very simple heuristic is used: the inverse of the
distance between two cities.

Chapter 2

69

AS-TSP: Constraint satisfaction. The constraint satisfaction method is implemented
as a simple, short-term memory of the visited cities, in order to avoid visiting a city
more than once.
AS-TSP: Pheromone updating rule. It is the one typical of Ant System (see
Eq. (2.8)): pheromone evaporates on all edges and new pheromone is deposited
by all ants on visited edges; its value is proportional to the quality of the solution
built by the ants.
AS-TSP: Probabilistic transition rule. The probabilistic transition rule, called random proportional, is the one typical of Ant System (Eq. (2.6)).
The AS-QAP case presents very similar characteristics:
AS-QAP: Problem representation. The problem is represented as in the TSP, and
ants build their solutions by sequentially assigning activities to locations.
AS-QAP: Heuristic desirability. The heuristic is based on a flow-distance matrix
used to implement the well-known min-max heuristic.
AS-QAP: Constraint satisfaction. Similarly to the AS-TSP case, the constraint satisfaction method is implemented as a simple, short-term memory, this time of the
assigned couplings.
AS-QAP: Pheromone updating rule. It is the one typical of Ant System (Eq. (2.8)):
pheromone evaporates on all edges and new pheromone is deposited by all ants on
visited couplings; its value is proportional to the quality of the assignment built by
the ants.
AS-QAP: Probabilistic transition rule. It is the random proportional probabilistic
transition rule, the one typical of Ant System (Eq. (2.6)).
It is interesting that there are currently applications of various versions of
the basic AGO algorithm to a number of combinatorial optimization problems. In
Table 2.8 we summarize the most successful applications, wJiich are briefly discussed
in the following.
2.5.1 AS-JSP: AN ACO ALGORITHM FOR THE JOB-SHOP SCHEDULING
PROBLEM
AS-JSP: Problem definition and representation. In the job-shop scheduling problem (JSP) [156], a set of M machines and a set of J jobs are given. The jth job,
j = l,...,J, consists of an ordered sequence of operations from a set
O = {... Ojm ...}. Each operation Ojm € O belongs to job j and has to be processed
on machine m for djm consecutive time instants. N = \O\ is the total number of
operations. The problem is to assign the operations to time intervals in such a way
that the maximum of the completion times of all operations is minimized and no two
jobs are processed at the same time on the same machine. JSP is an NP-hard prob-

70

Swarm Intelligence

TABLE 2.8 A chronologically ordered summary of most successful applications of AGO
algorithms to combinatorial optimization problems.
Problem
TSP

QAP
JSP
TSP

TSP
TSP
TSP
GCP
QAP
VRP
SOP
QAP
SCP

- Traveling salesman problem
- Quadratic assignment problem
- Job-shop scheduling problem
- Traveling salesman problem
- Traveling salesman problem
- Traveling salesman problem
- Traveling salesman problem
- Graph coloring problem
- Quadratic assignment problem
- Vehicle routing problem
- Sequential ordering problem
- Quadratic assignment problem
- Shortest common supersequence
problem

Algorithm name
AS-TSP
AS-QAP
AS-JSP
Ant-Q
ACS-TSP
MaxMin-AS
Rank AS
ANTCOL
HAS-QAP
AS-VRP
HAS-SOP
MMAS-QAP
AS-SCS

Authors
Dorigo et al.
Maniezzo et al.
Colorni et al.
Gambardella et al.
Dorigo et al.
Stiitzle et al.
Bullnheimer et al.
Costa et al.
Gambardella et al.
Bullnheimer et al.
Gambardella et al.
Stiitzle et al.
Michel et al.

Year
1991
1994
1994
1995
1997
1997
1997
1997
1997
1997
1997
1998
1998

lem [143]. Colorni et al. [78] suggest the following representation to be used with
the AGO approach: a JSP with M machines, J jobs, and an operation set O containing TV operations can be represented by a directed weighted graph G = (O', A),
where O' — O U {OQ}, OQ is an extra vertex added in order to specify which job
will be scheduled first, in case several jobs have their first operation on the same
machine, and A is the set of arcs that connects OQ with the first operation of each
job and that completely connects the nodes of O except for the nodes belonging to
the same job. Operations that do not belong to the same job are connected with
a bidirectional link. Two operations that belong to the same job are connected by
a unidirectional link only if one is the successor of the other (the unidirectional
link reflects the order in which operations have to be completed within the job);
otherwise, two such operations are not connected. There are, therefore, TV + 1 nodes
and J + [N(N - l)/2] edges in this graph.
Figure 2.16 presents an example graph with 3 jobs and 2 machines, in which one
machine processes operations QU, 021, and 031, while the other processes operations
012, 022, and 033. The first operation of jobs 1 and 3 as well as the second operation
of job 2 have to be performed on machine 1, while the first operation of job 2 and the
second operation of jobs 1 and 3 have to be performed on machine 2. Ants build
a solution by visiting all the nodes Ojm of the graph: the resulting permutation
specifies the orientation of the edges of the cliques representing the machines,
AS-JSP: Heuristic desirability. The heuristic desirability r\^ to have edge ( i , j ) in
the solution is computed by the simple greedy heuristic known as Longest Remaining Processing Time (that is: what is the operation Oj, connected to GJ, that has
the longest remaining processing time?).

Chapter 2

71

FIGURE 2.16 Representation graph for an example problem with 3 jobs and 2 machines.
Bold edges represent bidirectional connections.

AS-JSP: Constraint satisfaction. Because the graph is not fully connected, the set
of allowed nodes is defined with a procedure adapted to the problem. First, a node
that has been selected cannot be visited anymore. Second, if the selected node
is not the last in its job, its immediate successor in the job is added to the set
of allowed nodes (in which it could not be before). As an example, consider the
problem represented in Figure 2.16: the set of nodes to be visited at t = 0 is
{011,022,031,012,021,032}, but the set of allowed nodes is {011,022,031}.
AS-JSP: Pheromone updating rule. It is the one typical of Ant System (Eq. (2.8)):
pheromone evaporates on all edges and new pheromone is deposited by all ants on
visited edges; its value is proportional to the inverse of the total completion time
of the solutions built by the ants.
AS-JSP: Probabilistic transition rule. The probabilistic transition rule is the random
proportional, typical of Ant System (Eq. (2.6)).
AS-JSP: Results. This method has been applied by Colorni et al. [78] and by
Dorigo et al. [109] to problems with up to 10 jobs and 15 machines with reasonable
success. Further study is necessary to understand how AS-JSP compares to other
heuristic approaches on this type of problem.

72
2.5.2

Swarm Intelligence
ANTCOL: AN AGO ALGORITHM FOR THE GRAPH COLORING
PROBLEM

ANTCOL: Problem definition and representation. The graph coloring problem
(GCP) can be formulated as follows. Let G = (V, E) be a nondirected graph, where
V — {«,}, i = 1 , . . . , n, is the set of n vertices, and E the set of edges. A ^-coloring
of G, where q is a strictly positive integer, is a mapping c : V —> {1,2,..., q} such
that c(vi) ^ c(vj) if (vi,Vj) 6 E. c(vi) is called the color of vertex t>j. There is a
minimal <? below which no (^-coloring exists. This value of q is called the chromatic
number of the graph and is denoted x(G}- The graph coloring problem consists
of finding an x(G)-coloring of G. GCP is an NP-hard problem [145]. Ants build
their solution by means of the ANT-RLF procedure (see probabilistic transition
rule below).
ANTCOL: Heuristic desirability. To define the heuristic desirability, Costa and
Hertz [81] tried many different possibilities by taking various specialized heuristics
for the coloring problem. The one that gave the best results is the RLF (recursive
largest first) heuristic [216].
ANTCOL: Constraint satisfaction. The choice of the color to assign to a vertex is
such that neighbor vertices always have different colors.
ANTCOL: Pheromone updating rule. Costa and Hertz [81] define an n x n
"pheromone" matrix P, which is updated by ants after each iteration of the algorithm. Given two nonadjacent vertices vr and vs, the corresponding entry Prs
reflects the quality of the colorings obtained in previous trials by giving the same
color to vr and vg. All of P's entries are initially set to 1. Entries, representing
pheromone concentration, "evaporate" at a rate p. Let m denote the number of
ants, ( s 1 , . . . , sm) the colorings obtained by the m ants at the end of an iteration,
Srs C {s 1 ,... ,sm] the subset of those colorings in which vertices vr and vs have
the same color, and qk the number of colors used in sk, I < k < m. Prs is updated
as follows:

ANTCOL: Probabilistic transition rule. Here it must be mentioned that Costa and
Hertz [81] define their ANTCOL algorithm as a special case of AS-ATP, a generalization of the AS algorithm to assignment type problems. In AS-ATP two probabilities are defined: the probability with which an item to be assigned is chosen
and the probability with which a resource is chosen to assign to the chosen item. In
their best performing version of ANTCOL (which uses the RLF heuristic) the colors
are assigned sequentially (i.e., the first color assigned is q = 1, then q = 2, and so
on until all vertices are colored) and, therefore, the only probability that must be
defined is the probability with which resources are chosen. In fact, the probabilis-

Chapter 2

73

tic transition rule is implemented as a procedure called ANT-RLF. ANT-RLF is
a stochastic procedure that makes use of the RLF heuristic and of the pheromone
matrix P to build solutions.
ANTCOL: Results. ANTCOL was tested on a set of random graphs and results have
shown that its performance is comparable to that obtained by the best heuristics:
it found an average q of 15.05 colors for 20 randomly generated graphs of 100
vertices with any two vertices connected with probability 0.5, whereas the best
known result, obtained by Costa et al. [80] and Fleurent and Ferland [124], is 14.95.
Costa and Hertz [81] found that the performance of the algorithms increases with
"colony size" up to a certain size (that depends on the problem size and on the
heuristic used to guide the constructive part of the algorithm). They also found
that, when compared with the best graph coloring heuristics, ANTCOL tends to
become less competitive for increasing problem dimensions.
2.5.3

AS-VRP: AN AGO ALGORITHM FOR THE VEHICLE ROUTING
PROBLEM

Bullnheimer et al. [50] have proposed an application of an extended version of the
Ant System (AS) algorithm presented in section 2.3.1 to a vehicle routing problem
(VRP) denned as follows.
AS-VRP: Problem definition and representation. Let G = (V, A, d) be a complete
weighted directed graph, where V = {VQ, ... ,vn} is the set of vertices, A = {(i, j ) :
i ^ j} is the set of arcs, and a weight dij > 0 representing the distance between
Vi and Vj is associated to arc ( i , j ) . Vertex v0 represents a depot, while the other
vertices represent customers' locations. A demand di > 0 and a service time 5i > 0
are associated to each customer Vi (d0 = 0 and So = 0). The objective is to find
minimum cost vehicle routes such that (i) every customer is visited exactly once
by exactly one vehicle, (ii) for every vehicle the total demand does not exceed the
vehicle capacity D, (iii) every vehicle starts and ends its tour in the depot, and (iv)
the total tour length of each vehicle does not exceed a bound L.
It is easy to see that VRPs and TSPs are closely related: a VRP consists of
the solution of many TSPs with common start and end cities. As such, the VRP
is an NP-hard problem. As in the TSP, ants build their solutions by sequentially
visiting all the cities.
AS-VRP: Heuristic desirability. The heuristic desirability of a city is measured as a
parametrical saving function (proposed by Paessens [254]):

AS-VRP: Constraint satisfaction. As it was the case in AS-TSP, an ant in city i
chooses the next city j to move to among those not yet visited. Artificial ants construct vehicle routes by successively choosing cities to visit until each city has been

74

Swarm Intelligence

visited. Whenever the choice of another city would lead to an unfeasible solution
due to vehicle capacity or total route length, the depot is chosen as the next city
and a new tour is started.
AS-VRP: Pheromone updating rule. Pheromone trail update is done using the
ranked/ elitist scheme that Bullnheimer et al. [50] had already used with the TSP
(see section 2.3.3, Eq. (2.14)).
AS-VRP: Probabilistic transition rule. The probabilistic choice rule is the same as
in Ant System (Eq. (2.6)).
AS-VRP: Results. In AS-VRP a candidate list is used together with a local optimizer based on the 2-opt swap strategy. A set of experiments was run to compare AS-VRP with other heuristics based on tabu search, simulated annealing, and
neural networks. It was found that AS-VRP outperforms simulated annealing and
neural networks, while having a slightly lower performance than tabu search.
2.5.4

HAS-SOP: AN AGO ALGORITHM FOR THE SEQUENTIAL ORDERING
PROBLEM

Gambardella and Dorigo [139] have developed a Hybrid Ant System (called HASSOP) which is a modified version of ACS plus a local optimization procedure specifically designed to solve the sequential ordering problem (SOP).
HAS-SOP: Problem definition and representation. The sequential ordering problem [120] consists of finding a minimum weight Hamiltonian path on a directed
graph with weights on the arcs and the nodes, subject to precedence constraints
among nodes.
Consider a complete graph G = (V, A) with node set V and arc set A, where
nodes correspond to jobs 0,... ,i,... ,n and |V| = n + 1. To each arc ( i , j ) is
associated a cost tij 6 3? with t^ > 0. This cost represents the required waiting
time between the end of job i and the beginning of job j. Each node i has an
associated cost pi G 9?, pi > 0, which represents the processing time of job i. The
set of nodes V includes a starting node (node 0) and a final node (node ri) connected
with all the other nodes. The costs between node 0 and the other nodes is equal to
the setup time of node i, V, to» — Pi and tin — 0. Precedence constraints are given by
an additional acyclic digraph P = (V, R) that is denned on the same node set V. An
arc ( i , j ) € R if job i has to precede job j in any feasible solution. Given the above
definitions, the SOP problem can be stated as the problem of finding a job sequence
subject to the precedence constraints which minimizes the total makespan. This is
equivalent to the problem of finding a feasible Hamiltonian path with minimal cost
in G under precedence constraints given by P, and therefore SOP is NP-hard. As
in the TSP, ants build their solutions by sequentially visiting all the cities.
HAS-SOP: Heuristic desirability. The heuristic used is the same as in the TSP
applications: Tjy is the inverse of the distance between nodes i and j.

Chapter 2

75

HAS-SOP: Constraint satisfaction. The set of feasible nodes comprises the nodes j
still to be visited such that all nodes that have to precede j, according to precedence
constraints, have already been inserted in the sequence.
HAS-SOP: Pheromone updating rule. The same rule as in ACS is used (Eqs. (2.11)
and (2.12)): only the ant which generated the best solution from the beginning of
the trial is allowed to deposit pheromone. Also, as in ACS, a local updating rule is
applied (Eq. (2.13)).
HAS-SOP: Probabilistic transition rule. The probabilistic transition rule used is the
same as in ACS (Eq. (2.6)).
HAS-SOP: Results. Results obtained with HAS-SOP are excellent. HAS-SOP, which
was tested on an extensive number of problems, outperforms existing heuristics in
terms of solution quality and computation time. Also, HAS-SOP has improved
many of the best known results on problems maintained in TSPLIB.
2.5.5 AS-SCS: AN AGO ALGORITHM FOR THE SHORTEST COMMON
SUPERSEQUENCE PROBLEM
AS-SCS: Problem definition and representation. Given a set L of strings over
an alphabet E, find a string of minimal length that is a supersequence of each
string in L. A string S is a supersequence of a string A if S can be obtained
from A by inserting zero or more characters in A. Consider for example the set
L = {bcab,bccb,baab,acca}. The string baccab is a shortest supersequence. The
shortest common supersequence (SCS) problem is NP-hard even for an alphabet of
cardinality two [266]. Ants build solutions by repeatedly adding symbols to the supersequence under construction. Symbols are chosen according to the probabilistic
transition rule defined below.
AS-SCS: Heuristic desirability. Michel and Middendorf [239] use two types of heuristic information. The first one is based on a lookahead function which takes into account the influence of the choice of the next symbol to append on the next iteration.
The second one is based either on the MM heuristic or on the LM heuristic [40],
which is a weighted version of the majority merge (MM) heuristic [127], The MM
heuristic looks at the first characters of each string in L and appends the most
frequent one to the supersequence. The appended character is then removed by the
front of the strings and the procedure is repeated. The LM heuristic is defined by
adding a weight to each character in the strings of L and then selecting the one
for which the sum of the weights of all its occurences in the front of strings in L is
maximal. The weight of a symbol is given by the number of characters that follow
it in the string to which it belongs.
AS-SCS: Constraint satisfaction. Symbols to be selected are chosen only from
among those in the first position of at least one string in L.

76

Swarm Intelligence

AS-SCS: Pheromone updating rule. The same rule as in AS was used (Eq. (2.8)),
with two elitist ants.
AS-SCS: Probabilistic transition rule. The probabilistic transition rule used is similar to the one used in AS (Eq. (2.6)). The usual rj value is set to the value returned
by the lookahead function. A difference from Eq. (2.9) is that, in the version of ASSCS using the LM heuristic, the pheromone trail term is replaced by the product
of the pheromone trail with the value returned by the LM heuristic.
AS-SCS: Results. The AS-SCS-LM algorithm (i.e., AS-SCS with LM heuristic),
further improved by the use of an island model of computation (that is, different
populations of ants work on the same problem concurrently using private pheromone
trail distributions; every some-fixed-number of iterations they exchange the best solution found), found very good results. AS-SCS-LM was compared with both the
MM and LM heuristics, as well as with a recently proposed genetic algorithm specialized for the SCS problem. On almost all the test problems AS-SCS-LM was the
best performing algorithm. This is a rather good result since the genetic algorithm
is one of the best performing algorithms on this problem.

2.6

SOME CONSIDERATIONS ON AGO ALGORITHMS

Before we discuss a different class of applications for algorithms inspired by the
foraging behavior of ants, let us draw some parallels between the AGO algorithms
presented above and other approaches to combinatorial optimization which took
inspiration from other natural processes. We focus on AGO algorithms applied to
the TSP and draw some analogies with neural networks and with evolutionary
algorithms.
2.6.1

AGO AND NEURAL NETWORKS

Ant colonies, being composed of numerous interacting units, are "connectionist"
systems, the most famous examples of which are neural networks [167]. In artificial
neural networks, units are directly connected to each other and exchange information. The strength of a connection between two units, called "synaptic" strength
in analogy with real neurons in the brain, measures how tightly two neurons are
coupled or, in other words, how strongly two neurons influence each other. Synaptic connections are reinforced or decreased during a learning process: for instance,
examples are presented to the neural network, and synaptic strengths adapt to
"learn" these examples, to either recognize, classify, discriminate among them, or
predict their properties. It is tempting to draw a parallel here between synaptic
connections and pheromone trails, which are reinforced or decreased by ants to find
good solutions. Indeed, Chen [67] proposed a neural network approach to the TSP
which bears important similarities with the ant colony approach:

Chapter 2

77

(i) A tour is selected by choosing cities probabilistically according to the synaptic
strength between cities.
(ii) The synaptic strengths of the links that form the tour are then reinforced (reduced) if the tour length is shorter (longer) than the average result of the previous
trials.
More precisely, in Chen's [67] algorithm, the synaptic strength Wij between
cities i and j starts with a greedy-like value: w^ = e~dij/T, where dij is the distance
between the two cities and T is a (temperature-like) parameter that sets the scale
for initial synaptic strengths. Building a tour consists of selecting cities sequentially
according to synaptic strengths: first, a city i\ is selected randomly among all
the cities, then a city i% is selected among the remaining cities with probability
Pi1i2 oc Wi^, and then a city 13 is selected from among the cities which remain
unvisited, with probability Pi2j3 oc u>j 2 i 3 , and so forth, until a tour, containing
all n cities, is created. To enhance computational efficiency, Chen [67] also uses
candidate lists (see section 2.3.2). The obtained tour is then improved by applying
a local search procedure, here 2-opt [220]. This tour is then compared with other
tours obtained in previous r trials. Let {iii2---in} denote the current tour, of
length d, and {iji^ • • • * « } one of the previous tours, of length d'. Synaptic strengths
are modified as follows:

where, by convention, in+i = i\ and i'n+i = i'i, and a is a "learning" rate, that
is, the modification rate of synaptic strengths. According to this rule, not only are
links that belong to the current tour updated, links that belong to the r previous
tours are also updated. The similarity between this neural-network formulation and
the ant colony approach is striking. Here are some of the c6rrespondences:
pheromone trail <-> synaptic strength
add pheromone (amount oc l/d) <-> reinforce synaptic strength (amount a(d~-d'))
evaporate pheromone «-> reduce synaptic strength (amount oc (d — d'})
Q <-> a
p (evaporation) <-> a (learning rate)
local search <-> local search
candidate list <-> candidate list
Although there are some differences, the common features are overwhelming.
The basic principles are the same: reinforcement of portions of solutions that tend
to belong to many good solutions, and dissipation to avoid ending up in local
optima. This example illustrates in the clearest way the close relationship between
the ant colony approach and connectionist models.

78
2.6.2

Swarm Intelligence
AGO AND EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION

To see the similarities between AGO algorithms and evolutionary computation, we
focus on population-based incremental learning (PBIL), an algorithm proposed by
Baluja and Caruana [6], which takes inspiration from genetic algorithms. PBIL
maintains a vector of real numbers, the generating vector, which plays a role similar to that of the population in genetic algorithms. Starting from this vector, a
population of binary strings is randomly generated: each string in the population
will have the ith bit set to 1 with a probability which is a function of the ith value
in the generating vector (in practice, values in the generating vector are normalized
to the interval [0,1] so that they can directly represent the probabilities). Once a
population of solutions is created, the generated solutions are evaluated and this
evaluation is used to increase (or decrease) the probabilities of each separate component in the generating vector so that good (bad) solutions in the future generations
will be produced with higher (lower) probability. When applied to the TSP, PBIL
uses the following encoding: each city is assigned a string of length [Iog2 n~\, where
n is the number of cities; a solution is therefore a string of size n • [Iog2 n] bits.
Cities are then ordered by increasing integer values; in case of ties the leftmost city
in the string comes first in the tour. In AGO algorithms the pheromone trail matrix
plays a role similar to Baluja and Caruana's [6] generating vector, and pheromone
updating has the same goal as updating the probabilities in the generating vector.
Still, the two approaches are different since in AGO the pheromone trail matrix
changes while ants build their solutions, while in PBIL the probability vector is
modified only after a population of solutions has been generated. Moreover, AGO
algorithms use heuristics to direct search, while PBIL does not.
2.6.3

CONTINUOUS OPTIMIZATION

The AGO approach works for discrete optimization problems. How can it be extended to problems in which a continuous space of solutions has to be searched?
Such problems cannot be represented by graphs in which nodes are connected by
edges that can be marked with virtual pheromone. In order to search a continuous
space, some form of discretization must be used. Bilchev and Parmee [24] suggest
considering a finite set of regions at each iteration of the algorithm: agents are sent
to these regions, from which they explore randomly selected directions within a
radius of exploration. Agents reinforce their paths according to their performance.
Trails diffuse, evaporate, and recombine.
The first step in Bilchev and Parmee's [24] approach is to place the nest, to be
located in a promising region of search space identified by a previous coarse-grained
algorithm: Bilchev and Parmee's [24] algorithm concentrates on local search. The
radius of exploration decreases over time as agents converge toward a good solution.
Regions are first randomly placed in search space, or may correspond to regularly sampled directions from the nest. An agent selects a region with a probability
proportional to the virtual pheromone concentration of the path that goes from the

Chapter 2

79

nest to the region. Let Tj(i) be the pheromone concentration of the path to region i.
Initially, Tj(t — 0) = TO for all regions. The probability that an agent selects region
i is given by

where TV is the (constant) number of regions, r?f (t) is either equal to 1 or incorporates some problem-specific heuristics (it reflects the local "desirability" of a portion
of solution, such as the inverse distance between two cities in the traveling salesman
problem). The agent then moves to the region's center, chooses a random direction,
and moves a short distance from the region's center in that direction. The distance
Sr hopped by an agent at time t is a time-dependent random variable defined by
Sr(t, R) = R(l — u(l~i/T^ ), where R is the maximum search radius, determined by
the extent of the region one wishes to explore, u is a uniformly random real number
in [ 0 , I ] , T is the total number of iterations of the algorithm (so that 6r eventually
converges to 0 as t tends to T), and c is a "cooling" parameter. If the agent finds a
better solution than that of the region's center, the region is moved to the agent's
position and the agent increases TJ(£) by an amount proportional to the improvement made to the region's solution. The trail evaporates after each iteration at a
rate p : T^(t + 1) = (1 — p) • TJ(£). A form of diffusion is also applied to trails: several
"parent" trails are selected, and produce an offspring which is a trail resulting from
the weighted average of its parent trails. For example, the z-coordinate of a point
of curvilinear coordinate s on a new trail produced by two parent trails will be
given by x ( s ) = wix\(s) + w^x^s), where tUj is the weight of trail i (for instance,
an increasing function of TJ) and Xi(s) is the coordinate of a point of curvilinear
coordinate s on trail i.
This algorithm operates at three different levels: (1) the individual search strategy of individual agents, (2) the cooperation between local agents using pheromone
trails to focus local searches, and (3) the exchange of information between different
regions, performed by some kind of "diffusion," similar to a crossover in a genetic
algorithm. The algorithm can also be easily modified to handle constrained optimization: Bilchev and Parmee [24] define the level of constraint violation as the
euclidian distance from the feasible region; a point with a high level of constraint
violation will not be accepted as a "food source" by the algorithm, so that the path
leading to it will soon decay.
In order to design a more global approach and to avoid convergence toward
local optima, Wodrich [332] introduces two types of agents: local search agents
(LSAs), which make about 20% of the population, and global search agents (GSAs)
which make the remaining 80%. Local agents are similar to those of Bilchev and
Parmee [24]. Global agents are the equivalent of explorer ants in foraging: they
perform random walks and find new regions to replace those regions which do not
seem to contain good solutions. Wodrich [332] also introduces aging for regions: a
region's age is decremented whenever an improvement has been made and incremented when no improvement has been made within an iteration. The search radius

80

Swarm Intelligence

Sr is still given by 6r(t,R) = R(l — it( 1 ~*/ T ) < "), but t is now the age of the region
where the agent is located. This allows the adjustment of Sr to the agents' success.
Bilchev and Parmee [24] and Wodrich [332] tested their algorithms on continuous function optimization. They used common benchmark functions to compare
the performance of this approach with that of other algorithms, and found that it
performs well compared to evolutionary strategies, genetic algorithms, evolutionary programming, hill-climbing, and population-based incremental learning. Bilchev
and Parmee [24] also find that this approach produces good results in constrained
optimization. Given the success of the ant colony metaphor in discrete optimization problems, this approach should be studied in more depth. However, too few
results exist to make a definite statement about whether or not this is a promising
approach. Moreover, too many important implementation details are missing from
the descriptions given by both Bilchev and Parmee [24] and Wodrich [332] and
the details of the functioning of the algorithm cannot be understood, especially its
"meta-cooperation" or diffusion aspects.

2.7

APPLICATIONS TO TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS

All the optimization problems dealt with in the previous sections are static: the
problem to be solved does not change over time. One desirable feature of the swarmbased approach is that it may allow for enhanced efficiency when the representation
of the problem under investigation is spatially distributed and changing over time.
Distributed time-varying problems are, therefore, the next big field to move to for
researchers working on swarm-based optimization and problem-solving. This section
is mainly devoted to the presentation of the first paradigmatic application to a
problem with the above-mentioned characteristics: routing in telecommunications
networks. This problem, in addition to being dynamic, is also distributed.
Routing is a mechanism that allows information transmitted over a network
to be routed from a source to a destination through a sequence of intermediate
switching/buffering stations or nodes. Routing is a necessity because in real networks not all nodes are directly connected: the cost of completely connecting a
network becomes prohibitive for more than a few nodes. Routing selects paths that
meet the objectives and constraints set by the user traffic and the network technology, and therefore determines which network resources are traversed by which user
traffic [23, 195, 291].
The problem to be solved by any routing algorithm is to direct traffic from
sources to destinations maximizing network performance while minimizing costs
(e.g., rate of call rejection, throughput, packet delay, etc.). There are many possible
routing problems differing mainly by the characteristics of the network and of the
traffic, which call for different routing algorithms. In real networks traffic conditions
are constantly changing, and the structure of the network itself may fluctuate (nodes
or links can fail). Because there are usually many possible pathways for one message
to go from a given node to another node, it is possible, in principle, to make routing

Chapter 2

81

algorithms adaptive enough to overcome local congestion: calls can be rerouted to
less congested areas of the network. If there is a sudden burst of activity, or if one
node becomes the destination or the emitter of a large number of calls, rerouting
becomes crucial. Static routing, whereby routing remains fixed independent of the
current states of the network and user traffic, is therefore almost never implemented:
most routing schemes respond in some way to changes in network or user traffic
states. But there exists a wide spectrum of dynamic routing systems, which vary
dramatically in their speed of response and in the types of changes they respond
to [291]: some routing systems can be seen as "quasi static," because routing is
modified only in response to exceptional events (link or switch failure) and/or on a
long time scale, while other routing systems are highly dynamic and autonomously
update traffic routing in real time in response to perceived changes in user and
network states. Dynamic routing requires more computational resources than static
or quasi static routing. It relies on active participation of entities within the network
to measure user traffic, network state and performance, and to compute routes.
In the following we will present two routing algorithms for two types of networks. The first one, called ant-based control (ABC) and introduced by Schoonderwoerd et al. [283], was designed with a telephone network application in mind. The
second, called AntNet and proposed by Di Caro and Dorigo [97, 103, 104], was
primarily conceived for packet-switching, connectionless networks like the Internet,
although its extension to connection-oriented data networks is straightforward.
2.7.1

ABC: ROUTING IN TELEPHONE NETWORKS

Schoonderwoerd et al. [283] have proposed a very interesting adaptive routing algorithm based on the use of many simple agents, called ants, that modify the routing
policy at every node in a telephone network by depositing a virtual pheromone trail
on routing tables entries. The ants' goal is to build, and adapt to load changes at
run time, routing tables so that network performance is maximized. The network
performance is measured by the rate of incoming calls which are accepted (incoming calls can be either accepted or rejected depending on the network resources
available at call set-up time).
In Schoonderwoerd et al.'s [283] work, a telephone network is represented by a
graph with N nodes and E bidirectional links. Each node i has fej neighbors (two
nodes directly connected by a link are said to be neighbors), and is characterized by
a capacity Ci: a spare capacity Si, and by a routing table Ri = [r*n d (*)]fci,w-i wrtri
fcj rows and N — I columns. Links have infinite capacity, that is, they can carry an
infinite number of connections. From a technological point of view, the nodes are
crossbar switches with limited connectivity. Ci represents the maximum number of
connections node i can establish, while 5, represents the percentage of capacity that
is still available for new connections. Each row in the routing table corresponds to
a neighbor node and each column to a destination node. The value r^ d(i) is used
as a probability by ants: in this case it gives the probability that a given ant, the
destination of which is node d, be routed from node i to neighbor node n. Calls,

82

Swarm Intelligence

differently from ants, use routing tables in a deterministic way: at set-up time a
route from node s to node d is built by choosing sequentially and deterministically,
starting from node s, the neighbor node with the highest probability value, until
node d is reached. Once the call is set up in this way, the capacity of each node
on the selected route is decreased by a fixed amount. If at call set up any of the
nodes along the route under construction has no spare capacity left, then the call
is rejected. When a call terminates, the corresponding reserved capacity of nodes
on its route is made available again for other calls.
Ants can be launched from any node in the network at any time. An ant's
destination is selected randomly from among all the other nodes in the network.
The probability of launching an ant per time unit must be tuned to maximize the
performance of the system. It appears that too few ants make it difficult to reach
good solutions, whereas too many ants degrade the performance of the system.
Ants go from their source node to their destination node by moving from node to
node. The next node an ant will move to is selected probabilistically according to
the routing table of its current node. When the ant reaches its destination node
it is deleted from the network. Each visited node's routing table is updated: more
precisely, an ant deposits some pheromone on the routing table entry corresponding
to the neighbor node it just came from and to the ant source node, which is viewed
as a destination node. Formally, routing tables are updated as follows. Let s be the
source node of an ant, i — 1 be the node it just came from, and i its current node
at time t. The entry r|_1 s is reinforced while other entries rln s ( t ) . n ^ i — 1, in the
same column decay by probability normalization:

where Sr is a reinforcement parameter that depends on some ant's characteristics
such as its age. Note that this updating procedure conserves the normalization of
the values rln a(t)

if they are initially normalized, so that the values rln^s(t) can always be considered
as probabilities. r|_j s(t~) is comparatively more reinforced when it is small (that
is, when node i — 1 was not on the preferred route to node s) than when it is
large (that is, when node i — 1 was already on the preferred route to node s). This
is an interesting feature (similar in spirit to Stiitzle and Hoos's [298, 299] trailsmoothing mechanism by proportional update; see section 2.3.3), as it should allow
new routes to be discovered quickly when the preferred route gets congested because established routing solutions become unstable more easily. There is, however.

83

Chapter 2

Destination nodes

8 ,

1

I2

3

|5

0.8

0.3

0.1

0.1

0.4

0.8

0.1

0.3

0.1

0.8

1
1 53 0.1
O)

1

0.1

FIGURE 2.17 Example of use and update of a routing table, (a) An ant, whose destination is node 2 and whose source is node 5, arrives in node 4 from node 5. (b) The routing
table of node 4: the left framed column gives the probabilities with which the ant, which
is headed towards node 2, chooses the next node to move to among the neighbors; the
right framed column is the column whose values are updated by the ant.

an exploration/exploitation tradeoff, for too much instability might not always be
desirable.
An example of the way routing tables are updated is given in Figure 2.17. The
source node of the ant in the figure is node 5, while its destination is node 2. In the
situation represented in Figure 2.17(a) the ant just arrived in node 4 from node 5.
The routing table of node 4 is shown in Figure 2.17(b). The values in the column
relative to the ant's destination, that is the left framed column, are used to choose
probabilistically the next node to move to. The values in the column relative to the
ant's source, that is the right framed column, are updated using the rule given by
Eqs. (2.29) and (2.30). The new, updated, values of probabilities for destination 5
are therefore: 0.1/(1 + Sr), 0.1/(1 + <Jr), (0.8 + 5r)/(l + Sr).
We have seen that ants update routing tables of nodes viewing their node of
origin as a destination node. In fact, while moving, an ant collects information about
the path it traversed and which connects its source node with its current node: the
ant can therefore modify only the entries of the routing tables that influence the
routing of ants and calls that have the ant's source node as destination.
It is important to note that the feasibility of this choice is based on an important
assumption: that any specific path connecting two nodes s and d must exhibit
approximately the same level of congestion in both directions. Although this is a
realistic assumption for telephone networks, it becomes questionable in the case of
many packet-switching networks and, therefore, as we will see in section 2.7.2, a
different routing table strategy must be devised.
The amount of reinforcement Sr deposited on the routing table by a given ant
depends on how well this ant is performing. Aging can be used to modulate 5r: if an

84

Swarm Intelligence

ant has been waiting a long time along its route to its destination node, it means
that the nodes it has visited and the links it has used are congested, so that 5r
should decrease with the ant's age (measured in time units spent in the network).
Aging should, in principle, be relative to the length (expressed in time units) of
the optimal path from an ant's source node to its destination. Schoonderwoerd et
al. [283] choose to use the absolute age T, measured in time units spent in the
network, and propose

where a and b are parameters. Aging is also used in a complementary way: age
is manipulated by delaying ants at congested nodes. These delays determine two
effects: (1) the flow of ants from a congested node to its neighbors is temporarily
reduced, so that entries of the routing tables of neighbors that lead to the congested
node cannot be reinforced, and (2) the age of delayed ants increases by definition, so
that delayed ants have less influence on the routing tables of the nodes they reach,
if 6r decreases with age. Schoonderwoerd et al. suggest that the delay D imposed
on an ant reaching a node with spare capacity S should be given by

where c and d are two parameters and 5 is the spare capacity (expressed in percentage of the node's capacity).
It is important to note that in situations that remain static for a long time and
then suddenly change, good routes could become "frozen," that is, probabilities on
the routing tables of a good route can become so high that no more exploration is
going on. This can make the discovery of new, better routes impossible when the
network load status changes. To solve this problem, Schoonderwoerd et al. [283]
suggest the addition of a tunable "noise" or "exploration" factor <?,0 < g < I. At
every node, an ant chooses a purely random path with probability g and chooses its
path according to the node's routing table with probability (I — g). Noise allows a
constant exploration of the network so that it becomes less probable that new, better
routes (due, for example, to the release from congestion of a node) go unnoticed.
Overall, the effect of ants on routing tables is such that routes which are visited
frequently and by "young" ants will be favored routes when building paths to route
new calls. This has the effect that links close to the ant source node get higher
reinforcement than links that are far away. It is clear that there is a strong and
complex interplay among routing of calls, routing of ants, updating of routing tables
by ants, and user-generated traffic. A schematic representation of these relationships
is given in Figure 2.18.
Algorithm 2.7 reports a high-level description of the ABC algorithm, together
with algorithm parameters values as set by Schoonderwoerd et al. [283] in their experiments. Before the algorithm starts to route calls, an initialization phase during
which ants are allowed to explore the network in absence of users' calls takes place.

Chapter 2

85

FIGURE 2.18 Schema of the interplay between routing of calls, routing of ants, updating
of routing tables by ants, and user-generated traffic.

This initialization phase is intended to let the ants initialize the routing tables. It
is interesting that after a short time the highest probabilities in the routing tables
define routes very close to those obtainable by using a shortest path algorithm,
and circular routes have been eliminated. At this point, calls can be safely put on
the network. In their experiments Schoonderwoerd et al. [283] set the initialization
phase to either 250 time steps, when ants without noise are used, or to 500 time
steps, in the case of ants with noise.
Schoonderwoerd et al. [283] have tested their ABC algorithm on the 30-node
interconnection network of British Telecom as an underlying realistic network topology (Figure 2.19). In their simulation, each node has a maximum capacity of 40
calls. Within every time step, an average of one call is generated, with an average
duration of 170 time steps. Probabilities that nodes be emitters or receivers are chosen uniformly over [0.01,0.07] and then normalized. Generation and normalization
of emission and reception probabilities for all nodes define a set of call probabilities,
and a change in call probabilities means that new emission and reception probabilities have been generated (new nodes become more likely to be emitters or receivers,
and others less likely). At the start, before the initialization phase, routing tables
are characterized by equiprobable routing (all neighboring nodes are equally likely
to be selected as next node), and there are no calls in the network. The performance
measure used is the percentage of call failures: the lower the better.
Schoonderwoerd et al. have run experiments to compare five different algorithms: a fixed routing scheme based on a shortest path algorithm [22], an algorithm based on mobile agents [3], an improved version of the mobile agents algo-

86

Swarm Intelligence

Algorithm 2.7 High-level description of ABC
/* Initialization */
For

t = I tO ^initialize

do

For node = 1 to n do
Launch ant
End For
For each ant do
Choose next node j among neighbors using probabilistic routing tables
Update routing tables according to Eqs. (2.29) and (2.30)
End For
End For
/* Main loop */
For t = lio imax do
For node = 1 to n do
Launch ant
End For
For each ant do
Choose next node j among neighbors using probabilistic routing tables
Update routing tables according to Eqs. (2.29) and (2.30)
End For
Remove expired calls from the network
Add new calls to the network
Compute network statistics
End For
/* Values of algorithm parameters used in experiments */
a = 0.08, b = 0.05, c = 80, d = 0.075

rithm [283], the ABC algorithm without noise, and the ABC algorithm with noise
(9 - 0.05).
Table 2.9 shows the average percentage and its standard deviation (computed
over the last 7,500 time steps) of call failures for a set of ten simulations, each
one lasting 15,000 steps, where call probabilities are set at simulation start and
left unchanged thereafter. It is clear that the ABC algorithms perform significantly
better than the others. In this situation, where call probabilities are unchanged,
ABC without noise is slightly more efficient. Table 2.10 shows the average percentage of call failures and its standard deviation (again computed over the last 7,500
time steps) for a set of ten 15,000 steps simulations where call probabilities are
unchanged, but the adaptive component is switched off at time 7,500 for three of
the routing algorithms: improved mobile agents, ants without noise, and ants with
noise (g = 0.05). That the ABC algorithms still perform better despite the fact that
routing tables have been frozen suggests that the ants have been able to find good
routes for the given network conditions. Table 2.11 shows the same as Table 2.9,
but now a different set of call probabilities is introduced at time 7,500. Here again,

Chapter 2

87

TABLE 2.9 Average percentage and its standard deviation (time steps 7,500-15,000)
of call failures for a series of ten 15,000 steps simulations where call probabilities are
unchanged, for five different algorithms. After Schoonderwoerd et al. [283]. Reprinted by
permission © MIT Press.

Shortest path
Mobile agents
Improved mobile agents
ABC without noise
ABC with noise

Average
call failures
12.57
9.19
4.22
1.79
1.99

Std. Dev.
2.16
0.78
0.77
0.54
0.54

the ABC algorithms perform better than the others, with the noisy version being
slightly more efficient in the dynamic environment. In this dynamic environment,
if routing tables are frozen at the same time call probabilities are changed, the system's performance degrades significantly but the ABC algorithms remain the best
performing (Table 2.12).
At each time step, an ant as described by Schoonderwoerd et al. [283] only
updates the column that corresponds to its source node (viewed as a destination
node). A recent addition by Guerin [159] introduces updating of all columns corresponding to all the intermediate nodes visited by the ant, in a way reminiscent
of dynamic programming's optimality principle: the assumption is that if a route
between two nodes is optimal (irrespective of the exact definition of optimality), all
subroutes that connect intermediate nodes should also be optimal. Or, differently
put, optimal routes are made up of optimal subroutes. In order to take advantage
of this simple fact in the context of Schoonderwoerd et al.'s ant colony routing,
Guerin [159] defines a new species of ants—smart ants—which reinforce intermediate routes in addition to their main route. Smart ants reinforce an entry associated
with a given destination node by a quantity that depends on the smart ant's age
relative to the time it visited that node. Guerin notes that this scheme, although it
requires more complex ants, reduces the number of ants to be released in the network because each ant performs more updates: assuming that the average length of
an ant's trip, expressed as number of visited nodes, is L, an original ant reinforces
positively a total of L entries in all the routing tables of the various nodes it has
visited, whereas a smart ant reinforces positively L(L — l ) / 2 entries, that is, a factor
(L ~ l)/2 more entries. Therefore, it may, in principle, be possible to reduce the
number of ants in the network by a factor (L — l)/2 and obtain the same type of
performance.
Although Guerin's [159] method relies on ants that perform round trips from
their source nodes to their destination nodes and back, it can be readily applied

88

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 2.19 Schematic representation of the interconnection structure of the British
Telecom SDH network. After Schoonderwoerd et al. [283]. Reprinted by permission ©
MIT Press.

TABLE 2.10 Average percentage and its standard deviation (time steps 7,500-15,000)
of call failures for a series of ten 15,000 steps simulations where call probabilities are
unchanged, but the adaptive mechanism is switched off at time 7,500, for three algorithms.
After Schoonderwoerd et al. [283]. Reprinted by permission © MIT Press.

Improved mobile agents
ABC without noise
ABC with noise

Average
call failures
6.43
2.11
2.48

Std. Dev.
2.17
0.60
0.69

Chapter 2

89

TABLE 2.11 Average percentage and its standard deviation (time steps 7,500-15,000) of
call failures for a series of ten 15,000 steps simulations where call probabilities change at
time 7,500, for five different algorithms. After Schoonderwoerd et al. [283]. Reprinted by
permission © MIT Press.

Shortest path
Mobile agents
Improved mobile agents
ABC without noise
ABC with noise

Average
call failures
12.53
9.24
4.41
2.72
2.56

Std. Dev.
2.04
0.80
0.85
1.24
1.05

TABLE 2.12 Average percentage and its standard deviation (time steps 7,500-15,000)
of call failures for a series of ten 15,000 steps simulations where call probabilities change
at time 7,500 and the load balancing mechanism is switched off at time 7,500, for three
algorithms. After Schoonderwoerd et al. [283]. Reprinted by permission © MIT Press.

Improved mobile agents
ABC without noise
ABC with noise

Average
call failures
8.03
4.29
4.37

Std. Dev.
2.88
2.06
2.27

to the case of one-way ants [33]. Let i be a node visited by a smart ant on its way
to its destination. The ant updates the columns of i's routing table corresponding
to all the intermediate nodes which belong to the path the smart ant is building.
The updating of the column corresponding to an intermediate node / is performed
using a relative age instead of an absolute age. The entry r\_l f ( t ) , where i - 1 is
the node preceding node i in the smart ant route, is reinforced while other entries
r
/ / ( 0 > £ ^ i — 1, in the same column decay. The updating rules are exactly the
same as in ABC (see Eqs. (2.29) and (2.30)), and the value 5r is given by Eq. (2.32)
in which the absolute age T is substituted by the value T i — T f .

where T/ is the ant's absolute age when reaching node / and Tt its age when
reaching node i.
The ant colony algorithm ABC with smart ants yields significantly better performance than without. To evaluate smart ants, simulations have been run on the
same experimental testbed as Schoonderwoerd et al. [283], using exactly the same

90

Swarm Intelligence

simulation parameters: the 30-node interconnection network of British Telecom was
used as an example; each node i has a capacity of Ci = 40 calls; during every time
step, an average of one call is generated, with an average duration of 170 time steps;
the probabilities that nodes be emitters or receivers are uniform in [0.01,0.07] and
normalized; generation and normalization of emission and reception probabilities
for all nodes defines a set of call probabilities, and a change in call probabilities
means that new emission and reception probabilities have been generated (new
nodes become more likely to be emitters or receivers, and others less likely). At
initialization, routing tables are characterized by equiprobable routing (all neighboring nodes are equally likely to be selected as next node), and there is no message
in the network. Messages are routed independently of the agents' dynamics: when
a message reaches a node, it selects the largest entry in the appropriate row in
its current table and is routed towards the neighboring node corresponding to this
largest entry.
Figure 2.20(a) shows the average number of call failures per 500 steps together
with error bars representing the standard deviation observed over 10 simulation trials, the first 500 steps being discarded, after the network has been initialized [33].
Two phases are examined: the first phase is defined by 500 < t < 3,000, and
the second phase by 3,000 < t < 7,500. The first phase corresponds to a transient dynamics, while the second phase corresponds to a phase where a stationary regime has been reached. During the first phase following initialization, smart
ants perform significantly better than Schoonderwoerd et al.'s [283] ants (i-test:
P < 0.003). During the second phase, smart ants also perform significantly better
(t-test: P < 0.001), with a level of significance comparable to the one obtained during the first phase. Figure 2.20(b) shows the average number of call failures per 500
steps together with error bars representing the standard deviation observed over 10
trials of the simulation, the first 500 steps being discarded, after a change in the call
probabilities [33]. Results similar to those obtained after network initialization are
observed: during both phases, smart ants perform significantly better than simple
ants (t-test phase 1: P < 0.001; i-test phase 2: P < 0.025).
The above results must be taken with some care. The performance of ABC with
smart ants depends on the applicability of the optimality principle to the considered
problem, which in turn depends on the network topology and the traffic patterns.
More experiments will be necessary to better characterize the situations in which
smart ants are useful from those in which they are not.
Two other recent approaches which extend the ABC algorithm have been proposed. Subramanian et al. [301] have proposed an application of ABC to packetswitching networks. In the Subramanian et al. model an ant is represented by a
triple (s,d,c) where s is the ant source node, d its destination node, and c is a
path cost which starts at zero and is incremented while the ant is building its path.
Routing tables are probabilistic and they are updated exactly as in ABC. Subramanian et al. also define so called uniform ants that choose the next node to visit
uniformly randomly (that is, all neighbor nodes have the same probability of being
chosen). Unfortunately, both these schemes call for symmetric path costs (i.e., for

Chapter 2

91

FIGURE 2.20 (a) Adaptation (500 first steps discarded). Phase 1: from t = 501 to t =
3,000, Phase 2: from t = 3,001 to t = 7,500. a = 0.08, b = 0.005, c = 80, d = 0.075,
g = 0.05, node capacity Ci = 40. (b) Change in call probabilities (500 first steps discarded).
Phase 1: from t = 501 to t = 3,000, Phase 2: from t - 3,001 to t - 7,500. a = 0.08,
b = 0.005, c = 80, d = 0.075, g = 0.05, node capacity d = 40.

any traffic situation the cost to traverse the link (i, n) needs to be the same as
that of traversing the link ( n , i ) ) . Requiring path costs to be symmetric is a strong
constraint, hardly met by most of the interesting instances of packet-switching networks, and their ant algorithm can therefore find useful applications only to the
small subset of networks whose links can be assumed to have symmetric costs.
Heusse et al. [169] have proposed a model, called cooperative asymmetric forward (CAP) routing, for packet-switching networks with asymmetric path costs

92

Swarm Intelligence

that combines the ABC approach with some of the Q-routing ideas [39]. In CAF,
differently from what happens in both ABC and AntNet, routing tables are based
on cost estimates to destination nodes. In their implementation, packet delay is
used as the cost metric, and the ants measure the delay between nodes by sharing
the same transmission lines and queues with data packets. They use these cost estimates to update the routing tables on-line. The presence of asymmetric path costs
introduces two problems for ant routing algorithms like ABC. The first problem is
that an ant originated in node s and moving from node i — 1 to neighbor node i
cannot use the cost information it collects about the cost of link (i — l,i) to change
the probability r\_l s of going from i — 1 to i, (on the contrary, this can be done
in case of symmetric path costs like those used by Schoonderwoerd et al.'s and by
Subramanian et al.'s algorithms). To solve this problem Heusse et al. [169] maintain
on each node i a model of the time Tn^i required to go from any neighbor node n
of i to node i. When the ant moves from node i to node n it does two things: (i) it
reads the value T n _j it finds on node i and uses it to update the value r™ s of the
routing table of node n, and (ii) it updates the model of the time Ti^n maintained
at node n. (In fact, Heusse et al. use a very simple model: the value of Ti_,n is
set to the value written by the last ant which used link (i, n). That is, they do not
maintain any memory of what happened in the past.) The second problem is given
by the fact that, when path costs are asymmetric, the data traffic moving say from
node s to node d can follow different paths than the data traffic moving from node
d to node s. When the path costs are symmetric, i.e., traffic from a node s to a node
d has the same characteristics as traffic moving from node d to node s, the very
same routing tables can be used to route both data packets and ants. In this way
a variance reduction effect by which ants explore the neighborhood of the paths
that are currently used by data packets can be obtained. This cannot be done in
the presence of asymmetric path costs, as can be better understood by looking at
Figure 2.21. In this example, data packets from node s to node d follow a different
preferred route from that followed by data packets from node d to node s. Ants
with source node s and destination node d, since they update routing tables entries
used by data packets directed toward s, should follow the same preferred route as
that used by data packets directed toward s (lower branch in the figure). Therefore,
they cannot use the same routing tables as data packets directed toward d: if they
did, they would follow the upper branch.
To solve this problem, Heusse et al. [169] maintain, on each node i, a table
RevRi = [revln d(t)]fci,N-i which keeps track of the data traffic toward any possible
destination node d via any possible neighbor node n. In practice, each time a data
packet originated in node d traverses link (n,i) the value revln d(i] is incremented
by one. Ants are routed probabilistically using the normalized values of the table
RevRi. Heusse et al. also implemented the smart ant capability described above,
plus some capabilities to manage dynamic networks, that is, networks which change
configuration at run time (e.g., link failures, mobile devices, etc.).
In both cases, during the writing of this book, results about these works were
not accurate enough to say whether or not they resulted in an improvement over the

Chapter 2

93

FIGURE 2.21 Data packets from node s to node d and data packets from node d to node
s follow different preferred routes. Ants with source node s and destination node d update
routing tables entries used by data packets directed towards s. They should therefore
follow the same preferred route as that used by data directed towards s. Therefore ants
cannot use the same routing tables as data packets.

original ABC and AntNet algorithms. The preliminary results presented by Heusse
et al. [169], however, are promising.

2.7.2

ANTNET: ROUTING IN DATA COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS

Di Caro and Dorigo [97, 103, 104] have introduced an adaptive routing algorithm
based on ant colonies that explore the network with the goal of building routing tables and keeping them adapted to traffic conditions. Their algorithm, called AntNet,
although based on principles similar to those of Schoonderwoerd et al.'s approach,
has some important differences:
1. The way ants collect and distribute information was designed so that AntNet
can be applied to both connection-oriented and connectionless types of communication networks.
2. Ants collect information which is used to build local parametric models of the
network status. These models are used to compute reinforcements to change the
probabilistic routing tables.
3. AntNet has been tested on a packet-switching network model and its performance, in terms of throughput and delivery delays, has been compared to the
performance of well-known existing routing algorithms.

94

Swarm Intelligence

This work is a serious attempt at evaluating the efficiency of an ant-based algorithm,
although the network model used is still a simplification, albeit a sophisticated one,
of a real network. Moreover, Di Caro and Dorigo's tests are based on continuoustime discrete event simulation, which is much more powerful and closer to reality
than the sequential discrete iterations simulation system used by Schoonderwoerd
et al. [283].
The same notation as in the previous subsection is used. Let s and d be the
source and destination nodes, respectively, of an ant, i — I the node it just came
from, and i the current node at time t. In the network there are N nodes, and
each node i is characterized by its number of neighbors fcj and by a routing table
•^« = Vn d(tf\ki,N-\- The entry rln d ( t ) in the routing table of node i represents the
probability at time t of choosing node n (which is a neighbor of node i) as the next
node to move to when the destination is node d. Alternatively, rln d ( t ) can be seen
as the desirability of going through n when trying to reach d from i. The routing
table is not the only relevant data structure present at a node: there is also a set
of estimates for trip times from the current node i to all other nodes d. This set of
estimates, denoted by I\ = {^_ >{ j)° r f_,d}i comprises average estimated trip times
^ti-td, that is, the estimated average time to go from node i to node d, and their
associated variances 0f_,d. I\ allows maintenance of a local picture of the global
network's status at node i. Both the routing table Ri and the local model F, are
updated by ants in a way that is described below.
Two types of ants exist: forward ants, denoted by Fs^d, that go from a source
node s to a destination node d, and backward ants, denoted by J3d_»s, that go
from destination nodes to source nodes. Fs_>d is transformed into Bd^s when it
reaches d. Forward ants move in the network at the same level of priority as data
packets, and therefore experience queues and traffic load, which allows them to
collect information about the state of the network; backward ants are used to backpropagate this information to nodes on their paths as quickly as possible, which
is why they are given a higher priority than forward ants and data.9 The AntNet
algorithm can be informally described as follows.
• Forward ants Fs^d are launched at regular intervals from every node s in the network, with a randomly selected destination d. Destinations are chosen to match
the current traffic patterns.
• Each forward ant selects the next hop among the not yet visited neighbor nodes
following a random scheme. The choice probability is made proportional to the
desirability of each neighbor node (that is, to the value r^d(t)) and to the local
queues status.
• The identifier of every visited node i and the time elapsed from its launching
time to its arrival at this ith node are pushed onto a memory stack Ss^d carried
by the forward ant.
9

Backward ants use high-priority queues which, on real networks, are usually available for
control packets.

Chapter 2

95

If a cycle is detected, that is, if an ant is forced to return to an already visited node
because none of the neighbor nodes has an "unvisited" status, the cycle's nodes
are popped from the ant's stack and all the memory about them is destroyed.
When the ant F8-*d reaches the destination node d, it generates a backward
antbackward ants Bd-+s, transfers to it all of its memory, and then dies.
The backward ant makes the same path as that of its corresponding forward ant,
but in the opposite direction. At each node i along the path it pops its stack
Ss-+d to know the next hop node. Arriving in a node i coining from a neighbor
node i — 1, the backward ant updates F* and the routing table Ri as follows:
— The model Fj is updated with the values stored in the stack memory S s _,d(i);
the times elapsed to arrive in every node / on the path i —> d, that is the path
followed by ant F^^d starting from the current node i, are used to update the
corresponding sample means and variances. To be exact, only those subpaths
that have a smaller trip time than the average trip time memorized in the model
are used to update the model. Poor subpaths' trip times are not used because
they do not give a correct idea about the time to go toward the subdestination
node. In fact, all the forward ant routing decisions were made only as a function
of the destination node. In this perspective, subpaths are side effects, and
they are intrinsically suboptimal because of the local variations in the traffic
load. As already noted when discussing Guerin's work [159] on smart ants in
the previous section, the dynamic programming optimality principle must be
applied with care because of the nonstationarity of the problem representation.
Obviously, in case of a good subpath we can use it: the ant has discovered, at
zero-cost, an additional good route.
— The routing table Ri is changed by incrementing the probability rj_ 1 d ( t ) associated with the neighbor node i — 1 and the destination node d, and decreasing
(by normalization) the probabilities rln d ( t ) associated with the other neighbor
nodes n, n ^= i — 1, for the same destination. The trip time T^d experienced
by the forward ant Fs~>d is used to assign the probability increments. T^d
is the only explicit feedback signal available: it gives an indication about the
goodness r of the followed route because it is proportional to its length from
a physical point of view (number of hops, transmission capacity of the used
links, processing speed of the crossed nodes) and from a traffic congestion
point of view.10 A problem in using the value Tj_,d is that it cannot be associated with an exact error measure, given that the optimal trip times are
not known since they depend on the net load status. It can, therefore, only be
used as a reinforcement signal. The values stored in the model Fj are used to
score the trip times so that they can be transformed in a reinforcement signal
10
Forward ants share the same queues as data packets (backward ants do not, they have
priority over data to propagate the accumulated information faster), so if they cross a congested
area, they will be delayed. This has a double effect (which is very similar to the one artificially
induced by delaying ants in congested nodes as implemented in Schoonderwoerd et al.'s [283] ABC
algorithm): (i) the trip time will grow and therefore back-propagated probability increments will
be small, and (ii) at the same time these increments will be assigned a larger delay.

96

Swarm Intelligence

r = r(Ti-*d,Ti),r 6 [0,1] (r is such that the smaller T^d, the higher r). This
dimensionless value takes into account an average of the observed values and
their dispersion: r oc (1 — Wj_,d/Ti_>d) + A(a, W], where W^j is the best trip
time experienced over a time window, and A(<J, W) is a correcting term [97];
r is used by the current node i as a positive reinforcement for the node i — 1
the backward ant -B<^s comes from. The probability r\_l d(t) is increased by
the reinforcement value as follows:

In this way, the probability rln d ( t ) will be increased by a value proportional to
the reinforcement received and to the previous value of the node probability
(that is, given a same reinforcement, small probability values are increased
proportionally more than big probability values).
Probabilities rln d ( t ) for destination d of the other neighboring nodes n implicitly
receive a negative reinforcement by normalization. That is, their values are reduced
so that the sum of probabilities will still be 1:

The transformation from the raw value Tj^^ to the definition of the more
refined reinforcement r is similar to what happens in Actor-Critic systems [8]: the
raw reinforcement signal (Tt^d, in our case) is processed by a critic module which is
learning a model of the underlying process, and then is fed to the learning system.
Every discovered path receives a positive reinforcement in its selection probability. In this way, not only the (explicit) assigned value r plays a role, but also the
(implicit) ant's arrival rate. This strategy is based on trusting paths that receive
either high, independent of their frequency, reinforcements, or low and frequent
reinforcements. In fact, for any traffic load condition, a path receives one or more
high reinforcements only if it is much better than previously explored paths. On
the other hand, during a transient phase after a sudden increase in network load
all paths will likely have high traversing times with respect to those learned by the
model F in the preceding, low congestion, situation. Therefore, in this case good
paths can only be differentiated by the frequency of ants' arrivals. Assigning always
a positive, but low, reinforcement value in the case of paths with high traversal
time allows the implementation of the above mechanism based on the frequency of
the reinforcements, while, at the same time, avoids giving excessive credit to paths
with high traversal time due to their poor quality.
Algorithm 2.8 reports a high-level description of the AntNet algorithm [97]. Before AntNet starts to control the network, an initialization phase is run for t = 500
sec. During this initialization phase the algorithm is exactly the same as during
regular operation, but operates on the unloaded network. The goal of the initialization phase is to build initial routing tables which match the network topology,

Chapter 2

97

Algorithm 2.8 High-level description of AntNet
/* Initialization */
/* The initialization phase is the same as the main loop, but without data traffic */
t = current time
At = time interval between ants generations
/* Main loop */
For each node do /* concurrently over all network nodes */
While t < itmax do
If ((t mod Ai) = 0) do
Select destination node
Launch forward ant
End If
For each forward ant do /* concurrently for all forward ants */
While (current node ^ destination node) do
Select link using routing table and link queues
Put ant on link queue
Wait on data link queue
Cross the link
Push the elapsed time information on the stack
End While
Launch backward ant
Die
End For
For each backward ant do /* concurrently for all backward ants */
While (current node / destination node) do
Choose next node by popping the stack
Wait on high priority link queue
Cross the link
Update the traffic model
Update the routing table
End While
End For
End While
End For
/* Values of algorithm parameters used in experiments */
S = 1.2, At = 0.3 seconds

so that when data traffic is added AntNet can concentrate its efforts on adapting
routing tables to traffic load.
In order to fully characterize the system, one has to define how packets are
routed within a node. Each node holds a buffer in which incoming and outgoing
packets are stored; a different buffer is used for each outgoing link. Packets at
the same priority level are served on a first-in-first-out basis; high-priority packets
(backward ants) are served first. A packet which has not yet reached its destination

98

Swarm Intelligence

reads the relevant information from the routing table and selects its next node. It
is important to note that not only ants, but also data packets use routing tables
in a probabilistic manner. In fact, the use of probabilistic entries is very specific to
AntNet. It has been observed to improve AntNet performance, which means that
the way the routing tables are built in AntNet is well matched with a probabilistic
distribution of the data packets over all the good paths. Data packets are prevented
from choosing links with very low probability by remapping the T's entries by means
of a power function f(p) = ps,5 > 1 which emphasizes high-probability values and
reduces lower ones (in their experiments Di Caro and Dorigo set 5 = 1.2).
If link resources are available, the transfer is made, and arrival of the packet
at the next node is scheduled with a certain transmission delay characteristic of
the link and packet size. If there are not enough resources, the packet waits in the
node's buffer. If, upon arrival at a given node, there is not enough buffer space, the
packet is discarded.
Di Caro and Dorigo [97, 99, 100, 101] have tested their algorithm on a set of
model networks, among which are the US NSFNET-T1, and the Japanese NTTnet.
NSFNET is composed of 14 nodes and 21 bidirectional links (Figure 2.22(a)) with
a bandwidth of 1.5 Mbits/s and propagation delay which range from 4 to 20 ms.
NSFNET is the old Tl US backbone, and is a well balanced network: the distance
between a pair of nodes in terms of hops ranges from 1 to 4, while the ratio between
the mean connectivity degree and the number of nodes is about 0.2. NTTnet is
the NTT (Nippon Telephone and Telegraph company) corporate backbone, and
is the major Japanese network (Figure 2.22(b)). NTTnet has 57 nodes and 162
bidirectional links. Links have a 6 Mbit/sec bandwidth, while their propagation
delays range from 1 to 5 msec. NTTnet is not well balanced: the distance between
a pair of nodes in term of hops ranges from 1 to 20, while the ratio between the
mean connectivity degree and the number of nodes is about 0.05.
A number of different traffic patterns, both in terms of spatial and temporal
characteristics, have been considered. Traffic is defined in terms of open sessions
between pairs of different nodes. Each single session is characterized by the number
of transmitted packets, and by their size and interarrival time distributions. Sessions
over the network are characterized by their interarrival time distribution and by
their geographical distribution. The latter is controlled by the probability assigned
to each node to be selected as a session start or end-point. They considered three
basic patterns for the temporal distribution of the sessions, Poisson (P), fixed (F),
and temporary (TMP), and three for their spatial distribution, uniform (U), random
(R), and hot spots (HS). General traffic patterns are then obtained by combining
the above temporal and spatial characteristics. For example, UP traffic is obtained
by letting an identical Poisson process regulate the arrival of new sessions for all
nodes, while in RP traffic the Poisson process is different for each node, and in the
UP-TMPHS case a temporary hot spots traffic is superimposed to a UP traffic.
The performance of the AntNet algorithm and of several other algorithms is
expressed in throughput (delivered bits/s) and delivery time from source to desti-

Chapter 2

99

FIGURE 2.22 Two of the network topologies used by Di Caro and Dorigo: (a) NSFNET,
with 14 nodes and 21 bidirectional links, and (b) NTTnet, with 57 nodes and 162 bidirectional links.

nation (s) during a total simulated time of 1000 s. The competing algorithms with
which AntNet is compared are:
1. A simplified version of open shortest path first (OSPF), the current official Internet routing algorithm [244].
2. A sophisticated version of the asynchronous distributed Bellman-Ford algorithm
(BF) with a dynamic cost metric [23].
3. The shortest path first (SPF) algorithm with a dynamic cost metric [197].
4. The Q-routing algorithm as proposed by Boyan and Littman [39].
5. The predictive Q-routing algorithm [71], an extension of Q-routing.
In order to evaluate the "absolute" performance of the AntNet algorithm, Di
Caro and Dorigo [96, 97] introduced an approximation of an "ideal" algorithm,
called daemon algorithm, which provides an empirical bound to achievable performance. In this algorithm, which is an abstraction and cannot be implemented in
a real network, a daemon is capable of reading at every instant the states of the
queues of all nodes and of computing on the basis of this global knowledge instan-

100

Swarm Intelligence

taneous costs for all the links. This algorithm can, therefore, compute before each
packet hop new network-wide shortest paths. The cost of a given link is computed
on the basis of the characteristics of the link and of its queue status. For the BF and
SPF algorithms, where the cost metric is dynamic, several cost metrics were tested
(a detailed description can be found in Di Caro and Dorigo [97]). The parameters
of all competing algorithms were carefully optimized to make the comparison as
fair as possible.
A wide range of experiments were run on NSFNET and NTTnet, as well as on
other networks, using UP, RP, UP-HS and TMPHS-UP traffic patterns. For each
traffic pattern considered Di Caro and Dorigo studied the behavior of the algorithms
when moving the traffic load toward a saturation region. To this aim, they ran five
distinct groups often trial experiments gradually increasing the generated workload.
In all the cases considered, differences in throughput were of minor importance with
respect to those shown by packet delays. Because the distribution of packet delays
presents a very high variance, they measured the performance by the 90th percentile
statistic, instead of the more usual average packet delay. In this case, in fact, the
90th percentile gives a much better representation of the algorithm's performance.
Figures 2.23 and 2.24 show some results regarding throughput and packet delays
for RP traffic on NSFNET and NTTnet, respectively. These results are exemplar
of the behavior of AntNet: results obtained on other traffic pattern and network
topology combinations are qualitatively equivalent. It is interesting to note that
AntNet throughput was at least as good as that of the competing algorithms,
while its 90th percentile of packet delays was much better than that of the others.
Moreover, it was rather close to that generated by the ideal daemon algorithm.
Di Caro and Dorigo also investigated the response of AntNet to a sudden increase
of traffic which temporarily took the network to a saturation condition.
Figures 2.25 and 2.26 show the results of an experiment in which a temporary
hot-spot load was superimposed to a light Poisson traffic. In both the NSFNET
(Figure 2.25) and NTTnet (Figure 2.26) case AntNet was the best performing
algorithm with the exception of the daemon which in the NSFNET case did slightly
better.
Di Caro and Dorigo's AntNet is an interesting contribution to both the fields of
swarm-based algorithms and ant-based routing algorithms. Although it is close in
spirit to Schoonderwoerd et al.'s [283] algorithm, Di Caro and Dorigo's [97, 98, 99,
100, 101, 102, 103] work goes further in several respects: it uses a network model
which is more complex, it deals with general packet-switching networks avoiding the
"symmetric path costs" constraint of Schoonderwoerd et al.'s model, it introduces
additional information at the level of nodes about the reliability of agent-based
information in the form of estimated trip times and their variances, it compares
the algorithm's performance with the performance of (simplified versions of) classical routing schemes, and, in doing so, it introduces a "benchmark" algorithm
(the daemon algorithm) the performance of which provides an empirical bound to
achievable performance.

101

Chapter 2

0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
90-th percentile of packet delays (sec)

FIGURE 2.23 Comparison of algorithms for increasing load for RP traffic on NSFNET.
The load is increased reducing the mean session inter arrival vafue from 2.8 to 2.4 seconds,
(a) Throughput, and (b) 90th percentile of the packet delays empirical distribution.

2.7.3 AN ANT ROUTING ALGORITHM BASED ON ANT SYSTEM
White et al. [325] have proposed a scheme for routing in circuit-switched networks
which was also inspired by ant colonies' foraging behavior, and in particular by
Ant System (AS) (section 2.3.1). Although they had no significant results at the
time this book was being written, we report a brief description of their method for
completeness. In their system, ants are launched each time there is a connection
request. A connection request can be a point-to-point (PTP) or a point to multipoint (PMP) request. In the PTP case, in a network of N nodes, N ants are launched
to look for the best path to the destination, given a cost function associated with
every node. For a PMP request with m destinations, N • m ants are launched.

102

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 2.24 Comparison of algorithms for increasing load for RP traffic on NTTnet.
The load is increased reducing the mean session inter arrival value from 3.1 to 2.7 seconds,
(a) Throughput, and (b) 90th percentile of the packet delays empirical distribution. The
OSPF value for packet delays is out of scale.

Contrary to the previous algorithms, but similar to what happens in Ant System
this one relies on pheromone concentrations on links. Let ^(t) be the amount of
pheromone trail on the link connecting node i and node j, CV,-(£) the cost associated
with this link (CV,-(£) is a dynamic variable that depends on the link's load), Ck(t)
the cost of the fcth ant's route, AT^ the amount of pheromone deposited by ant k
(Ark is independent of the ant's performance Ck(t); it could be modified to be, for
example, proportional to l/Ck(t)), pkj(t) the probability that ant k chooses to hop
from node i to node j, and Cmax the maximum allowed cost of a route. In a way

Chapter 2

103

FIGURE 2.25 NSFNET: Comparison between algorithms for a temporary hot-spot load
superimposed to a Poisson traffic. Packet delays are averaged over a 10 seconds moving
window.

similar to what is done in the AS-TSP algorithm, p^At) is denned by:

where Jf is the set of nodes connected to node i (that is, the neighbors of node i)
which have not been traversed yet by ant k, and a and /? are two tunable parameters
that determine the respective influences of pheromone concentration and link cost.
After the initial generation of N (or N • m) ants, ants are created at a frequency fe
during the time of the session, so that it is possible to adapt to changing network
conditions within a session. Ant k hops from node to node to reach its destination
node and memorizes the visited nodes. Ant k selects the next node to hop to
according to probability p^(t) and updates its route cost each time it traverses a
link: Ck(t + 1) = Ck(t) + Ctj(t}. If Ck(t + 1) > Cmax, ant k is deleted from the
network. Once it has reached its destination, ant k goes all the way back to its
source node through all the nodes visited during the forward path, and updates the
pheromone concentration of every edge (i, j) traversed: T^(t + l) = Tij(t) + Ark. In

104

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 2.26 NTTnet: Comparison between algorithms for a temporary hot-spot load
superimposed to a Poisson traffic. Packet delays are averaged over a 10 seconds moving
window. Since AntNet and daemon have very similar performance their packet delay
graphs are superimposed.

addition to this pheromone reinforcement, there is evaporation, characterized by an
evaporation rate p (evaporation per unit time). The source node keeps in memory
all paths that have been found by ants. If the path found by ant k is the same as
p% of all paths in the node's memory, then the path is reserved and a connection
is eventually set up (in the case of a PMP request, it is the spanning trees found
by ants to the multiple destination nodes which are compared).

2.7.4

LIMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION

In the previous sections we have seen how ant-based algorithms can be used to find
good, adaptive routing tables in both connection-oriented and connectionless types
of networks. Although ABC and AntNet differ for a number of important details,
they share some important ideas:
• Both approaches view ants as a mechanism to explore the network and to collect
information about its status.

Chapter 2

105

• In both systems the implicit information represented by the arrival rate of ants,
one of the most original aspects of the approach, plays an important role.
• They both use probabilistic routing tables instead of routing tables based on cost
estimates (e.g., of expected times required to reach destination nodes).
These aspects make ant colony routing algorithms a novel, and very promising,
approach to distributed routing. Before the ant colony routing methods presented
in this chapter can actually be implemented in real communications networks, some
limitations have to be overcome:
• The model network used in the examples is obviously a simplification of reality:
the "ant routing" methods have to be tested on realistic, and therefore more
complex, network models. Not only should more realistic traffic conditions be
simulated, specific constraints should also be taken into account. In the considered examples, routing is limited to finding the shortest path from one point
to another under given network conditions. On the contrary, in the context of
modern high-speed networks like ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode), routing
is often complicated by the notion of guaranteed Quality of Service (QoS), which
can either be related to time, packet loss or bandwidth requirements: constraints
related to various types of QoS make some routing solutions unacceptable. Currently, AntNet is being extended, see [98], to allow best effort QoS [229]. The idea
is to use faster ants (not waiting in data queues) which use the values maintained
in the probabilistic routing tables to concurrently build a set of possible routes;
the best one will be chosen and used to set up a virtual channel with loosely
defined characteristics.
• Flow and congestion control has been mostly neglected in the systems described in
the previous sections11: flow control (see chapter 6 in Bertsekas and Gallager [23])
is a mechanism that prevents some of the offered traffic from entering the network
to avoid congestion when the network is heavily loaded. Obviously, flow control
works in synergy with routing, influences throughput and average delay, and
therefore affects routing algorithms.
Designing more complex simulation environments, however, points to the problem of analyzing the routing's behavior. Routing algorithms are generally difficult to
analyze mathematically, especially when the underlying network is complex and/or
not fully connected, and it is not possible to know a priori the characteristics of
the traffic flow. For example, it would be crucial for "self-organizing" algorithms
such as those presented here, where control by humans can only be limited, to
be able to prove that they (i) converge to a solution asymptotically close to the
optimal one for stationary traffic loads, (ii) adapt reasonably quickly to any new
traffic situation, and (iii) do not enter oscillatory behavior. One also needs to have
11

Although in AntNet a very simple form of flow control based on a limited production
window is implemented.

106

Swarm Intelligence

a clear understanding of the limits and constraints of communications networks:
for example, if there are sufficient computational power and spare capacity in the
network to launch a large number of complex agents without affecting traffic, why
bother to design simple agents?
2.7.5

FINDING INFORMATION IN A NETWORKED ENVIRONMENT

As a final example of the use of virtual pheromones in telecommunications networks,
although in an application different from routing, a group of researchers at the
School of Communication, Information, and Library Studies at Rutgers University
is developing a new approach to finding information in networked environments
based on digital information pheromones (DIP) (see Holden [170]). The idea is
to use other people's experience in prior searches: for example, net surfers that
are looking for interesting links or sites that deal with particular subjects can, if
they belong to a "colony" of users, access information that has been left in the
form of DIP (ratings) in previous searches by other colony members: as links are
turned up by a web search, an "ant icon" appears next to every hyperlink for
which the "ant server" had data from previous similar searches; clicking on the
icon would produce a chart showing how many previous searches went through a
particular hyperlink, and how the hyperlink was rated [170]. Documents that are
found interesting could also get reinforced, while the DIP associated with those
that are not found interesting could evaporate. Trail decay also allows obsolete
information about documents to disappear naturally: if no user has visited a given
site for a certain time, the DIP will have disappeared, so that only information
which is regularly verified and reinforced is conserved. This could be implemented
by discounting ratings by a factor that decreases with time. Although this project
is only beginning, it looks promising and relies on principles that we have explored
throughout this chapter.

2.8

POINTS TO REMEMBER

• In several species of ants, cooperative foraging through trail laying-trail following
allows decentralized selection of the food source that is closest to the nest. Despite
its ability to select the closest food source, a colony may not be able to track
a changing environment because trail reinforcement is too strong. Pheromone
evaporation could, in principle, solve this problem, but real trail pheromones seem
to be long-lived. Virtual trail pheromones in simulations of collective foraging can
be made as volatile as necessary if biological plausibility is not an issue.
• In army ants, foraging patterns are adapted to the spatial distribution of prey.
A single self-organizing algorithm, in which both exploration and prey retrieval
are based on trail laying-trail following, can account for different raid patterns
in different species of army ants. One conjecture that remains to be tested is

Chapter 2

107

that the energy expense is optimized in the raid patterns: if that is the case, the
self-organizing algorithm provides an optimal response to different environments.
The foraging behavior of ants has inspired a novel approach to distributed optimization, Ant Colony Optimization (AGO). Most of current AGO applications
are either in combinatorial optimization or in communications networks routing.
Ant System (AS), the first AGO algorithm, was applied to the traveling salesman
problem (TSP). Although it had limited success from a performance standpoint,
it opened up the road to improvements and new applications. Ant Colony System (ACS), a modified version of AS that extends AS and includes local search
routines, exhibits top performance on asymmetric TSPs.
A whole family of AGO algorithms is now applied to many different combinatorial optimization problems ranging from the quadratic assignment and the sequential ordering problems to vehicle routing and graph coloring problems. AGO
algorithms for routing in communications networks, also called ant routing algorithms, have been particularly successful. This success is probably due to the
dynamic nature of the routing problem which is well matched to the distributed
and adaptive characteristics of AGO algorithms.
AntNet, an AGO algorithm tested on several packet-switching communications
networks, outperformed some of the best-known routing algorithms. These results, although obtained using a simulator which only approximates real networks, are very promising.
The AGO area of research is now very active and the interested reader can find
up-to-date information about publications as well as workshops and conferences
on the Web at: http://iridia.ulb.ac.be/dorigo/ACO/ACO.html.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 3
Division of Labor and Task Allocation

3.1

OVERVIEW

Many species of social insects have a division of labor. The resilience of task allocation exhibited at the colony level is connected to the elasticity of individual
workers. The behavioral repertoire of workers can be stretched back and forth in
response to perturbations.
A model based on response thresholds connects individual-level plasticity with
colony-level resiliency and can account for some important experimental results.
Response thresholds refer to likelihood of reacting to task-associated stimuli. Lowthreshold individuals perform tasks at a lower level of stimulus than high-threshold
individuals.
An extension of this model includes a simple form of learning. Within individual
workers, performing a given task induces a decrease of the corresponding threshold,
and not performing the task induces an increase of the threshold. This double
reinforcement process leads to the emergence of specialized workers, that is, workers
that are more responsive to stimuli associated with particular task requirements,
from a group of initially identical individuals. The fixed response threshold model
can be used to allocate tasks in a multiagent system, in a way that is similar to
market-based models, where agents bid to get resources or perform tasks.
The response threshold model with learning can be used to generate differentiation in task performance in a multiagent system composed of initially identical

109

110

Swarm Intelligence

entities. Task allocation in this case is emergent and more robust with respect to
perturbations of the system than when response thresholds are fixed. An example
application to distributed mail retrieval is presented.

3.2

DIVISION OF LABOR IN SOCIAL INSECTS

In social insects, different activities are often performed simultaneously by specialized individuals. This phenomenon is called division of labor [253, 272]. Simultaneous task performance by specialized workers is believed to be more efficient
than sequential task performance by unspecialized workers [188, 253]. Parallelism
avoids task switching, which costs energy and time. Specialization allows greater
efficiency of individuals in task performance because they "know" the task or are
better equipped for it.
All social insects exhibit reproductive division of labor: only a small fraction
of the colony, often limited to a single individual, reproduces. Beyond this primary
form of division of labor between reproductive and worker castes, there most often
exists a further division of labor among workers, which may take three, possibly
coexisting, basic forms:
1. Temporal polyethism. With temporal polyethism, individuals of the same age
tend to perform identical sets of tasks. Individuals in the same age class form
an age caste. It is not clear at the moment whether or not absolute aging is the
main cause of temporal polyethism. Social and external environment, as well as
genetic characteristics, seem to influence the rate of behavioral ontogeny.
2. Worker polymorphism. In species that exhibit worker polymorphism, workers
have different morphologies. Workers that differ by their morphologies are said
to belong to different morphological or physical castes. Workers in different morphological castes tend to perform different tasks. An example of a worker caste
is the soldier or major caste which is observed in several species of ants.
3. Individual variability. Even within an age or morphological caste, differences
among individuals in the frequency and sequence of task performance may exist.
One speaks of behavioral castes to describe groups of individuals that perform
the same set of tasks within a given period.
A key feature of division of labor is its plasticity [272]. Division of labor is
rarely rigid. The ratios of workers performing the different tasks that maintain
the colony's viability and reproductive success can vary in response to internal
perturbations or external challenges. Such factors as food availability, predation,
climatic conditions, phase of colony development, or time of year influence the size
and structure of a colony's worker population in natural conditions. The worker
force must be allocated to tasks so as to adjust to changing conditions. Changes
in the pattern of task allocation can be induced experimentally by altering colony

Chapter 3

111

size, structure, or demography, or by increasing the need for nest maintenance, nest
repair, defense, etc.
Wilson [330] experimentally altered the structure of colonies of polymorphic
ant species from the Pheidole genus. In most species of this genus, the worker
population is divided into two morphological subcastes: the minor and major subcastes. Minors, which take care of most of the quotidian tasks of the colony, are
smaller than the large-headed majors (often called soldiers), which are specialized
either for seed milling, abdominal food storage, defense, or some combination of
these functions. Wilson [330] showed that majors in the species he studied exhibit
elasticity: their normally limited behavioral repertoire can be stretched back and
forth in a predictable manner in response to perturbations. He artificially tuned
the ratio of majors to minors and observed a change in the rate of activity within
one hour of the ratio change. When the fraction of minors in the colony becomes
small, majors engage in tasks usually performed by minors and efficiently replace
the missing minors. Figure 3.1 shows the number of behavioral acts per major per
hour as a function of the fraction of majors in the colony for two tasks that are
normally performed by minors, for three species of the genus Pheidole. The usual
proportion of majors in these species varies between 5% and 30%. It can be seen
that majors become progressively more and more involved in performing minors'
tasks as the fraction of majors increases. These experiments suggest that the resilience of a colony as a whole, that is, the degree to which the colony responds to
alterations, is determined by the elasticity observed at the individual level.
In the next section, we introduce a model that explicitly connects the two levels,
that is, elasticity at the worker level and resilience at the colony level. The model
applies equally well to division of labor based on physical, temporal or behavioral
castes.

3.3

RESPONSE THRESHOLDS

3.3.1 INTRODUCTION
In order to explain Wilson's [330] observations, Bonabeau et al. [29] have developed a simple model which relies on response thresholds [270, 272]. In this model,
every individual has a response threshold for every task. Individuals engage in task
performance when the level of the task-associated stimuli exceeds their thresholds.
When individuals performing a given task are withdrawn from the colony—they
have low response thresholds with respect to stimuli related to the task—the associated demand increases and so does the intensity of the stimulus, until it eventually
reaches the higher response thresholds of the remaining individuals. The increase of
stimulus intensity beyond threshold has the effect of stimulating these individuals
into performing the task.
Let us give two simple examples. If the task is larval feeding, the associated
stimulus may be larval demand, which is expressed, for example, through the emission of pheromones. Feeding the larvae reduces larval demand. Another example is

112

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURES.1 (a) Number of behavioral acts (social behavior and self-grooming) per major
per hour as a function of the fraction of majors in the colony for Pheidole guilelmimuelleri.
(b) Number of behavioral acts (social behavior and self-grooming) per major per hour as
a function of the fraction of majors in the colony for Pheidole pubiventris. (c) Number
of behavioral acts (social behavior and self-grooming) per major per hour as a function
of the fraction of majors in the colony for Pheidole megacephala. "Fitting lines" are only
visual aides. After Wilson [330]. Reprinted by permission © Springer-Verlag.

Chapters

113

the removal of corpses from the nest in honey bees [256]: "undertaker" honey bees
drag the corpses of their nestmates, fly away with them, and drop them at some
distance from the nest. Dead nestmates within the nest provide the stimuli that
trigger the "undertaker" behavior. The removal of corpses has the effect of actually
reducing or eliminating the stimuli. In these two examples, task performance by an
individual reduces the intensity of task-associated stimuli and, therefore, modifies
the stimulatory field of its nestmates: information about the necessity of performing such or such task is transmitted through a combination of direct and indirect
channels. Indirect information transfer through modifications of the environment is
stigmergy [157, 158].
The nature of task-related stimuli may vary greatly from one task to another
and so can information sampling techniques, which may involve direct interactions
among workers (trophallaxis, antennation, etc.) [153], nest "patrolling" [223], or
more or less random exposure to task-related stimuli.
3.3.2

RESPONSE THRESHOLDS: INTRODUCTION AND EXPERIMENTAL
EVIDENCE

The first question that we have to answer is: how do we formally define a response
threshold? Let s be the intensity of a stimulus associated with a particular task.
s can be a number of encounters, a chemical concentration, or any quantitative
cue sensed by individuals. A response threshold &, expressed in units of stimulus
intensity, is an internal variable that determines the tendency of an individual to
respond to the stimulus s and perform the associated task. More precisely, 9 is such
that the probability of response is low for s -C 9 and high for s 3> 9. One family
of response functions TJj(s) (the probability of performing the task as a function of
stimulus intensity s) that satisfy this requirement is given by

where n > 1 determines the steepness of the threshold. In the rest of the chapter,
we will be concerned with the case n = 2, but similar results can be obtained with
other values of n > I . Figure 3.2 shows several such response curves, with n = 2,
for different values of 9. The meaning of 9 is clear: for s -C 0, the probability of
engaging task performance is close to 0, and for s ~^> 0, this probability is close
to 1. At s = 9, this probability is exactly 1/2. Therefore, individuals with a lower
value of 6 are likely to respond to a lower level of stimulus. Figure 3.3 shows a
schematic representation of how the threshold model can be used to understand
the experiments of Wilson [330].

114

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.2 Semi-log plot of threshold response curves (n = 2) with different thresholds
(0 = 1,5,10,20,50).

FIGURE 3.3 Schematic representation of hypothetical response curves for minors and
majors in the polymorphic species of ants studied by Wilson [330]. In this figure, majors
have a higher response threshold than minors to task-associated stimulus intensity.

115

Chapter 3

FIGURE 3.4
5).

Exponential response curves with different thresholds (0 = 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1,

Another important example of threshold response function is given by1
Te(s) = I - e~s'e .

(3.2)

Figure 3.4 shows Tg(s) given by Eq. (3.2) for different values of 9. We see here again
that the probability of engaging task performance is small for s -C 0, and is close
to 1 for s 3> 0. Although there is no change in concavity in the curve, this response
function produces behaviors which are comparable to those produced by response
functions based on Eq. (3.1) [34]. Figure 3.5 also shows that a semi-logarithmic
plot of Tg(s) given by Eq. (3.2) exhibits a change in concavity, and Figure 3.5 is
actually very similar to Figure 3.2. In most of this chapter, we make use of Eq. (3.1)
with n = 2 rather than Eq. (3.2), simply because analytical results are possible for
Eq. (3.1) with n-1.
It is important to emphasize that threshold models encompass exponential response functions: the main ingredient of a threshold model is the existence, within
each individual, of a value 9 of the stimulus intensity s such that task performance is likely for s 3> 8 and unlikely for s <C 0. Exponential response functions
are particularly important because they are likely to be common. For example,
imagine a stimulus that consists of a series of encounters with items that have to
be processed, such as grains to be carried to the nest or corpses to be removed
'Plowright and Plowright [261]: use this type of response function in their model of the
emergence of specialization.

116

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.5 Semi-log plot of exponential response curves with different thresholds (0 •
0.1,0.25,0.5,1,5).

from the nest. If, at each encounter with an item, an individual has a fixed probability p of processing the item, then the probability that the individual will not
respond to the first N encountered items is given by (1 — p)N. Therefore, the probability P(N) that there will be a response within the AT encounters is given by
P(N) = 1 - (1 - p)N = 1 - eNln(l~ri , which is exactly Eq. (3.2) with s = N and
d = — l/ln(l — p). The organization of cemeteries by ants provides a good illustration of this process (see also Chapter 4). The probability of dropping a corpse
(or a dead item, i.e., a thorax or an abdomen) has been studied experimentally by
Chretien [72] in the ant Lasius niger: the probability that a laden ant drops an item
next to a N-cluster can be approximated by P(N) = 1- (l-p)N = 1- eNln^~p\
for N up to 30, where p « 0.2 (Figure 3.6). Here, the intensity of the stimulus is the
number of encountered corpses, and the associated response is dropping an item.
Another situation in which exponential response functions may be observed is
when there are waiting times involved, although it may not always be the case.
Let us assume that tasks A and B are causally related in the sense that a worker
performing task A has to wait for a worker performing task B to, say, unload nectar
or pulp, or any kind of material. If a task-/I worker has a fixed probability p per
unit waiting time of giving up task-A performance, the probability that this worker
will still be waiting after t time units is given by P(t) = 1 — (1 — p)* = 1 — et[n(-1~p\
In summary, response functions which exhibit an explicit threshold-like shape,
such as the ones given by Eq. (3.1), or exponential response functions, such as the

Chapter 3

117

FIGURE 3.6 Probability P(N) of dropping a corpse next to a N-clusteT as a function
of N. Fit P(N) = 1(1 - p)N with p = 0.2 is shown. After Chretien [72]. Reprinted by
permission.

ones given by Eq. (3.2), can be encountered in various situations and yield similar
results. Both types of response functions can be used in response threshold models.
Viewed from the perspective of response thresholds, castes may correspond to
possible physical differences, but also to innate differences in response thresholds
without any visible physical difference.
Robinson and Page [255, 271] have shown that honey bee workers belonging to
different patrilines2 may have different response thresholds. For example, assume for
simplicity that workers of patriline A engage in nest guarding as soon as there are
less than 20 guards, whereas workers of patriline B start performing this task when
there are less than 10 workers guarding the hive's entrance: workers of patriline B
have a higher response threshold to perform this task. Here, the stimulus intensity
is the number of honey bees that are already guarding the nest.
Another example of response threshold has been found in honey bees. If it
takes a honey bee forager too long to unload her nectar to a storer bee, she gives
up foraging with a probability that depends on her search time in the unloading
area. She will then start a "tremble dance" [286] to recruit storer bees (the tremble
dance also inhibits waggle dancing). If, on the other hand, her in-hive waiting or
search time is very small, she starts recruiting other foragers with a waggle dance.
If her in-hive waiting or search time lies within a given window, she is likely not
to dance at all and return to the food source. If one plots the probability of either
2

Two bees belong to the same patriline if they have the same mother and the same father.
They are also called supersisters.

118

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.7 Probabilities of performing a waggle dance and a tremble dance as a function
of in-hive search time for foragers visiting a rich nectar source. After Seeley [286]. Reprinted
by permission © Springer- Verlag.

waggle or tremble dancing as a function of search time, a clear threshold function
can be observed (Figure 3.7).
Other experimental results show the existence of response thresholds in two
species of ants, Pheidole pallidula and Ectatomma ruidum:
• A series of experiments by Detrain et al. [90, 91, 92] clearly indicate the existence
of differential response thresholds in the ant Pheidole pallidula in at least two
activities, foraging and nest defense. The intensity of behavioral stimuli (measured by trail concentration and the number of tactile invitations in the case of
foraging, supplemented by the number of intruders in the case of defense) required to induce the effective recruitment of majors is greater than for minors for
both tasks, indicating that majors have higher response thresholds. An interesting discussion of the adaptive significance of these findings is given by Detrain
and Pasteels [91, 92].
• Schatz [281] presents convincing evidence of response thresholds in the ant Ectatomma ruidum: when presented with an increasing number of prey, specialized
"stinger ants" (or killer ants) start to become involved in the retrieval process
(in addition to transporters, to which dead prey are transferred), the number
of such stinger ants being dependent on the number of prey in a characteristic
sigmoid-like manner (Figure 3.8). This suggests that within-caste specialization
among hunters is indeed based on response thresholds.

Chapter 3

119

FIGURE 3.8 Number of stingers involved in prey retrieval as a function of the number of
prey in the ant Ectatomma ruidum, for a nest composed of 130 workers. After Schatz [281].
Reprinted by permission.

3.3.3

MODEL WITH ONE TASK

Assume that only one task needs to be performed. This task is associated with a
stimulus or demand, the intensity s of which increases if it is not satisfied-—because
either the task is not performed by enough individuals or it is not performed with
enough efficiency. Let Xi be the state of an individual i: Xi = 0 corresponds to
inactivity and Xi = 1 corresponds to performing the task. Let Oi be the response
threshold of i. An inactive individual starts performing the task with a probability
P per unit time:

The probability that individual i will perform the task depends on s, the magnitude
of the task-associated stimulus (which also affects the probability of being exposed
to it) and on $,, individual i's response threshold [272]. Again, the choice of the
threshold function in Eq. (3.3) is dictated by the availability of some exact analytical
results. Any threshold function is expected to generate similar results.
An active individual gives up task performance and becomes inactive with
probability p per unit time:
Parameter p is assumed to be identical for all individuals, l/p is the average time
spent by an individual in task performance before giving up the task. It is assumed

120

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.9 Fraction of active majors (type-1 workers) found in Monte Carlo simulations
as a function of the proportion / of majors in the colony, for # 1 = 8 , #2 = 1, a = 3,
5 = 1, p = 0.2. Comparison with Wilson's [330] results (scaled so that curves of model
and experiments lie within the same range): number of acts of social behavior per major
within time of experiments in Pheidole guilelmimuelleri and Pheidole pubiventris. After
Bonabeau et al. [29]. Reprinted by permission © Elsevier Science.

that p is fixed and independent of stimulus. Individuals give up task performance
after l/p time units, but may become engaged again immediately if stimulus is still
large.
Variations in stimulus intensity result from task performance, which reduces
stimulus intensity, and from the natural increase of demand irrespective of whether
or not the task is performed. The resulting equation for the discrete-time dynamics
of stimulus intensity s is given by:

where Wact is the number of active individuals, N is the total number of potentially
active individuals in the colony, 5 is the increase in stimulus intensity per unit time,
and a is a scale factor measuring the efficiency of task performance. The amount
of work performed by active individuals is scaled by N to reflect the intuitive idea
that the demand is an increasing function of N, that we take linear here. This
corresponds to the idea that brood should be divided by two when colony size is
divided by two: in other words, colony requirements scale (more or less) linearly
with colony size.
In Monte Carlo simulations [29], this simple fixed-threshold model shows remarkable agreement with experimental results in the case where there are two

Chapters

121

castes characterized by two different values of the response threshold: when "minors," with low response thresholds, are removed from the simulated colony, "majors," with higher response thresholds, start to perform tasks usually performed by
minors. Figure 3.9 shows the fraction of majors engaged in task peformance as a
function of the fraction of majors in the colony. This curve is very similar to the one
observed by Wilson [330]. This simple model with one task can be easily extended
to the case where there are two or more tasks to perform. Such an extension is
examined in section 3.3.5.
3.3.4

FORMAL ANALYSIS OF THE MODEL: DETERMINISTIC EQUATIONS

In order to further analyze the behavior of the system described in section 3.3.3, we
may write down "mean-field" differential equations based on the transition probabilities given by Eqs. (3.3) and (3.4). Assuming the existence of two types of workers,
such as minors and majors, characterized by two thresholds Q\ and 62, let n\ and
n-2 be the respective numbers of workers of type 1 and type 2 in the colony, N the
total number of workers in the colony (HI + n2 = N), f = n\/N the fraction of
workers of type 1 in the colony, N\ and N^ the respective numbers of workers of
type 1 and type 2 engaged in task performance, and x\ and x% the corresponding
fractions Xi = /Vj/rtj). The variable Xi can be viewed as the fraction of type-i workers performing the task or, equivalently, as the fraction of time spent by a typical
type-i worker in task performance, or also as the probability of finding an arbitrary
type-z worker performing the task within a time unit. The average deterministic
differential equations describing the dynamics of x\ and xi are given by:

where 9i is the response threshold of type i workers, and s the integrated intensity
of task-associated stimuli. The first terms on the right-hand side of Eqs. (3.6) and
(3.7) describe how the (1 — £j) fraction of inactive type i workers responds to the
stimulus intensity or demand s, with a threshold function Tg^s):

The continuous-time dynamics of the stimulus intensity is given by:

that is, since (A^ + N2)/N = jxv + (1 - /)x 2 ,

where, as for Eq. (3.5), S is the increase in stimulus intensity per unit time, and a is
the scale factor that measures the efficiency of task performance. Let us introduce

122

Swarm Intelligence

for convenience z = Q\l®\, and let / be the fraction of majors in the colony. Assuming that type-1 workers are majors (9\ > 82), it can be shown analytically [34]
that the average fraction of time xf spent by majors in task performance (which
is also the average frequency of task performance per major, or the fraction of majors involved in task performance per unit time, or the probability per unit time of
finding a major performing the task), for the model described by Eqs. (3.6), (3.7)
and (3.10), is given by

where

This exact result is in very good agreement with Monte Carlo simulations. Figure 3.10 shows how xf varies as a function of /, for z — 64, p = 0.2, 5 = 1, and
Q = 3, and a comparison with Wilson's [330] results. Figure 3.11 illustrates the fact
that it is possible to find appropriate parameters with an exponential response function (Tg(s) = 1 — e~ s//e ) such that it reproduces the same results as the threshold
response function.
Only three parameters influence the shape of xf (/): 6/a, z, and p. Figures 3.12,
3.13, and 3.14 show how the x\ (/) relationship varies with these parameters. When
individuals are very efficient at performing the task (S/a small), the value of /
above which an important fraction of majors is performing the task is larger and
the crossover becomes smoother; conversely, a decrease in efficiency leads to an
earlier and more abrupt modification of the number of majors engaged in task
performance (Figure 3.12: 6 = 1, a varying). This result is relatively natural, as
more efficient task performance by individuals which have a low response threshold
prevents task-related stimuli from growing large, and therefore from eliciting task
performance by individuals that have larger response thresholds. The crossover
becomes more abrupt as z increases, and the point at which the crossover is observed
decreases; when z is close to 1, the proportion of majors engaged in task performance
starts from a larger value (Figure 3.13). When the probability of giving up task
performance becomes small, the involvement of majors in task performance becomes
less progressive, and starts at a larger value of / (Figure 3.14): this is due to the fact
that task performers, mostly minors for low values of /, spend more time on average
in task performance, so that fewer majors are required. But when majors have to
engage in task performance, they must do so more massively because missing minors
were performing a lot of work. Finally, it is important to note that in Figures 3.12,
3.13, and 3.14, there is always a fraction of active majors as / becomes close to 0
(this property may be difficult to see directly on Eq. (3.11)).

Chapter 3

123

FIGURES.10 Fraction of active majors given by Eq. (3.11) as a function of the proportion
/ of majors in the colony, for Oi = 8, 62 = 1, a = 3, 5 = 1, p = 0.2. Comparison with
Wilson's [330] results (scaled so that model's curve and experimental data lie within the
same range): number of acts of social behavior and self-grooming per major within time
of experiments in Pheidole guilelmimuelleri. After Bonabeau et al. [34]. Reprinted by
permission © Elsevier Science.

3.3.5

MODEL WITH SEVERAL TASKS

Let us now proceed to the case of m tasks. By analogy with the previous case,
let us define N^j, the number of workers of type i engaged in task j performance,
Xij, the corresponding fraction (xy = Nlj/ni), and %, the associated response
threshold. The average deterministic differential equations describing the dynamics
of the x^ 's are given by:

where Sj is the intensity of task-j-associated stimuli. Let us assume for simplicity
that m = 2 and i = 1,2. Results for other cases can readily be inferred from those
obtained with these parameters. The dynamics of the demand Sj associated with
task j is given by:
Here again, we assume that efficiency in task performance, mesured by a, is
identical for workers of both types. Furthermore, a is the same for all tasks. Let
us now distinguish two cases. In case (1), type-2 workers are more responsive to

124

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.11 Comparison between the fraction of active majors as a function of the
proportion of majors in the colony obtained with an exponential response function (9i =
0.1, 02 = 1, a = 3, 5 = 1, p = 0.2) and a threshold response function (#1 = 8, 6*2 = 1,
a = 3, 5 = 1, p = 0.2). After Bonabeau et al. [34]. Reprinted by permission © Elsevier
Science.

FIGURE3.12 Fraction of active majors given by Eq. (3.11) as a function of the proportion
/ of majors in the colony, for z = 64, 5 = 1, p = 0.2, and a. — 1.5,2, 3,5. After Bonabeau
et al. [34]. Reprinted by permission © Elsevier Science.

Chapter 3

125

FIGURE 3.13 Fraction of active majors given by Eq. (3.11) as a function of the proportion
/ of majors in the colony, for a = 3, 6 = I , p = 0.,. z = 4, 9,16,25,36,49, and 64. After
Bonabeau et al. [34]. Reprinted by permission © Elsevier Science.

FIGURE 3.14 Fraction of active majors given by Eq. (3.11) as a function of the proportion
/ of majors in the colony, for a = 3, 6 = 1, z = 64, and p = 0,0.05,0.1,0.2,0.5,0.8 and 1.
After Bonabeau et al. [34]. Reprinted by permission © Elsevier Science.

126

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.15 Fractions of type-1 and type-2 workers performing tasks 1 and 2 as a
function of the proportion / of majors in the colony, obtained by numerical integration
of Eqs. (3.13) and (3.14). On = 8, 6»i2 = 5, 02i = 1, 6»22 = 1, a = 3, S = 1, p = 0.2 After
Bonabeau et al. [34]. Reprinted by permission © Elsevier Science.

task-associated stimuli for both tasks (9u > 621 and #i2 > #22)- In case (2), type-1
workers are more responsive than type-2 workers to stimuli associated with task 1,
but type-2 workers are more responsive than type-1 workers to stimuli associated
with task 2; in other words, type-i workers are specialists of task i (On < 821 and
#12 > #22)Numerical integration is necessary to find the stationary values of Xij as a function of the fraction / of type-1 workers. Let us introduce Zj = Q\^jB\^. Figures 3.10
show Xij as a function of / in case (1) (z\ = 64 and Z2 = 25) and case in (2)
(z\ = 64 = 1/22) for P = 0.2, 6 = 1, and a = 3. In case (1), when type-1 workers
have lower response thresholds to both tasks, the obtained curves are qualitatively
similar to those observed in Figure 3.12-3.14. The curves are, however, quantitatively different because z\ and z% are different. Wilson [330] measured the number of
acts per major for two tasks, social behavior and self-grooming, in Pheidole megacephala. There is a reasonably good agreement between Wilson's observations and
the model's curves. In case (2), when a caste is specialized in one of the two tasks
and the other caste in the other task, behavioral flexibility is observed on both
sides: workers of type 1 can replace workers of type 2, and vice versa (Figure 3.16).

Chapter 3

127

FIGURE 3.16 Fractions of type-1 and type-2 workers performing tasks 1 and 2 as a
function of the proportion / of majors in the colony, obtained by numerical integration of
Eqs. (3.13) and (3.14). %• = 1/2, 0U = 8, 6>12 = 1, 02i = 1, 6>22 = 8, a = 3, 5 = 1, p = 0.2.
After Bonabeau et al. [34]. Reprinted by permission © Elsevier Science.

Although the results of the model have been compared only with Wilson's [330]
data on species with physical castes, the model can equally well describe the behavioral flexibility observed within physical, age, or behavioral castes.
3.3.6

MODELS OF "EMERGENT" TASK SUCCESSION

Before proceeding to the case of variable response thresholds, we give here two simple examples where the fixed-threshold model can be used to generate "emergent"
task succession. These examples are of particular interest in that they show that coordination (whereby individuals tend to perform the same task before switching in
relative synchrony to another task) does not have to be directly coded into individual behavior. Such a result may have direct application to the design of distributed
problem-solving systems. In addition, the models presented below lend themselves
to a robotic implementation. Puck clustering, detailed in chapter 4, is an important proof of concept but remains extremely primitive in terms of functionality. In
chapter 4 we describe how a distributed robotic system capable of clustering could
easily be modified to implement task succession.
It is possible, with fixed response thresholds, to observe a simulated colony
perform some tasks in succession in situations that are not uncommon. There are
two possible models. Model 1 assumes that individuals all have identical response

128

Swarm Intelligence

thresholds, but these thresholds are different for the various tasks to be performed,
and, moreover, success rate in task performance also varies with the task. This
model can describe the dynamics of brood sorting in Leptothorax ants [130] or seed
piling in harvester ants. Model 2 assumes that performing a given task increases the
demand for another task: for example, creating a refuse pile just at the entrance
of the nest generates a need for cleaning [72]. Both models will give the impression
that individuals have decided to perform the tasks in sequence.
Model 1 Let us assume that m different types of items need to be processed. Let
Li be the number of workers loaded with item type i, U the number of unloaded
workers, Sj the number of items that still need to be processed, T-J the number of
items that have been successfully processed, and TJ the time it takes to process an
item of type i (for example, to carry a larva or seed to the appropriate location),
and fi = e~ri/r (where r is a characteristic time) the probability of success of the
task (the longer it takes to carry a larva or seed to the appropriate location, the less
likely the individual is to succeed). The idea behind this model is that, for example,
heavier items or items that are harder to work with will be processed after lighter
or easier items have been processed. Heavier items are naturally associated with a
lower probability of success. The dynamics of U and Li are given by

where:

In Eq. (3.17), p± is the probability of finding an item of type i, that we approximate
simply by

Equation (3.16) expresses the fact that laden individuals deposit their loads
every n (either successfully or not) and that unloaded workers pick-up items with
a probability that combines the probability of encountering an item of type i and
that of responding to such an item (Eq. (3.17)). Equation (3.16) also expresses how
laden workers become unladen, and vice versa, but with signs opposite to those
of Eq. (3.15), as it describes the dynamics of the number of laden workers. The
threshold Bi in Eq. (3.17) is such that if Sj <S #», few workers will be stimulated to
carry an item of type i, and, if s$ 3> #i; workers will, on the contrary, be stimulated
to process items of type i. The dynamics of r, and s, are given by

Chapter 3

129

Equation (3.19) expresses that the number of items that can be processed decreases
when an item is picked up, but increases when a laden worker deposits an item at
a wrong location (unsuccessful deposition), which happens with probability 1 — /j.
Eqs. (3.15) to (3.20) have been integrated numerically for three types of items.
Figure 3.17(a) shows the respective numbers of workers performing tasks 1, 2, and
3 as a function of time. Figure 3.17(b) shows the fraction of processed items of
types 1,2, and 3 as a function of time. Clearly, workers tend to process items of
type 1, then items of type 2, and eventually items of type 3.
Model 2 Let us now assume that there are m potential tasks to be performed by
the workers. Let Xi define the fraction of workers engaged in performing task i, s^
the demand (stimulus intensity) associated with task i, $, the threshold associated
with task i (similar to model 1), pi the probability of encountering stimuli associated
with task i, p the probability of stopping performing task i (the average time spent
performing a task before task switching or before becoming inactive is given by
1/p), and a the efficiency of task performance, which we also take to be the rate of
stimulus production per unit working time for the next task.
An example in which one task provides the stimulus for the next task is the
polyethism among hunters in the ant Ectatomma ruidum [281] that was introduced
in Section 3.3.2. When live drosophila are presented to the colony, stinger behavior is
activated; stingers start killing the prey, which leads to the presence of an increasing
number of corpses to be transported to the nest; the presence of these corpses
stimulate transporter behavior. Figure 3.18(a) shows how the fractions of ants that
are, respectively, stingers and transporters, and how the stimuli associated with,
respectively, killing prey and transporting corpses, vary over time. The number of
live prey in the experimental arena decreases rapidly, whereas the number of corpses
that are to be transported as a result of the activity of stingers increases and then
decreases.
The dynamics of &, and s, are described by

Equation (3.21) is similar to Eq. (3.13), and Eq. (3.22) expresses the fact that
performing task i — 1 increases s^, which in turn decreases when task i is being
performed. Numerical integration of Eqs. (3.21) and (3.22) has been performed for
three tasks (i = 1,2,3). Figure 3.18(b) shows the respective numbers of workers
performing tasks 1, 2, and 3 as a function of time. Figure 3.18(c) shows the dynamics
of stimulus intensities associated with tasks 1, 2, and 3, respectively. It can be seen
that workers first tend to perform task 1, then task 2 and finally task 3. If performing

130

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.17 (a) Respective numbers of workers performing tasks 1, 2, and 3 as a
function of time. Dynamics given by Eqs. (3.15) to (3.20), with three types of items.
0! = 10,6>2 = 40,6>3 = 80, r = 5,n = 2,r 2 = 5,r 3 = 8,si(J = 0) = 120,s2(i = 0) =
70, sz(t = 0) = 50. After Bonabeau et al. [34]. (b) Respective fractions of processed items
of types 1, 2, and 3 as a function of time for the same simulation as in Figure 3.17(a),
Time unit: r/5. After Bonabeau et al. [34]. Reprinted by permission © Elsevier Science.

Chapter 3

131

FIGURE 3.18 (a) Fraction of the workers that are stingers, fraction of the workers that are
transporters, number of live prey in the arena, and number of corpses to be transported as
a function of time. The total number of workers is 130, and the initial number of live prey
is 80. The experiment's duration is 2 hours. After Schatz [281]. (b) Respective numbers of
workers performing tasks 1, 2, and 3 as a function of time. Dynamics given by Eqs. (3.21)
and (3.22) with three tasks. si(t = 0) = 100,s 2 (t = 0) = sa(t = 0) = 0, si -» s2 -> S3,a =
3,0i = 02 = 03 = 20,pi = P2 = PS = 0.3,p = 0.2. Time unit: 0.2p. After Bonabeau et
al. [34]. continued.

132

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.18 continued (c) Respective stimulus intensities associated with tasks 1, 2,
and 3 as a function of time for the same simulation as in Figure 3.18(a). After Bonabeau
et al. [34]. Reprinted by permission © Elsevier Science.

task 3 increased the demand associated with task 1, a cyclical activity would be
observed.

3.4 SPECIALIZATION
The simple response threshold model introduced in the previous section, which
assumes that each worker responds to a given stimulus when stimulus intensity
exceeds the worker's threshold, can explain how flexibility at the colony level results
from the workers' behavioral flexibility [29]. Unfortunately, this model is of limited
applicability because it assumes that workers' thresholds are fixed over the studied
time scale:
1. It cannot account for the genesis of task allocation, including temporal polyethism,
for it assumes that individuals are differentiated and roles preassigned.
2. It cannot account for strong task specialization within (physical or temporal)
castes.
3. It is valid only over sufficiently short time scales, where thresholds can be considered constant.
4. It is not consistent with recent experiments on honey bees [56, 273], showing
that aging and/or learning play a role in task allocation.
In order to overcome these limitations, Theraulaz et al. [308, 312] have extended the fixed-threshold model by allowing thresholds to vary in time, following
a simple reinforcement process: a threshold decreases when the corresponding task
is performed and increases when the corresponding task is not performed. The original model of Theraulaz et al. [308] is slightly more complicated than a model of
division of labor, since it is coupled to a model of self-organizing hierarchies. A
simplified version of this model is described in this section. This idea had been
previously introduced by Oster [252], Deneubourg et al. [84], and Plowright and
Plowright [261]. The main competing hypothesis for overcoming limitations 1 to
4 (above) is absolute aging, or, within the present context, age-based changes in
response thresholds.
Several experiments suggest the existence of a reinforcement process or support the reinforcement hypothesis. Deneubourg et al. [84] proposed that such a
hypothesis could be consistent with experimental observations of foraging in ants.
Sendova-Franks and Franks [288] suggest that reinforcement learning plays a role
in the ability of Leptothorax ant colonies to quickly re-assemble after dissociation.

Chapter 3

133

Withers et al. [331] observed that important changes in some regions of the brain are
associated with aging in honey bees: the brain of a forager (> 20 days old) is significantly different from that of a 1-day-old bee. While their observations could result
from absolute aging, further experiments, where worker bees were forced to start foraging early, have shown that precocious foragers were similar in brain organization
to normal older foragers. This suggests that behavior influences brain organization,
which in turn certainly influences the conditions under which tasks are performed.
Other experiments, which have been interpreted as suggesting aging as the main
factor, can be reinterpreted along the same lines. For example, the probability of
behavioral reversion from foraging to nursing in honey bees [285] is a decreasing
function of the time spent foraging, which suggests that some kind of learning may
occur. Another example is the recent study by Calderone and Page [56], who have
shown that deprived bees (raised in isolation in wire cages with a queen) exhibit
precocious foraging, suggesting that the lack of certain stimuli may influence the
rate of behavioral ontogeny (a possibility that Calderone and Page [56] did not rule
out; see also Huang and Robinson [181]). More generally, relative age (that is, age
relative to the rest of the colony and to the individual's own experience) is often
a more relevant parameter than absolute age [54, 186, 217, 288, 320], which means
that stimuli provided by the environment and other colony members, as well as individual history, are likely to play an important role in shaping behavioral ontogeny.
These studies suggest that individual experience shapes behavioral ontogeny, and
that response thresholds may be dynamic, rather than static.
Using the same notations as in sections 3.3.4 and 3.3.5, in the fixed-threshold
model [29] individual i engages in task-j performance with probability

In addition to the fixed-threshold model, Oij is now updated in a self-reinforcing
way [308, 312]. The more individual i performs task j, the lower 0^-, and vice versa.
Let £ and <p be the coefficients that describe learning and forgetting, respectively. In
this time-incremental model, individual i becomes more (respectively less) sensitive
by an amount £At (respectively </?At) to task-j-associated stimuli when performing
(respectively not performing) task j during a time period of duration At:

if i performs task j within At, and

if i does not perform the task within At. Let Xij be the fraction of time spent by
individual i in task j performance: within At, individual i performs task j during
Xij At, and other tasks during (1 — Xjj)At. The resulting change in 0^ within At is
therefore given by

134

Swarm Intelligence

which combines Eqs. (3.24) and (3.25). £ and if are assumed to be identical for all
tasks, and the dynamics of ^ is restricted to an interval [# m i n ,$max]- The decision
to perform task j is still given by Tgi:j(s) in Eq. (3.23), but Oij now varies in time
according to Eq. (3.26). The continuous-time formulation of Eq. (3.26) is given by:

where dt denotes the time derivative and O(-) is a step function (Q(y) — 0 if
y < 0, Q(y} = I if y > 0). €>(•) is used to maintain dij within bounds. The average
temporal dynamics of Xij is given by the following equation:

The first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (3.28) describes how the
1 — Y^T=i xik fraction of time potentially available for task performance is actually allocated to task-j performance. The second term on the right-hand side of
Eq. (3.28) expresses the assumption that an active individual gives up task performance and becomes inactive with probability p per time unit. The average time
spent by an individual in task j performance before giving up that task is 1 /p. It
is assumed that p is fixed, identical for all tasks and individuals, and independent
of stimulus. Individuals give up task performance after 1/p, but may engage again
immediatly if stimulus intensity is still large. t(j(i, j, t) is a centered gaussian stochastic process of variance a2, uncorrelated in time and uncorrelated among individuals
and among tasks:
and

where <5o is the Dirac distribution. -0(i,j,i) is a stochastic term that simulates
the fact that individuals encounter slightly different local conditions. Assuming for
simplicity that the demand for each task increases at a fixed rate per unit time, the
dynamics of Sj, the intensity of task-j-associated stimuli, is described by

where 5 is the increase in stimulus intensity per unit time, and aj is a scale factor
measuring the efficiency of task j performance. It is assumed that both factors are
identical for all tasks (Vj, aj = a), and that a is fixed over time and identical for all
individuals. In reality, however, a can vary as a result of specialization [116, 190] or
genotypic differences. The amount of work performed by active individuals is again
scaled by the number of individuals N.

Chapter 3

135

FIGURE 3.19 (a) Dynamics of response thresholds Oij for N = 5 individuals and ra = 2
tasks, a —3, 6=lp = 0.2, £ = 10, ip - 1, cr - 0.1. Initial conditions: Vi € { ! , . . . , N],
Vj 6 {!,...,m}, 9ij(t = 0) = 500, and Xij(t = 0) = 0.1. 6^ is the response threshold of
individual i to task j : for example, #21 is the response threshold of individual 2 to task
1. A low value of Oij indicates that individual i is highly sensitive to task-j-associated
stimuli and is therefore a specialist of task j. Individuals 3, 4, and 5 are task-1 specialists,
and individuals 1 and 2 are task-2 specialists. After Theraulaz et al., [312]. Time unit
0.2/p. (b) Dynamics of the fractions of time spent in task performance Xij for the same
parameter values as in Figure 3.19(a). Xij is the fraction of time spent by individual i
in task j performance: for example, £42 is the fraction of time spent by individual 4
performing task 2. When a?y is close to 1, individual i spends most of its time performing
task j. Individuals 3, 4, and 5, which all perform mostly task 1, are less active xn « 0.55,
Xi2 « 0.05) than individuals 1 and 2, which perform mostly task 2 (xn ss 0.05, 2,2 ~ 0.8).
After Theraulaz et al. [312]. (c) The same as in Figure 3.19(a), except that the initial
distribution of thresholds is uniform over [0mjn = l,#max = 1000]. Individuals 1, 3 and 5
are task-1 specialists, and individuals 1, 2, and 4 are task-2 specialists (individual 1 is a
specialist of both tasks). After Theraulaz et al. [312]. Reprinted by permission © Elsevier
Science.

136

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.20 (a) Convergence time Tc (time it takes for the following condition to be
satisfied: Vi E {!,..., N},Vj 6 {1,... ,m},% > 900 or On < 100), and NI and 7V2
(the number of specialists of tasks 1 and 2, respectively) as a function of if (forgetting
rate) for N = 100 and m = 2, assuming that <p + £ = 11 (where £ is the learning rate),
Q = 3,5 = l,p = 0.2, a = 0.1. Vi € {1,... ,N}, Vj € {1,... ,m},0ij(t = 0) = 500, and
Xii(t = 0) = 0.1. After Theraulaz et al. [312]. (b) Convergence time Tc,Ni and N2 as a
function of p (probability per unit time of becoming inactive) for N = 100, m = 2, a =
3,5 = 1,£ = 10,ip = l,a = 0.1. Vi e { 1 , . . . , N } , V j € {1,... ,m},9ij(t = 0) = 500, and
a5ij(t = 0) = 0.1. After Theraulaz et al. [312]. (c) Convergence time Tc,Ni, and N2 as
a function of a (efficiency of task performance) for N = 100, m = 2,p = 0.2,6 = 1,£ =
10,<p = l,cr = 0.1. Vi 6 {!,..., N},Vji e {!,..., m},0ij(t = 0) = 500, and x f j ( t - 0) =
0.1.

Chapter 3

137

The dynamics of the model described by Eqs. (3.27) to (3.31) can lead to
specialization, or differentiation out of an initially homogeneous population. Individual i is considered a specialist of task j if (9^ is small. Figure 3.19(a) shows an
example of specialization: thresholds are represented as a function of time for five
individuals and two tasks (N - 5,m = 2) (initially. Vz € {!,..., 5}, Vj e {1,2},
9ij = 500, Xij = 0.1, a = 3, 6 = 1, p = 0.2, £ = 10, (f> = 1, a = 0.1). Some of these
individuals become highly responsive to stimuli associated with task 1 but not to
those associated with task 2, and others exhibit the opposite behavior. Individuals 1
and 2 are task-2 specialists, while individuals 3, 4, and 5 are task-1 specialists. Figure 3.19(b) shows the frequencies xn and X& of task performance for all individuals
as a function of time. Individuals with small 6^ (respectively large) tend to have
large (respectively small) x^. Individuals adjust their levels of activity to maintain
stimulus intensity below threshold, so that the three individuals 3, 4, and 5, which
perform mostly task 1, are less active Xn w 0.55, x^ ~ 0.05) than individuals 1 and
2, which perform mostly task 2 (xn ~ 0.05,Zj2 ~ 0.8). This specialization seems to
well describe what is observed in the primitively eusocial wasp Polistes dominulus,
where a clear division of labor, including reproductive division of labor, emerges
after a few days [309]) despite the lack of initial individual differentiation.
When, instead of initially being identical, thresholds are initially randomly
distributed in [# m in,#max], individuals with an initially small Q^ are more likely
to become task-j specialists (Figure 3.19(c)). In a genetically diverse colony, individuals with close genotypic characteristics (for example, belonging to the same
patriline) may have similar response thresholds and are, therefore, predisposed to
perform the same tasks [42, 55, 135, 255, 271] (genes might also influence a, p, £,
Vi 0min> and $max)- On Figure 3.19(c), individuals 1, 3, and 5 are task-1 specialists,
and individuals 1, 2, and 4 are task-2 specialists; individual 1 is a specialist of both
tasks.
Specialization can be observed over a certain portion of parameter space. Let
Tc be the convergence time, that is, the time it takes until all individuals become
either specialists or nonspecialists of both tasks (the criterion is: Vi € {1,..., -/V},
Vj e {1,... ,m}, % > 900 or 0O- < 100), and let NI and N2 be the number of
specialists after convergence of tasks 1 and 2, respectively. Figure 3.20(a) shows Tc,
N I , and N2 as a function of <p (forgetting rate) for N — 100 and m = 2, assuming
that (p + £ = 11 (where £ is the learning rate). When ip < 0.4, all individuals are
specialists because the forgetting rate is small. Tc becomes large as (p approaches
0.4: Sj always being very low thanks to the large number of specialists; individuals
are not easily stimulated to engage in task performance, so that their thresholds
fluctuate a lot. For 0.4 < (p < 2, the number of specialists for each task decreases,
and so does Tc: differentiation is observed in this region. For tp > 2, forgetting is
quick and no specialization is observed. A different pattern is observed when Tc,
NI , and 7V2 are plotted as a function of p (probability per unit time of becoming
inactive) (Figure 3.20(b)). All individuals are specialists for p < 0.04 because they
spend a lot of time in task performance each time they engage. For the same reason
as above, Tc becomes large as p approaches 0.04. The number of specialists for each

138

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.21 (a) Dynamics of response thresholds fly for N = 5 individuals and m — 2
tasks. Before t = 2500: ai = a = 2 = 5,5 = l,p = 0.2,£ = 10,95 = l,a = 0.1. Initial
conditions: Vi 6 {1,... ,N},Vj 6 {1,...,m},zy(t = 0) = 0.1, and initial distribution of
thresholds is uniform over [0mm = l,0max = 1,000]. Individual 5 is a task-1 specialist,
and individuals 2 and 4 are task-2 specialists. After t = 2,500: a\ = 2. All individuals
become task-1 specialists. Individuals 2 and 4 remain task-2 specialists. Time unit: 0.2/p.
continued.

Chapter 3

139

FIGURE 3.21 continued, (b) Dynamics of the fractions of time spent in task performance
Xij for the same parameter values as in Figure 3.21(a). The same remarks apply as to Figure 3.21(a). (c) Dynamics of the demands si and s-z- s\ increases at t = 2, 500 as a response
to the perturbation and decreases again after t = 3, 200 because of the engagement in task
1 performance of four new workers.

task drops dramatically just after p = 0.04. For 0.04 < p < 0.42, Tc decreases and
the number of specialists increases with p, until all individuals become specialists,
for p > 0.42, because they spend so little time in task performance that it requires
a lot of specialists to maintain stimulus intensity at a low level. When (efficiency of
task performance) is varied (Figure 3.20(c)), NI and N% decrease with increasing a
because a smaller number of specialists is required as the efficiency or success rate
of task performance increases. A transition is observed around a — 1.8, where Tc
becomes large before stabilizing.
One important advantage of this strategy over the fixed-threshold strategy is
that in the case where individuals with low thresholds are removed, the demand is
quickly taken back to a much lower level because individuals with previously high
thresholds lower their thresholds and become more responsive to task-associated
stimuli. Flexibility and robustness can also be observed when task performance
becomes less efficient (lower value of a). A lower value of a may be due to competition with neighboring colonies, changing environmental conditions (temperature, humidity, rain, wind, etc.), exhaustion of food sources, or many other events.
Figure 3.21(a) shows how thresholds change when the value of task 1 efficiency
suddenly decreases from 5 to 2 at t = 2, 500. Before t — 2,500, there is only one
specialist of task 1 (individual 5), and two specialists of task 2 (individuals 2 and 4).
After t — 2,500, all other individuals become task-1 specialists by lowering their
thresholds to the minimum value. Individuals 2 and 4 remain task-2 specialists.
Therefore, the system has generated task-1 specialists in response to the perturbation. The same behavior can be seen in Figure 3.21(b), where frequencies of task
performance are plotted as a function of time. The system's ability to respond to
the perturbation also reflects on the dynamics of the demand, as can be seen in
Figure 3.21(c): demand s\ (which is higher than 82 before the perturbation because
there is only one individual performing task 1) exhibits a sudden increase as soon
as the perturbation is applied. This increase is rapidly corrected for, and starts to
decrease around t = 3,200, until it reaches s^'s low level around t = 5,000. By contrast, a strategy based on fixed-response thresholds would be unable to influence
the demand in response to the perturbation.

140

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.22 Schematic representation of the problem's formulation: individual i, located in zone z(i), responds to a stimulus Sj from zone j at a distance dz^^j from zone
z(i), with probability Py = S?/(5| + aO?ti + ^ (i) ,j)-

3.5

DIFFERENTIATION IN A MULTIAGENT SYSTEM AND
ADAPTIVE TASK ALLOCATION

3.5.1

DIFFERENTIATION IN A MULTIAGENT SYSTEM OR A GROUP OF
ROBOTS

Simple identical robots or agents are easy to design and produce: they do not
require a "predifferentiation," neither at the hardware level nor at the software
level. If several tasks need to be performed simultaneously by the group of robots
or agents, the undifferentiated entities need to be differentiated online. The response
threshold model combined with the reinforcement procedure described in section 3.4
can be used to differentiate initially identical agents in a multiagent or multirobot
system. It provides a widely applicable scheme for organizing task allocation in a
homogeneous group of agents or robots. For example, Murciano et al.[246] have used
a simple reinforcement learning procedure to achieve specialization in an artificial
multiagent system composed of homogeneous agents, that is, agents with identical
capabilities, which do not communicate directly. Agents specialize and eventually
cooperate to collectively perform a complex gathering task. Each agent has an
"affinity" variable for each type of item to be processed. The affinity of an agent for
an object type is equivalent to the inverse of a response threshold. The distribution
of affinities in the group converges to an optimum as affinities are reinforced as a
function of the successes and failures of each agent.

Chapters

141

But even the fixed-threshold model can be used to organize a group of robots.
Krieger [203] designed a group of Khepera robots (miniature mobile robots aimed at
"desktop" experiments [241] to collectively perform a puck-foraging task. In that
remarkable work, pucks spread in the environment are taken back to the "nest"
where they are dropped in a basket. The available "energy" of the group increases
when pucks are dropped into the basket, and decreases regularly with time. More
energy is consumed during foraging trips than when robots are immobile at the
nest. Each robot has a foraging threshold: when the energy of the colony goes
below the foraging threshold of a robot, the robot leaves the nest to look for pucks
in the environment (in addition, a robot can detect a patch of pucks, and goes back
directly to a patch that was detected in its previous foraging trip). Different robots
have different thresholds. But even a robot that is not very responsive to the energy
level can be recruited by another, more responsive, robot.
3.5.2

ADAPTIVE TASK ALLOCATION

A simple toy application illustrates how the threshold-based model of specialization
presented in section 3.4 can be used to allocate tasks in a multiagent system in a
flexible and robust way [32]. Imagine a group of mailmen (hereafter called agents),
belonging to some express mail company, that have to pick up letters in a large city.
Customers should not have to wait more than a given amount of time: the aim of
the mail company is, therefore, to allocate the agents to the various demands that
appear in the course of the day, keeping the global demand as low as possible. The
probability that individual i, located in zone z ( i ) , responds to a demand Sj in zone
j is given by
5?
Pl] =

(3 32)
^ + </+/^ WJ '
'
where 0j,j(e [0 m in,#max]) is the response threshold of agent i to the demand from
zone j, dz(i)j is the distance between z ( i ) and j (this distance can either be euclidian
or include factors such as one-way thoroughfares, lights, usual traffic jams, etc.),
and a and /3 are two 'positive coefficients that modulate the respective influences of
0 and d. Each time an agent i allocates itself to zone j to retrieve mail, its response
thresholds are updated in the following way:

where {n(j)} is the set of zones surrounding j, fo, and £1 are two learning coefficients
corresponding to zone j and its neighboring zones respectively (£Q > £1), and ip is
the forgetting coefficient applied to response thresholds associated with other zones.
This procedure allows an increase in spatial fidelity not only purely locally but also
with respect to neighboring zones.

142

Swarm Intelligence

Algorithm 3.1 High-level description of zone allocation algorithm
/* Initialization */
For j = 1 to L x L do
Sj = 0 /* initial demand in zone j is equal to 0 */
End For
For i — 1 to m do
For j = 1 to L x L do
Oij = 500 /* initialization of thresholds at neutral values */
End For
Place agent i in randomly selected zone z(i)
End For
/* Main loop */
For t = 1 to t max do
/* increase demand in randomly selected zone and assign agent if possible */
For k = 1 to RS do
Draw random integer number n between 1 and L x L /* select zone */
If (zone n not covered) then
Sri «— Sn + S I* increase demand by S in selected zone */
Reponse = 0 /* no agent has responded to demand from zone n */
Sweep = 1 /* first sweeping of all agents */
Repeat
For i = 1 to m do
If (agent i available) /* agent i is not traveling */ then
Draw real number r between 0 and 1
Compute Pin /* Eq. (3.32) */
If (r < Pin) then
Zone z(i) is no longer covered
Zone n is covered
Sn*-0

Agent i unavailable for d z (jj n time units
z(i) <— n
End If
End If
End For
Sweep <— Sweep +1
Until ((Response=l) or (Sweep = SW)
End If
End For
/* threshold updates */
For i = 1 to m do
For j = 1 to L X L do
If (j = z(i)) then
&ij <— Oij — Co /* agent i "learns" zone j */
Else If (j is in the neighborhood of z(i)) then
Oij <— Oij — fi /* agent i "learns" zone j *j
Else
Oij *— Oij + (p I* agent i "forgets" zone j */
End If
End For
End For
End For
/* Values of parameters used in simulations */
a - 0.5, (3 = 500, 0min = 0, 0max = 1000, &> = 150, £1 = 70, S = 50, ip = 10, m = 5, RS = 5,
SW = 5, L = 5

Chapter 3

143

Simulations have been performed with a grid of LxL = 5x5 zones (we consider
four neighbors for the update of Eq. (3.35), with periodic boundary conditions, see
Figure 3.22), and m — 5 agents; at every iteration, the demand increases in RS — 5
randomly selected zones by an amount S = 50. Other parameter values are: a = 0.5,
J3 = 500, 0min = 0, Qmax = 1,000, £0 = 150, £1 = 70, <p = 10. Agents are swept
in a random order and decide to respond to the demand from a particular zone
according to Eq. (3.32). If no agent responds after SW — 5 sweepings, the next
iteration starts. If an agent responds, this agent will be unavailable for an amount
of time that we take to be equal to the distance separating its current location
from the zone where the demand originates. Once the agent decides to allocate
itself to that zone, the associated demand in that zone is maintained at 0 (since
any demand emerging between the time of the agent's response and its arrival in
the zone will be satisfied by the same agent). Algorithm 3.1 shows a high-level
algorithmic description of the Monte Carlo simulations. Figure 3.23(a) shows how
the demand increases but is still kept under control when one individual fails to
perform its task. Figure 3.23(b) shows how the threshold of an individual with
respect to a single zone can vary as a function of time. A special behavior can be
observed after the removal of another individual. The removed individual was a
specialist of a given zone: another individual lowers its threshold with respect to
that zone and becomes in turn a new specialist of that zone. This is observed in
Figure 3.23(b). However, because the workload may be too high to allow agents
to settle into a given specialization, response thresholds may oscillate in time. All
these features point to the flexibility and robustness of this algorithm.
Although we have presented the performance of the algorithm based on one
specific (toy) example, it can certainly be modified to apply to virtually any kind
of task allocation: the demand Sj can be the abstract demand associated with some
task j, dij is a response threshold of agent i with respect to the task-associated
stimulus S j . The distance dz(i)j is an abstract distance between i and task j which
can, for example, represent the ability or lack of ability of i to deal with task j: if
i is not the most efficient agent to perform task j, it will not respond preferentially
to Sj, but if no other agent is in a position to respond, it will eventually perform
the task. It is certainly possible to design a scheme in which d can vary depending
on the efficiency of i in performing task j. Moreover, tasks may not have the same
priority, which can be reflected in the magnitude of their associated stimuli and in
the rate of increase of the stimulus intensities.
The task allocation scheme advocated in this section is easy to implement, provides a flexible method for allocating tasks, and allows adjustment to unpredictable
changes in demand, disturbances to individual agents, or perturbations due to other
factors. It constitutes a new programming methodology to control task or resource
allocation in complex systems. More work is needed to explore its behavior and
performance.

144

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 3.23 (a) Demand as a function of time. One individual is removed at time
t = 2,000. After Bonabeau et al. [32]. (b) Threshold dynamics of a particular individual
with respect to the zone from which a specialist is removed at t = 2, 000. After Bonabeau
et al. [32]. Reprinted by permission © World Scientific.

Chapter 3
3.5.3

145

CONNECTION WITH "BIDDING" ALGORITHMS

Algorithms inspired by the division of labor in social insects share fundamental
features with multiagent "market-based" algorithms where the allocation of tasks
or resources is regulated by a bidding system [73, 74, 184, 212, 321]. The agent
that makes the highest bid gets the resource or gets to perform the task. A marketclearing mechanism ensures that all tasks or resources have been allocated. For
instance, Waldspurger et al. [321] have developed Spawn, a computational system
where each task, starting with a certain amount of "money" that corresponds to
its relative priority, bids for the use of machines on a network. Examples of tasks
include searching through a database for an item, printing a paper, etc. Through
bidding for the use of machines, each task can allocate its budget to those resources
that are most important for it [184, 321]. When prices are low enough, some tasks
may use several machines in parallel; the number of machines used by, and the computation time devoted to, each task are adjusted to the demand from other tasks.
In another example [73], the problem of thermal resource distribution in a building
is solved using market-based control: computational agents that represent individual temperature controllers bid to buy or sell cool or warm air via a double-blind
computerized auction moderated by a central computer auctioneer. Clearwater et
al. [73] have shown that this system results in an equitable temperature distribution throughout the building at a low cost. Market-based control is a paradigm for
controlling complex systems. A social insect colony is a complex system in which,
as we have argued in this chapter, task allocation is controlled by response thresholds. Tasks that need to be performed correspond to a job market and insects are
individuals (more or less) actively seeking a job (Tofts and Franks [314] speak of
"foraging-for-work"). Insects with a low response threshold get the job.
A high bid may, therefore, be similar to a low threshold: if the agent has a low
response threshold with respect to the task or the resource, it makes a high bid.
Morley [242] and Morley and Ekberg [243] describe a situation in which the bidding
system is equivalent to an adaptive task allocation system inspired by social insects.
The problem to be solved is to assign trucks to paint booths in a truck facility:
trucks get out of the assembly line at a quick pace (one per minute) to be painted.
The color that a truck should have is predetermined directly by a customer order.
The paint fit-and-finish operations are a traditional bottleneck that can significantly
reduce production throughput. It takes three minutes to paint a truck, but it takes
more time to change the color of a paint booth: if, for example, a given paint
booth is applying black paint and the next truck to be processed by that paint
booth requires white paint, the booth will be down for several minutes. The cost
of paint changeover is also high. Therefore, the number of such changeovers should
be minimized online. On the other hand, if the paint booth which is applying black
is the only one that is available or that has a small waiting queue, and if painting
the white truck is urgent, the white truck should be allocated to that paint booth.
In other words, a black paint booth does not accept white trucks unless no other
better-positioned paint booth is available; in a polymorphic ant colony, majors do

146

Swarm Intelligence

not perform brood care unless minors are not doing it. Morley [242, 243] developed
a system in which each paint booth is an agent that follows four simple rules:
1. Try to take another truck the same color as the current color.
2. Take particularly important jobs.
3. Take any job to stay busy.
4. Do not take another job if paint booth is down or queue is large.
These rules were implemented through a bidding system and a market-clearing
mechanism (every truck must be painted). Booths bid based on their ability to
do the job efficiently—low cost, minimal delay. A paint booth that is down or the
queue of which is full does not participate in the bidding. The optimal parameters
of the bidding system were determined with evolutionary techniques. The bidding
system, implemented in a real truck factory,3 resulted in a 10% reduction in paint
usage, half as many paint changeovers, a higher global throughput (booths are
busier), and a significantly shorter software code than with the previous method,
which was based on a global preoptimization of the paint schedule. Most of these
nice results come from the fact that the system is more robust and more flexible:
a booth that breaks down has a limited impact on the throughput because the
schedule is generated online.
In this example, the parallel with threshold-based task allocation is striking.
Imagine that each paint booth has a response threshold with respect to an arriving
truck—the stimulus: the response threshold is low if the truck is the same color
as the paint booth's current color, if the job is urgent, or if the queue is empty or
small; the response threshold is high if the truck's color is different from the paint
booth's current color, if the queue is large, or if the paint booth is down (in which
case the threshold is infinite). It is therefore easy to transform this market-based
task-allocation algorithm into a threshold-based algorithm.

3.6

POINTS TO REMEMBER

• Division of labor in social insect colonies is not rigid. Workers switch tasks. The
behavioral elasticity of individual workers leads to colony-level resilience. For
example, major workers in polymorphic species of the ant genus Pheidole start
performing tasks that are normally performed by minor workers when minor
workers are removed from the colony.
• A simple model based on response thresholds allows a formal connection between
the level of individual workers and the colony level. Workers with low response
thresholds respond to lower levels of stimuli than workers with high response
3
The system has recently been dismantled to replace hydraulic paint robots with electric
ones that require new software. Interestingly, despite the efficiency of the system, there always
was some resistance against using it because of the autonomy that was given to the paint booths.

Chapter 3

147

thresholds. Task performance reduces the intensity of stimuli. If workers with low
thresholds perform their normal tasks, the task-associated stimuli never reach the
thresholds of the high-threshold workers. But if workers with low thresholds are
removed, or if for any reason the intensity of task-associated stimuli increases,
high-threshold workers start task performance. There is a good agreement between the model and experimental observations of colony-level resiliency in ants
of the genus Pheidole.
An extension of the model, where a threshold is lowered when the associated task
is performed and increased when the associated task is not performed, generates
differential task allocation and specialization in a population of initially identical
workers.
Threshold models can serve as a basis to generate differential task allocation
and specialization in a multiagent system. They are very similar to market-based
algorithms used to allocate resources and tasks, in which agents bid for a resource
or a task. The agent that makes the highest bid gets the resource or performs the
task. A toy application example, distributed mail retrieval, shows how a taskallocation system based on a response-threshold model with learning responds to
perturbations.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 4

Cemetery Organization, Brood Sorting, Data
Analysis, and Graph Partitioning

4.1

OVERVIEW

In the previous two chapters, foraging and division of labor were shown to be
useful metaphors to design optimization and resource allocation algrithms. In this
chapter, we will see that the clustering and sorting behavior of ants has stimulated
researchers to design new algorithms for data analysis and graph partitioning.
Several species of ants cluster corpses to form a "cemetery," or sort their larvae
into several piles. This behavior is still not fully understood, but a simple model, in
which agents move randomly in space and pick up and deposit items on the basis of
local information, may account for some of the characteristic features of clustering
and sorting in ants.
The model can also be applied to data analysis and graph partitioning: objects
with different attributes or the nodes of a graph can be considered items to be
sorted. Objects placed next to each other by the sorting algorithm have similar
attributes, and nodes placed next each other by the sorting algorithm are tightly
connected in the graph. The sorting algorithm takes place in a two-dimensional
space, thereby offering a low-dimensional representation of the objects or of the
graph.
Distributed clustering, and more recently sorting, by a swarm of robots have
served as benchmarks for swarm-based robotics. In all cases, the robots exhibit

149

150

Swarm Intelligence

extremely simple behavior, act on the basis of purely local information, and communicate indirectly except for collision avoidance.

4.2

CEMETERY ORGANIZATION AND LARVAL SORTING

In several species of ants, workers have been reported to form piles of corpses—
literally cemeteries—to clean up their nests. Chretien [72] has performed experiments with the ant Lasius niger to study the organization of cemeteries. Other
experiments on the ant Pheidole pallidula are also reported in Deneubourg et al.
[88], and many species actually organize a cemetery. Figure 4.1 shows the dynamics of cemetery organization in another ant, Messor sancta. If corpses, or, more
precisely, sufficiently large parts of corposes are randomly distributed in space at
the beginning of the experiment, the workers form cemetery clusters within a few
hours. If the experimental arena is not sufficiently large, or if it contains spatial
heterogeneities, the clusters will be formed along the edges of the arena or, more
generally, following the heterogeneities.
The basic mechanism underlying this type of aggregation phenomenon is an
attraction between dead items mediated by the ant workers: small clusters of items
grow by attracting workers to deposit more items. It is this positive feedback that
leads to the formation of larger and larger clusters. The exact individual behavior
that actually implements this positive feedback is, however, still unclear, as is the
adaptive significance of corpse clustering. The formation of cemeteries may be the
(possibly nonadaptive) side-effect of clustering behavior, which can be applied to
all kinds of items, including brood items: clustering would then be adaptive in a
different context, although cleaning the nest by getting rid of corpses is certainly
an important task by itself.
Brood sorting is observed in the ant Leptothorax unifasciatus (this phenomenon
is certainly widespread, but has been clearly studied only in this species [130]).
Workers of this species gather the larvae according to their size, that is, all larvae
tend to be aggregated with smaller larvae located in the center and larger larvae
in the periphery (Figure 4.2). Franks and Sendova-Franks [130] have intensively
analyzed the distribution of brood within the brood cluster. The brood items are
sorted, and different amounts of space are allocated to different types of brood.
Eggs and microlarvae are clustered compactly at the center of the brood area, with
each item being given little individual space. Individual space tends to increase
from the center of the cluster outward. The largest larvae, which are located at
the periphery of the brood cluster, receive more individual space. When pupae
and prepupae are present, they are located between peripheral large larvae and
the more central larvae of medium size. This suggests that space and location are
not determined purely on the basis of size, since pupae and prepupae are at least
as large as the largest larvae. In fact, pupae and prepupae do not require feeding
but only grooming: Franks and Sendova-Franks have shown that there is a positive
correlation between individual space and metabolic rate.

Chapter 4

151

FIGURE 4.1 1500 corposes are randomly located in a circular arena (4> = 25 cm), where
Messor sancta workers are present. The figure shows four successive pictures of the arena:
the initial state, 2 hours, 6 hours, and 26 hours after the beginning of the experiment.

FIGURE 4.2 Piles of larvae in Leptothorax unifasciatus. Smaller larvae can be seen at the
center, and larger larvae at the periphery. This picture was taken 72 hours after all larvae
were randomly placed in the experimental arena. After Deneubourg et al. [88]. Reprinted
by permission © MIT Press.

152

Swarm Intelligence

A possible adaptive explanation for the phenomenon of brood sorting is that,
because items with similar needs are located nearby, care can be provided with more
efficiency. For the sake of simplicity, the model presented in the next section assumes
that items are sorted on the basis of their perceived characteristics, which may
include size, metabolic rate, as well as other features. Recent robotic "modeling"
by Melhuish et al. [237] (described in section 4.6.3) suggests that it is sufficient to
assume that one item needs more space to actually segregate items (see also Barker
and Grimson [7]).

4.3

A MODEL OF CORPSE CLUSTERING AND BROOD
SORTING

4.3.1

CLUSTERING

Deneubourg et al. [88] have proposed two closely related models to account for the
two above-mentioned phenomena of corpse clustering and larval sorting in ants.
Although the model of clustering reproduces experimental observations more faithfully, the second one gives rise to more applications. Both models rely on the same
principle, and, in fact, the clustering model is merely a special case of the sorting
model.
The general idea is that isolated items should be picked up and dropped at some
other location where more items of that type are present. Let us assume that there
is only one type of item in the environment. The probability pp for a randomly
moving, unladen agent (representing an ant in the model) to pick up an item is
given bv

where / is the perceived fraction of items in the neighborhood of the agent, and
ki is a threshold constant. When / <C fcj, pp is close to 1, that is, the probability
of picking up an item is high when there are not many items in the neighborhood.
pp is close to 0 when / ^> k\, that is, items are unlikely to be removed from dense
clusters. The probability pd for a randomly moving loaded agent to deposit an item
is given by:

where k^ is another threshold constant: for / -C k?, pd is close to 0, whereas for
/ » fo, Pd is close to 1. As expected, the depositing behavior obeys roughly opposite
rules.
How is / evaluated? For the sake of robotic implementation, Deneubourg et
al. [88] have assumed that / is computed through a short-term memory that each

Chapter 4

153

FIGURE 4.3 Simulation of the clustering model. The figure shows four successive pictures
of the simulated circular arena (diameter = 200 grid sites; total area: 31,416 sites): the
initial state, with 5,000 items placed randomly in the arena, the arena at t — 0, t = 50,000,
t = 1,000,000, and t = 5,000,000. T = 50, ki = 0.1, k2 = 0.3, 10 agents.

agent possesses: an agent keeps track of the last T time units, and / is simply
the number N of items encountered during these last T time units, divided by the
largest possible number of items that can be encountered during T time units. If
one assumes that only 0 or 1 object can be found within a time unit, then / = N/T.
As mentioned above, this procedure lends itself more easily to a robotic implementation. Real ants are likely to use chemical or tactile cues to orient their
behavior. The algorithms described in sections 4.4 and 4.6, which are inspired by
this idea, rely on a more direct evaluation of /. This procedure should, therefore,
be taken as an example among many possible procedures, and changing the detail
of the procedure does not drastically alter the results [30]. Figure 4.3 shows a simulation of this model with T = 50, k\ = 0.1, k^ = 0.3, and 10 agents clustering 5,000
items in a circular arena, the diameter of which is 200 sites, at t = 0, t = 50,000,
t = 1,000,000, and t = 5,000,000. Small evenly spaced clusters emerge within a
relatively short time and then merge, more slowly, into fewer larger clusters.

154

4.3.2

Swarm Intelligence

SORTING

Let us now assume that there are two types, A and B, of items in the environment.
The principle is the same as before, but now / is replaced by fj\ and /#, the
respective fractions of items of types A and B encountered during the last T time
units. Figures 4.4(a), 4.4(b), and 4.4(c) show a simulation of this model with two
items, T = 50, fci = 0.1, fc2 = 0.3, and 10 agents sorting 200 items of each type
on a 100 x 100 square grid, at t = 0, t = 500,000, and t = 5,000,000. Notice that
this model is unable to reproduce exactly the brood sorting patterns observed in
Leptothorax ants, where brood is organized into concentric areas of different brood
types. In order to fully reproduce such patterns, one would have to include some
kind of differential adhesion [293, 294, 295].
4.3.3

SPATIAL ENTROPY AND VARIANTS

Gutowitz [160] has suggested the use of spatial entropy to track the dynamics
of clustering. Spatial entropy measures how well items are clustered at different
spatial scales. Let s be a certain spatial scale (for example, s = 8 means that we
are considering patches of 8 x 8, hereafter called s-patches): the spatial entropy Es
at scale s is defined by

where PI is the fraction of all objects on the lattice that are found in s-patch I.
By definition, ]C/e{s-patches} PI = 1- Es, which decreases as clustering proceeds, is
useful to compare various clustering strategies, and how fast they lead to clusters
at different scales.
A variant of Deneubourg et al.'s [88] model (hereafter called BM, for basic
model) was proposed by Oprisan et al. [251], in which the influence of previously
encountered objects is discounted by a time factor: recently encountered objects
have more weight than objects encountered long ago. Different patterns can also be
obtained with other weighting functions. Bonabeau [30] also explored the influence
of various weighting functions, especially those with short-term activation and longterm inhibition, and found that it is possible to generate reaction-diffusion-like
patterns.

4.4

EXPLORATORY DATA ANALYSIS

Lumer and Faieta [225] have generalized Deneubourg et al's [88] BM to apply it to
exploratory data analysis. The idea is to define a distance or dissimilarity d between
objects in the space of object attributes. For instance, in the BM, two objects Oj
and Oj can only be either similar or different, so that a binary distance can be
defined, where, for example, d(oi,Oj) = 0 if Oi and Oj are identical objects, and

Chapter 4

155

FIGURE 4.4 Simulation of the sorting model, (a) Initial spatial distribution of 400 items
of two types, denoted by o and +, on a 100 x 100 grid, (b) Spatial distribution of items
at t = 500, 000. T = 50, fci = 0.1, k2 = 0.3, 10 agents, (c) Same as (b) at t = 5,000, 000.

d(oi,Oj) — 1 if Oi and QJ are not identical objects. Obviously, the very same idea
can be extended to include more complicated objects, that is, objects with more
attributes, and/or more complicated distances. It is classical in data analysis to
have to deal with objects that can be described by a finite number n of real-valued
attributes, so that objects can be seen as points in TU1, and d(oi, DJ) is the euclidian
norm, or any other usual metric, such as the infinite norm||... ||oo.

156

Swarm Intelligence

The algorithm introduced by Lumer and Faieta [225] (herafter LF) consists of
projecting the space of attributes onto some lower dimensional space, typically of
dimension z = 2, so as to make clusters appear with the following property: intracluster distances (i.e., attribute distances between objects within clusters) should
be small with respect to inter-cluster distances, that is, attribute distances between
objects that belong to different clusters. Such a mapping should, therefore, keep
some of the neighborhood relationships present in the higher-dimensional space
(which is relatively easy since, for instance, any continuous mapping will do the
job) without creating too many new neighbors in z-dimensions that would be false
neighbors in n-dimensions (which is much less trivial since projections tend to compress information and may map several well-separated points in the n-dimensional
space onto one single point in the z-dimensional space).
The LF algorithm works as follows. Let us assume that z = 2. Instead of
embedding the set of objects into 7£2 or a subspace of K2, they approximate this
embedding by considering a grid, that is, a subspace of Z2, which can also be
considered a discretization of a real space. Agents that are moving in this discrete
space can directly perceive a surrounding region of area s2 (a square Neigh( sxs ) of
s x s sites surrounding site r). Direct perception allows a more efficient evaluation
of the state of the neighborhood than the memory-based procedure used in the
BM: while the BM was aimed to a robotic implementation, the LF algorithm is to
be implemented in a computer, with significantly fewer material constraints. Let
d(c>i,Oj) be the distance between two objects GJ and QJ in the space of attributes.
Let us also assume that an agent is located at site r at time t, and finds an object
Oi at that site. The "local density" /(oj) with respect to object Oi at site r is given
by

j ( p i ) is a measure of the average similarity of object Oi with the other objects QJ
present in the neighborhood of o,. f(o-i) replaces the fraction / of similar objects
in the basic model (BM). a is a factor that defines the scale for dissimilarity: it
is important for it determines when two items should or should not be located
next to each other. For example, if is too large, there is not enough discrimination
between different items, leading to the formation of clusters composed of items
which should not belong to the same cluster. If, on the other hand, a is too small,
distances between items in attribute space are amplified to the point where items
which are relatively close in attribute space cannot be clustered together because
discrimination is too high.
Let us briefly examine the behavior of / by looking at the extreme cases. If,
for example, all s2 sites around r are occupied by objects that are similar to Oi
(Voj 6 Neigh( s x s )(r),rf(c>i,Oj) = 0), then f(oi) = 1, and the object should be
picked up with low probability. If all s2 sites around r are occupied by objects that
are maximally dissimilar to Oj (Vo.,- e Neigh( s x s )(r),d(oj,Oj) = dmax), then /(o,) is
small, and the object should be picked up with high probability. Finally, if all sites

Chapter 4

157

around r are empty, then, obviously, /(oi) = 0, and the object should be picked up
with a high probability. An easy generalization shows that QJ should be picked up
with high (respectively, low) probability when / is close to 0 (respectively, close to
1). Lumer and Faieta [225] define picking up and dropping probabilities as follows:

where ki and k% are two constants that play a role similar to fci and k^ in the BM.
Algorithm 4.1 High-level description of the Lumer Faieta algorithm
/* Initialization */
For every item Oi do
place Oi randomly on grid
End For
For all agents do
place agent at randomly selected site
End For
/* Main loop */
For t = 1 to i max do
For all agents do
If ((agent unladen) and (site occupied by item Oi)) then
Compute f(oi) and pp(oi)
Draw random real number R between 0 and 1
If (R < pp(oi)) then
Pick up item o,
End If
Else If ((agent carrying item Oi) and (site empty)) then
Compute f ( o i ) and Pd(oi)
Draw random real number R between 0 and 1
If (R < pd(oi)} then
Drop item
End If
End If
Move to randomly selected neighboring site not occupied by other agent
End For
End For
Print location of items
/* Values of parameters used in experiments */
ki = 0.1, ki = 0.15, a = 0.5, s2 = 9, t max = 106 steps.

To illustrate the functioning of their algorithm, Lumer and Faieta [225] use
a simple example in which the attribute space is 7£2, and the values of the two
attributes for each object correspond to its coordinates (x,y) in 7£2. Four clusters

158

Swarm Intelligence

of 200 points are generated in attribute space, with x and y distributed according
to normal (or gaussian) distributions /V(/z,cr) of average /j, and variance <r2:

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

z oc AT(0.2,0.1),
zociV(0.8,0.1),
zcx JV(0.8,0.1),
xoc7V(0.2,0.1),

yocW(0.2,0.1),
yocIV(0.2,0.1),
yoc JV(0.8,0.1),
j/oc AT(0.8,0.1),

for clusters 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively (see Figure 4.5). The data points were then
assigned to random locations on a 100 x 100 grid, and the clustering algorithm
was run with 10 agents. Figures 4.6(a), 4.6(b), and 4.6(c) show the system at
t = 0, t = 500,000, and t = 1,000,000. At each time step, all agents have made a
random move and possibly performed an action. Grid coordinates have been scaled
to [0,1] x [0,1]. Items that belong to different clusters are represented by different
symbols: o, +, *, and x. Objects that are clustered together belong to the same
initial distribution, and objects that do not belong to the same initial distribution
are found in different clusters. But there are generally more clusters in the projected
system than in the initial distribution.
In order to correct this tendency to create more clusters than desired, Lumer
and Faieta [225] have added three features:
1. Agents with different moving speeds. Let v be the speed of an agent (v is the
number of grid units walked per time unit by an agent along a given grid axis).
v is distributed uniformly in [l,w ma x]- The simulations use vmax = 6. v also
influences, through the function /, the tendency of an agent to either pick up or
drop an object:

Therefore, fast moving ants are not as selective as slow ants in their estimation
of the average similarity of an object to its neighbors. The diversity of agents
allows the formation of clusters over various scales simultaneously: fast agents
form coarse clusters on large scales, that is, drop items approximately in the right
coarse-grained region, while slow agents take over at smaller scales by placing
objects with more accuracy. Since v serves as a sort of temperature, the presence
of agents with different values of v corresponds to a system operating at different
temperatures at the same time.
A short-term memory. Agents can remember the last m items they have dropped
along with their locations. Each time an item is picked up, the agent compares
the properties of the item with those of the m memorized items and goes toward
the location of the most similar instead of moving randomly. This behavior leads
to a reduction in the number of equivalent clusters, since similar items have a
low probability of initiating independent clusters.

Chapter 4

159

FIGURE 4.5 Distribution of points in "attribute space": 4 clusters of 200 points each
are generated in attribute space, with x and y distributed according to normal (or
gaussian) distributions N(p,,cr): [x oc W(0.2,0.1), y oc JV(0.2,0.1)], [x oc N(0.8,0.1),
y oc AT(0.2,0.1)], [x oc JV(0.8,0.1), y oc JV(0.8, 0.1)], [x oc N (0.2,0.1), y oc 7V(0.8,0.1)],
for clusters 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively.

3. Behavioral switches. The system exhibits some kind of self-annealing since items
are less and less likely to be manipulated as clusters of similar objects form.
Lumer and Faieta [225] have added the possibility for agents to start destroying
clusters if they haven't performed an action for a given number of time steps.
This procedure allows a "heating up" of the system to escape local nonoptimal
configurations.

160

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 4.6 (a) Initial spatial distribution of 800 items on a 100 x 100 grid. Grid coordinates have been scaled to [0,1] x [0,1]. Items that belong to different clusters are
represented by different symbols: o, +, *, and x. (b) Distribution of items at t = 500,000.
fci = 0.1, ki - 0.15, a = 0.5, s2 - 9. (c) Same as (b) at t = 1,000,000.

Chapter 4

161

FIGURE 4.7 Spatial distribution of 800 items on a 100 x 100 grid at t = 1,000,000. Grid
coordinates have been scaled to [0,1] x [0,1]. Items that belong to different clusters are
represented by different symbols: o, +, *, and x. fci = 0.1, fo = 0.15, a = 0.5, s2 = 9,
m = 8, Vmax = 6.

Figure 4.7 shows the system at t = 1,000,000 with ants characterized by different speeds and a short-term memory (TO = 8). The effects of behavioral switches,
not included here, can be found in Lumer and Faieta [225].
Simulations of this algorithm with appropriate parameter values show that
the spatial distribution of objects becomes strongly correlated with the distance
in attribute space. Let Wj = (xi^y^ be the position in the plane of item GJ. The
correlation can be seen clearly on Figure 4.8, which shows \\Wi — Wj\\ as a function
of d(ot, Oj] in all possible pairs (o,, QJ) for the spatial distribution of items obtained
at t •= 1,000,000 in the previous simulation (Figure 4.7). However, because the
positions of the clusters are arbitrary on the plane, one cannot expect a perfect
global correlation between distances in the plane and distances in attribute space.
Lumer and Faieta [225] suggest that their algorithm is "halfway between a
cluster analysis—insofar as elements belonging to different concentration areas in
their n-dimensional space end up in different clusters—and a multidimensional
scaling, in which an intracluster structure is constructed." Note that in the present
example, the exact locations of the various clusters on the low-dimensional space
are arbitrary, whereas they usually have a meaning in classical factorial analysis.

162

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE4.8 \\Wi-Wj\\ as a function of d(oi,Oj) for all possible pairs (oi,Oj) for the spatial
distribution of items obtained at t = 1,000,000 in the previous simulation (Figure 4.7).

In many cases, it is not useful to have any information about the locations of the
clusters (especially in the context of textual databases), and, as noted by Lumer
and Faieta [225], relaxing the global positioning constraints allows the clustering
process to speed up significantly. The LF algorithm is therefore nonparametric,
both with respect to the number of emerging clusters and to their positions on
the representation plane. We shall see in the next chapter how to make the LF
algorithm parametric with respect to these two aspects: although it is sometimes
a good thing to have a nonparametric approach, it might also be useful to be able
to construct the parametric counterpart of this algorithm.
The LF algorithm clusters the data and provides a visualization of the obtained
clustering, as well as of the whole clustering process. When compared with clustering
techniques, this algorithm is based on a mixture of two approaches: hierarchical and
partitioning algorithms [226]. In hierarchical algorithms, all elements are considered
clusters, and pairs of clusters that are most similar are iteratively merged into

Chapter 4

163

larger and larger clusters, providing solutions to the clustering problem at different
levels of granularity. By contrast, in partitioning algorithms, an initial partition of
the data is generated, and then iteratively improved by moving elements to their
nearest cluster centroid. Such algorithms, although they are computationally more
efficient than hierarchical algorithms, are usually more parametric: in particular,
they require the number of clusters to be determined in advance.
Lumer and Faieta's [225, 226] algorithm is similar to a hierarchical algorithm
in that an element is included in a cluster after comparison of this element's attributes with those of the elements in the cluster, whereas a partitioning algorithm
would compare the element's attributes with the average attributes of the elements
of the cluster. But the algorithm does not allow clustering at different levels. It
is also similar to a partitioning algorithm in that elements are moved from cluster to cluster, thereby refining the partition through several passes on the data.
The visualization part of the algorithm is similar in spirit to multidimensional scaling (MDS) techniques, which map a (usually) high-dimensional space onto a low
dimensional space in which the data can be visualized. However, because cluster
positions in the low-dimensional space are arbitrary, the algorithm can only allow
qualitative conservation of dissimilarity relations: two objects which are close in
the low-dimensional space have close attributes; the other way round however is
not necessarily true.
Lumer and Faieta [226] went beyond the simple example of the gaussian distributions in the plane, and applied their algorithm to interactive "exploratory
database analysis," where a human observer can probe the contents of each represented point and alter the charateristics of the clusters. They showed that their
model provides a way of exploring complex information spaces, such as document
or relational databases, because it allows information access based on exploration
from various perspectives.
They applied the algorithm to a database containing the "profiles" of 1650 bank
customers. Attributes of the profiles included marital status, gender, residential
status, age, a list of banking services used by the customer, etc. Given the variety
of attributes, some of them qualitative and others quantitative, they had to define
several dissimilarity measures for the different classes of attributes, and to combine
them into a global dissimilarity measure. For example, for attributes such as marital
status or gender, they assigned a dissimilarity of 0 to pairs having the same value of
the attribute, and a value of 1 to pairs with different values. For age, the dissimilarity
was some decreasing function of the age difference in the pair.
Figure 4.9 shows a schematic representation of the clusters after applying the
algorithm. Some arbitrarily selected clusters in Figure 4.9 are represented with
numbers to illustrate how the algorithm works. Cluster 1 comprises primarily customers who are single, either male or female, age about 20, whose most popular
banking product is interest checking and that mostly live with their parents. Most
people in cluster 2 are married, some of them widowed, female owners of a house
with no mortgage, some of them tenants, whose average age is 57. Cluster 3 comprises primarily married male tenants of average age 44. These clusters have a clear

164

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 4.9 Schematic layout of the data points on the grid after application of the LF
algorithm. Clusters numbered 1, 2, and 3 correspond to those described in the text.

significance, suggesting that the algorithm has been able to find interesting underlying common properties. In addition to what is shown here, they implemented
their system in such a way that the user could, by the click of a mouse, access the
information associated with any point in the representation plane and move it to
another location.
Despite interesting results, it is not obvious that this algorithm has a future. It
does not appear to be very efficient in terms of computation time. It does, however,
provide the user with a simple way of implementing multidimensional scaling. A
systematic comparison between the LF algorithm and other algorithms that perform
the same type of task should be undertaken, with respect to both computation time
and quality of solutions.

4.5

GRAPH PARTITIONING

Kuntz and Layzell [210] and Kuntz, Layzell, and Snyers [211] (hereafter KLS) have
proposed an interesting application of Lumer and Faieta's [225] idea to the problem
of graph partitioning as an alternative to other methods such as quadratic placement (QP) and multidimensional scaling (MDS). Whereas classical graph partitioning methods work directly on the graph, the KLS algorithm, like QP and MDS,
considers the problem of graph partitioning through embedding into a euclidian
space. Such approaches provide a geometric representation of the graph, so that
visualization is enhanced if the representation is low dimensional. In addition, euclidian metrics can be used, and natural clusters in the graph can be detected.

Chapter 4

165

All these features can be of particular importance in the context of computeraided design (CAD), where space is obviously relevant at many levels, from transistors to logical gates to higher-level components. KLS's method is an original way of
finding a reasonably good representation of a graph, where natural components or
clusters in the graph emerge as a result of local actions taken by agents—the simple agents that we described in the previous sections. Indeed, the KLS algorithm
can also be seen as a graph-drawing algorithm [307]. Complex networks of relationships, which arise in numerous disciplines, can often be represented by graphs.
Such graphs can be weighted, possibly with negative weights, directed or undirected,
etc. It is usually convenient to be able to visualize graphs in the form of diagrams,
preferably embedded in a two-dimensional space, where it's easier for researchers to
interpret. Automated procedures for drawing graphs are extremely useful, especially
for large graphs. Many graph-drawing algorithms have been designed in the past
three decades [307], but few of those algorithms deal with arbitrary graphs [192].
As we shall see, the KLS algorithm cannot be used to draw arbitrary graphs, but
only graphs that contain natural clusters.
Let G = (V, E) be a graph, where V = {u,, i = 1 , . . . , N} is the set of N vertices
and E the set of edges. We assume that G is nondirected, that is, E is symmetric.
Let the adjacency matrix be denoted by A = [o^]; a,ij ^ 0 if and only if (u,, Vj) & E.
We shall only treat the cases where a^ = 0 or 1, which correspond to (vi, Vj) $ E
and (vi,Vj) 6 E, respectively. The case of weighted edges can be readily derived.
Let 6^ be the degree of vertex i, that is, the number of edges that connect to Vi.
More generally, ^ = ]T] . a^. Let 6 be the diagonal matrix, the elements of which
are the Si's.
Each vertex of the graph is initially assigned a set of random coordinates in 72™,
and the task to be performed by the algorithm is to change the vertices' coordinates
in 72™ so that
1. clusters present in the graph are located in the same portion of space,
2. intercluster edges are minimized, and
3. different clusters are clearly separated.
The precise formulation of the usual problem of graph partitioning is to find
k nonempty components such that the total intercomponent weight is minimized.
For arbitrary fc, the decision problem is NP-complete, and for fixed k, a solution
can be found in O(|V| fe ) steps, where \V\ denotes the number of elements in V. If
the additional constraint of having the same number of vertices in every cluster is
added, the problem is NP-complete for fixed k [142].
It may also be useful to see the KLS algorithm as an approach to graph drawing,
or graph representation. In this case, criteria are more difficult to define because
aesthetic factors play a role: a graph representation must not only allow for the easy
extraction of the characteristic features of the graph, it must also be pleasing to the
eye. For example, minimizing the number of edge crossings in a planar embedding of
a graph can be an objective of the graph-drawing algorithm, but it does not always

166

Swarm Intelligence

lead to representations that highlight the graph's properties [193]. This difficulty
explains why general graph-drawing algorithms are rare.
Let (xim)m=i,...,n be the coordinate of vertex i in fin, and
X = [xim](i=i,...,N)(m=i,...,n) the N x n matrix describing the coordinates of all
vertices. One interesting formulation of the graph-partitioning problem involves a
quadratic cost function C (quadratic placement), where the problem is to minimize

under the constraint that XX = In, where /„ is the identity matrix in Tin. This
constraint is a way of avoiding the collapse of all points onto a single coordinate.
It can be shown that this problem is equivalent to minimizing tr(XtQX), where
Q — A — A is called the laplacian matrix of A and tr(A) is the trace of A, still
under the constraint that XiX = /„. This method then relies heavily on matrix
diagonalization, which can be costly computationally.
The KLS heuristic method is based on the idea of Lumer and Faieta [225].
Here, o, is replaced by Vi, and the dissimilarity function d(oi,Oj) by a distance
d(vi,Vj) to be defined. As was the case with LF, the embedding is into a grid,
that is, a subspace of Z2. The ant-based clustering model is essentially a dynamical
system where vertices move in the plane and are attracted to or rejected by clusters:
one has to choose a distance such that the system will converge toward a good
representation of the graph or a reasonable solution of the partitioning problem,
with k unknown. One such distance is

where p(vi) — {vj e V; a^ ^ 0}u{vi} is the set of vertices adjacent to vi: including
Uj, D is the symmetric difference of two sets D(A, B) = (A(JB) — (AnB)), and | . . .
denotes the number of elements of a set. When two vertices u, and Vj have a lot of
common adjacent nodes, (p(^)Up(uj)) - (p(vi) C\p(vj)) is a small set, and d(vz,Vj)
is small: this is good, because Vi and Vj should be represented by close locations in
the embedding space. When two vertices v^ and Vj have few or no adjacent edges
in common, (p(u») U P(VJ)) — (p(vi) n P(VJ)) is a large set, and d(vi,Vj) is large:
the points representing Uj and Vj in the embedding space should be further apart.
The denominator of the righthand term of Eq. (4.10) is a kind of "normalization"
factor that weighs the contribution of the symmetric difference by the total number
of vertices that are adjacent to the two vertices, so that d always lies between 0
and 1. For example, d(vi,Vj) = I when the two vertices are not adjacent and have
no adjacent edge in common: this is because D(p(vi),P(VJ)) = p(vi) U P(VJ) and
|p(vj)| + \P(VJ)\ = \p(vi) U P(VJ)\. At the other extreme, di(vi,Vj) = 0 if the two
vertices are adjacent and have all their adjacent vertices in common: this is because
p(vi) U P(VJ) = p(vi) n P(VJ). In the case where a^ = 0 or 1, d(vi,Vj] is simply a

Chapter 4

167

"normalized" version of the LI distance di1 (vi, Vj} between two nodes in the graph:

Similarly to the LF algorithm, one has to define probabilities of picking up and
depositing items, here vertices. Let us assume that an agent is located at site r at
time t and finds a vertex u, at that site. The local density with respect to vertex v^
at site r is given by

f ( v i ) is a measure of the average distance within the graph of vertex Vi to the other
vertices Vj present in the Z"2 neighborhood of vt, a defines the scale for dissimilarity
and is set to 1 in our simulations. Let us briefly examine the behavior of / by
looking at the extreme cases. If, for example, all s2 sites around r are occupied by
vertices that are connected to Vi and have all their adjacent vertices in common
with Vi(Vvj & Neigh( sxs )(r), d(vi,Vj) = 0) , then /(uj) is equal to 1 and the vertex
should not be picked up. If all s2 sites around r are occupied by vertices which are
not at all connected to Uj or to one of v^s neighbors, then /(u$) = 0, and the vertex
should be picked up. If all sites around r are empty, then, obviously, f ( v i ) = 0,
and the object should be picked up with high probability. Picking up and dropping
probabilities of vertex Vi are defined as follows:

where k\ and k% are two constants similar to k\ and k% in the BM and the LF
algorithm.
The KLS algorithm was tested on random graphs F(n,c,pi,p e ) [141], which
have been used in the context of VLSI to test iterative improvement partitioning
algorithms. Such graphs are composed of c clusters of n vertices, pi is the probability that two vertices within a cluster are connected, and pe is the probability
that two vertices that belong to different clusters be connected. Figure 4.10 illustrates the fact that the KLS algorithm is able to find "natural" clusters in a graph
r(25,4,0.8,0.01). Figure 4.10(a) shows the initial random distribution of nodes on
the plane. Figure 4.10(b) shows that, after T = 2 • 106 steps, vertices distribute
themselves in space in such a way that exactly c — 4 clusters of vertices appear,
which correspond to the four clusters of the graph. The positions of vertices are
arbitrary on the plane.
The quality of the solution found by the KLS algorithm can be evaluated if
one considers the algorithm a mapping from graph space onto the plane: we expect

168

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 4.10 (a) Initial distribution of vertices on the portion of plane [0,1] x [0,1],
for a random graph F(25,4,0.8,0.01). (b) The algorithm, with 10 agents, is able to find
"natural" clusters in this graph. Vertices distribute themselves in space in such a way that
exactly c = 4 clusters of vertices appear, which correspond to the 4 clusters of the graph.
ki = 0.03, fa = 0.1, a = 1, s2 = 9, T = 2 • 106 steps.

Chapter 4

169

Algorithm 4.2 High-level description of the KLS algorithm
/* Initialization */
For every vertex Vi do

place vt randomly on grid
End For
For all agents do
place agent at randomly selected site
End For
/* Main loop */
For t = 1 to imax do
For all agents do
If ((agent unladen) and (site occupied by vertex Uj)) then
Compute f(vi) and pp(vi)
Draw random real number R between 0 and 1
If (R < pp(vi)) then
Pick up item Vi
End If
Else If ((agent carrying item Vi) and (site empty)) then
Compute f(vi) and pd(vi)
Draw random real number R between 0 and 1
If (R < pd(vi)) then
Drop item
End If
End If
Move to randomly selected neighboring site not occupied by other agent
End For
End For
Print location of vertex
Draw edges between vertices
/* Values of parameters used in experiments */
fci = 0.3, fe = 0.1, a = 1, s2 = 9, T = 2.106 steps.

nodes which are far apart in the graph to lie far away from each other on the plane,
and vice versa. In a random graph of the type studied here, we expect to have two
characteristic distances in the graph: the distance between vertices that belong to
the same cluster and the distance between vertices that do not belong to the same
cluster. Let Wi be the coordinates in the grid of vertex Vi. Figure 4.11 (a) shows
\\Wi — Wj\\ as a function of d(vi,Vj) for all pairs of vertices for the same graph and
the same distribution of vertex positions in the plane as in Figure 4.10(a): the two
expected clouds of points are observed, and there is, of course, clearly no correlation
between \\Wi — Wj\\ and d(vi,Vj). Figure 4.11(b) shows the same relationship after
T = 2 • 106 time steps (vertex positions are those of Figure 4.10(b)): the distance
between the positions of vertices in the plane representation is an increasing function
of their distance in the graph, with two clouds of points corresponding to the two

170

Swarm Intelligence

characteristic distances in the graph. The algorithm is able to generate a good
mapping of the graph onto the plane.
At the time this section was being written, no quantitative comparision had
been made with other graph partitioning methods or graph-drawing algorithms,
which may perform faster and/or converge toward higher-quality solutions. The
KLS algorithm may turn out to be "no more" than a proof-of-concept that it is
possible to solve problems with a swarm-based approach (as many examples in this
book may turn out to be), but, even so, it is an extremely valuable example, and
may even be able to find original solutions that other algorithms have been unable
to find.
It would also be useful to study this algorithm in the context of either ratio cut
partitioning and clustering [163] or edge crossing minimization [146]. The ratio cut
partitioning problem [163] is an extension of the partitioning problem that allows
for some level of imbalance between clusters, so that the best solution is the one that
offers the best tradeoff between total intercluster cut and cluster balance. Let us
consider, for example, the bipartitioning problem, where given a graph G = (V, E),
one has to find a partition of V into two disjoint clusters U and W such that
\U\ = \W\ and the total edge weight e(U, W) between U and W is minimized. The
associated ratio cut problem consists of finding a partition of V into two disjoint
clusters U and W such that e(U, W)/\U\\W\ is minimized. It is intuitively clear that
the ratio cut cost function provides the freedom to find more "natural" partitions
in graphs by relaxing the constraint of perfect balance. This problem, despite this
additional freedom, is still NP-complete, as can be shown by reduction from the
problem of bounded min-cut graph partitioning [145].
The KLS algorithm may be relevant to the ratio cut problem because its underlying self-organizing dynamics makes it more likely to converge toward a solution
that is "natural" with respect to the graph being partitioned or clustered. Let us
introduce the family of graphs F(P^, c,pi,pe), which are identical to graphs of the
type r(n,c,pi,p e ) except for the number of vertices per cluster, m which is a random variable that follows a discrete probability distribution P^ the expectation of
which is given by £Tm=i m-^m ™ (-^m) ~ n- Such graphs are characterized by clusters of m vertices, where m fluctuates around its average value n. Whe applied to
such graphs, KLS's algorithm finds a two-dimensional representation of the graph
where clusters are still clearly separated despite their different sizes. Figure 4.12
shows an example of a graph representation found by the algorithm for a graph
comprising four clusters of 25 vertices on average, the probability distribution being gaussian. This indicates that the algorithm may certainly be more appropriate
for ratio cut clustering.
Finally, the KLS algorithm is particularly useful when there actually are clusters
in a graph and can be used as an extraction tool. However, it may not perform well,
either in terms of representation or of partitioning, on other types of graphs where
there are no obvious clusters. Geometric graphs illustrate this limitation of the
algorithm well. In geometric graphs, which are used in the context of numerical
modeling, vertices, characterized by euclidian coordinates, are located on a plane

Chapter 4

171

FIGURE 4.11 (a) \\wt — Wj\\ vs. d(vi,Vj) for the graph representation of Figure 4.10(a).
|| ... || is the Li norm in the plane, and d ( . . . ) is the (normalized) LI norm for graphs, (b)
\\Wi — Wj\\ vs. d(vi,Vj) for the graph representation of Figure 4.10(b).

172

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 4.12 Representation of a graph T(P£ oc e -("'-") 2/49 j c = 4, Pi = 0.1, pe = 0.01)
found by KLS's algorithm, n = 25.

and are locally connected to other vertices that lie within a radius of connectivity
R. Figure 4.13 shows an example of a geometric graph with 200 vertices randomly
distributed in a [0,1] x [0,1] square area. Vertices are connected to all vertices that
lie within a disc of radius R = 0.18. Figure 4.14 shows the spatial distribution of
vertices and their connections found by the KLS algorithm after T = 5 • 106 time
steps. It is clearly difficult to say that the algorithm has been able to extract the
structure of the geometric graph.

4.6

ROBOTIC IMPLEMENTATIONS

4.6.1

INTRODUCTION

Although designing robots that implement the process of distributed clustering may
not be particularly useful in itself in the context of engineering, several groups have
done it [12, 147, 148, 235, 305], because it is conceptually useful. Showing that it

Chapter 4

173

FIGURE 4.13 Randomly generated geometric graph of 200 vertices in a square area of
linear size 1, where the radius of connectivity is R = 0.18 (Li norm in the plane).

is possible to design a collection of extremely simple robots that are capable of
clustering items in a decentralized way on the basis of purely local perception is an
extremely important step. Of course, ultimately, one wishes to see more complex
applications of swarm intelligence in the field of robotics, and indeed, collective
robotics is flourishing (see, for example, Cao et al., [61]).

4.6.2 EXAMPLE
Among the first to design a collection of robots to implement distributed clustering
are Beckers and his colleagues (Beckers et al., [12]). The problem was to design
simple robots that could displace items (pucks). Their robots are equipped with
C-shaped grippers with which they can push items. A gripper is also used as a mechanical sensor to evaluate resistance to pushing. This mechanism allows the local
density of pucks to be measured: high resistance means high local density, whereas

174

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 4.14 Representation of the geometric graph of Figure 4.13 found by KLS's
algorithm, fci = 0.03, fc2 = 0.1, a = 1, s2 = 9, T = 5 • 106 steps.

weak resistance means low local density. The gripper activates a microswitch when
the perceived resistance to pushing exceeds a threshold.
Each robot is equipped with two infrared sensors for obstacle avoidance, and a
microswitch which is activated by the gripper when a certain number of pucks to
be pushed is exceeded (here, three pucks are sufficient to trigger the microswitch).
Many robotic systems of this type rely on a common principle, introduced by
Brooks [44, 45]: the subsumption architecture. The idea is to decompose any behavior into atomic, hierarchically organized subbehaviors which can be activated
when necessary. Rather than modularize perception, world modeling, planning, and
execution, this approach builds control systems in which many individual modules
(that incorporate their own perceptual, modeling, and planning requirements) directly generate some part of the behavior of the robot. An arbitration scheme, built
within the framework of the modules, controls which behavior-producing module
has control of which part of the robot at any given time. All possible combinations
of atomic subbehaviors can generate many robot behaviors. This recent approach

Chapter 4

175

FIGURE 4.15 Robot 1, because it has only two pucks in its C-shaped gripper, continues
to move in a straight line. Robot 2, with three pucks in its gripper, is encountering a
cluster: its microswitch is activated by the gripper, so that the robot leaves the pucks next
to the cluster.

in robotics can be opposed to a more classical one, based not on behavioral modules
but on reasoning steps and functional modules. The subsumption approach relies
on a strong assumption: that it is possible, with an appropriate combination of
stimuli-responses, to solve most simple robotic problems. This idea is central to the
reactive approach to robotics.
Here, there are three possible behaviors for the robots, and only one can be
active at any time:
1. A robot moves in a straight line if no sensor is activated, until an obstacle is
detected or the microswitch is activated. Notice that pucks are not detected
as obstacles because they are too low. Moving in a straight line is the default
behavior.
2. When the robot detects an obstacle, it turns away from the detected obstacle
by a random angle and starts moving in a straight line in the new direction.
Thanks to the C-shaped gripper, any puck that is carried by the robot when it
is executing its obstacle avoidance behavior is retained in the gripper throughout
the turn (Figure 4.15).
3. When the robot pushes three or more pucks (either when there are three or more
pucks in the gripper, or when the robot bumps into a cluster of three or more
pucks), the microswitch is activated by the gripper: this triggers a reversal of the
robot's motors for one second, so that the robot steps back and then executes
a turn by a random angle before moving in a straight line in the new direction.
The pucks have been "dropped" at a location of perceived high puck density.
The obstacle-avoidance behavior has priority over the "puck-dropping" behavior, which itself has priority over the default behavior. Beckers et al. [12] have
reproduced the spatial clustering process of Deneubourg et al. [88] with groups of
robots comprised of one to five robots.

176

Swarm Intelligence

Beckers et al.'s [12] robotic experiments have been performed with 81 pucks
regularly spaced in an experimental square arena (250 x 250 cm 2 ). Robots are
initially placed in the center of the arena. Every ten minutes of run time, the
robots are stopped manually, for the positions of the pucks and the sizes of clusters
to be recorded (a cluster being defined as a set of pucks separated by no more
than one puck diameter). Three successive phases are observed, irrespective of the
number of robots:
1. In the early stage of the clustering process, robots move, collect pucks and drop
them when three pucks have been collected, which leads to the formation of
miniclusters comprised of three pucks. Such miniclusters rapidly become large
enough not to be easily destroyed.
2. During the second phase, the robots remove a few pucks from existing clusters
by striking them at an appropriate angle, and depositing the pucks next to other
clusters. Some clusters rapidly grow during this phase, leading to the formation
of few relatively large clusters.
3. The third phase is the one that has the longest duration. From time to time,
a puck is removed from a large cluster and added to another large cluster, or,
most often, to the same cluster. This competition among clusters eventually
leads to the formation of a single cluster. The equilibrium state is a dynamic
one, since the robots continue to remove and add pucks to this last cluster. It
is however surprising that the system always converges toward a single cluster.
Large clusters are more likely to lose pucks, but at the same time, they are also
more likely to receive pucks. This latter process seems to be dominant, which
intuitively explains the convergence property.
This convergence to a single large cluster is surprising, and relies on a sophisticated implementation of stigmergy: in effect, a puck can be withdrawn from a cluster by a robot only when the robot is approaching the cluster tangentially, whereas
a frontal approach rather tends to trigger a deposition behavior. This indicates that
cluster geometry is extremely important in the clustering process, and obviously
additions and removals of pucks influence cluster geometry. The stigmergic process
is, therefore, more complex than one might think.
The clustering process has also been tested with an initial seed, that is, an
initial cluster. In fact, in order to prevent the seed cluster from being broken up
during the early stage of clustering, Beckers et al. [12] used a large saucer. They
found that three robots were able to form a single cluster around the saucer, thereby
showing that robots can be induced to form a cluster at a predefined location. The
time taken to converge toward this cluster induced by the seed is, however, longer
(126 min) than the time it takes to reach a single cluster without a seed (105 min).
Finally, Beckers et al. [12] studied the performance of the group of robots as
a function of group size (Figure 4.16). In their setup, they found that the optimal
number of robots, with respect to both average convergence time and efficiency
(expressed in robot • minutes required to converge), is three. A degradation of

Chapter 4

177

FIGURE 4.16 (a) Number of interactions (avoidance) among robots during a 20 minute
experiment as a function of the number of robots, (b) Efficiency, expressed in robot • minutes, as a function of the number of robots: a group of three robots seems to be optimal
for this particular setup [12].

the performance is observed for more than three robots, because of the increasing
number of useless interactions among robots. For up to three robots, the robots
work in parallel, largely unaffected by each other's behavior, except for indirect
interactions through modifications of clusters, whereas for more than three robots,
they start to interact directly. Not only do robots lose time when they encounter and
have to avoid each other, they can also lose their pucks in the avoidance process
(although this should be rare, thanks the C-shaped gripper), and may destroy
existing clusters in the process of turning away from each other, for the avoidance
behavior has priority over the puck dropping behavior.
4.6.3

OTHER SELECTED WORKS

As mentioned previously, several other groups have worked on the same problem.
For example, Gaussier and Zrehen [147, 148] have used a slightly more sophisticated "gripper" and a more complicated puck-dropping behavior, but the principles
of their robotic implementation, based on the Khepera robot (a miniature mobile
robot designed to perform "desktop" experiments [235, 236, 241]), are basically
identical to those of Beckers et al. [12]. A hook mounted on the robot's back allowed pucks to be grasped and shifted, with the number of pucks carried by the
hook triggering picking up and dropping behaviors in a way similar to Beckers et
al. [12]. A preprogrammed Winner-Take-All-type neural net is used to implement

178

Swarm Intelligence

the perception of items and obstacles, and picking up and dropping behaviors are
also preprogrammed so as to favor cluster building rather than cluster destruction.
Although this robotic implementation of collective clustering was the first or one of
the first with that of Beckers et al. [12], Gaussier and Zrehen [147, 148] did not attempt to evaluate the performance of their system, which is why we have presented
the work of Beckers et al. [12] in more detail.
Martinoli et al. [235, 236] have performed more experiments of the same type,
refining in particular the communication architecture among teammates (with a
possible "supervisor" unit) to avoid the problem of communication bottleneck in
larger teams of robots, and introducing the idea of programmable "active" seeds,
that is, pucks that actively emit signals or actively respond to signals emitted
by robots. Active pucks extend the sensorial capabilities of the robots without
adding to the robots themselves. The grippers of individual robots are also more
sophisticated (Figure 4.17). When a robot's sensors are activated by an item, the
robot either avoids it if it detects a large obstacle, such as another robot, a wall or
a cluster of seeds, or, if currently not carrying a seed, picks up the item with its
gripper. Then, in either case, it turns by an angle of about 180 degrees. In addition,
robots are equipped with IR reflecting bands, so that their size as perceived by other
robots' proximity sensors is increased, thereby facilitating early recognition by the
other robots. Experiments were performed with one to five robots equipped with
grippers, and 20 pucks initially randomly scattered in a 80 x 80 cm2. Figure 4.18
shows the mean cluster size as a function of time for group sizes from 1 to 5.
The implementation of a special supply floor, whereby robots can transfer energy
from an external supply by electrical contact regardless of their positions, allows
study of the clustering process over time scales of several hours. In three two-hour
experiments with two robots, it is found that cluster size does not vary a lot after
80 minutes. Figures 4.19(a) and 4.19(b) show typical initial and final (after two
hours with two robots) arrangements of pucks in the experimental arena.
4.6.4

FROM CLUSTERING TO SORTING

Melhuish et al. [237] recently went one step further than clustering. They show that
it is possible to perform a rough type of sorting, or, more precisely, segregation, with
a simple extension of the robotic implementations decribed in sections 4.6.2 and
4.6.3. They use two types of items—red and yellow frisbees. Picking up and dropping
behaviors are essentially identical for both types of frisbees, and are similar to the
behaviors described in section 4.6.2, except for one aspect: when dropping a yellow
frisbee, a robot pulls the frisbee backwards for some distance before releasing it.
In other words, yellow frisbees, and only yellow frisbees, are not deposited hard up
against other frisbees, but some little way off. This mechanism may be a good model
of differential space requirements of the different brood types in ants. This simple
addition seems to be sufficient to generate a segregation of yellow and red frisbees,
with red frisbees in the center of the cluster and yellow frisbees at the periphery
(Figure 4.20). This distribution is similar to the one found in Leptothorax ants

Chapter 4

179

FIGURE 4.17 Three Khepera robots equipped with different combinations of modules
(from left to right): a robot with a gripper and IrDA modules, a robot with IrDA and
radio modules, and a robot with a gripper and radio modules. Three active seeds are also
represented. The robots lie on a supply floor board developed by Martinoli et al. [236],
whereby robots can take advantage of the external supply source regardless of their positions. The IrDA and radio modules correspond to different communications tools. See
Martinoli et al. [236] for a more detailed description. Reprinted by permission.

FIGURE 4.18 Average cluster size (over five experiments) as a function of time for robot
group sizes from 1 to 5. After Martinoli et al. [236]. Reprinted by permission.

180

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE4.19 (a) Initial configuration of 20 pucks in the experimental arena. After Martinoli et al. [236] (b) Configuration of pucks after two hours with two robots. After Martinoli
et al. [236]. Reprinted by permission.

(Figure 4.2), where brood items that have larger space requirements are located at
the periphery of the brood pile.

FIGURE 4.20 Configuration of red and yellow frisbees obtained by Melhuish et al. [237]
after 8 hours and 35 minutes, using their pullback algorithm.

Chapter 4

181

FIGURE 4.21 Average cluster sizes as a function of time when two types of items are
sorted. For type 1 items: k\ = 0.1, k^ = 0.15; for type 1 items: k\ = 0.03, fe = 0.15.

4.6.5

A PROPOSAL

Given the current stage of collective robotics, it is certainly possible to envision a
distributed robotic implementation, in the context of clustering, of the models of
task succession presented in section 3.3.6, especially model (1). We propose that
such an implementation could be the next step in the design of swarm-based robotic
systems because it would constitute a significant leap forward in the functional complexity of the system. The robotic implementation can be sketched as follows (we
leave the details of the implementation to the imagination of roboticists): assume
that several types of pucks are present in the arena, each type being characterized by some property that is recognizable by the robots. Such a property can be
weight, color, or, in the case of active seeds, radio frequency and so forth. The
robots may be programmed with different, but nonzero, probabilities of picking up
the various items. If the probabilities are significantly different, it is likely that we
will observe the emergence of clusters of the most easily picked up items, followed
by the formation of clusters of items in the second category, etc. In other words,
sequential cluster formation should be observed, or, if robots are programmed to
take items back to their base, sequential processing of the various types of items.
This corresponds to model 1 in section 3.3.6.

182

Swarm Intelligence

Model 2 could also be implemented. Figure 4.21 shows the dynamics of average
cluster sizes when two types of items are involved: a type 1 item is more likely to
be picked up when isolated than a type 2 item; probabilities of being dropped are
identical for both types of items. It can be seen that the average cluster size of type
1 items increases more rapidly than that of type 2 items, indicating that cluster
formation proceeds sequentially: when clusters of type 1 items have been formed,
type 2 items are available for pick up.

4.7

POINTS TO REMEMBER

• Corpse aggregation and brood sorting are commonly observed behaviors in ants,
but they have been studied in few species. A simple agent-based model can account for the formation of clusters which contain only one type of item: an item
is dropped by a laden agent when the agent is surrounded by items of the same
type; an item is picked up by an unladen agent when the agent perceives no (or
few) item(s) of the same type in its neighborhood. In this model, two items are
either similar or different: in other words, the dissimilarity measure between two
items can take only two values, 0 or 1.
• The agent-based model can be extended to deal with items which have variable
attributes in a possibly continuous, possibly high-dimensional, space. The dissimilarity measure between two items can take any positive value. An item is dropped
by a laden agent when the agent is surrounded by items which are similar (with
respect to the dissimilarity measure) to the item it is carrying; an item is picked
up by an unladen agent when the agent perceives items in its neighborhood which
are dissimilar from the item to be picked up. This extended model can be applied
to map high-dimensional data onto a two-dimensional representation.
• Nodes in a graph are particular examples of objects with high-dimensional attributes. When the extended model is applied to the nodes of a graph, the agents
sort the nodes in such a way that clusters of nodes in the graph translate into
clusters of points in the representation space. This application can be used to
partition or draw graphs.
• The clustering model has been used to test the feasibility of swarm-based robotic
systems. All robotic implementations are based on local perception and action.
Interference among robots may become a problem if there are too many robots
in a small area. Although one recent example of sorting by a swarm of robots
has been described, swarm-based robotics remains confined to apparently trivial
tasks.

CHAPTER 5

Self-Organization and Templates: Application
to Data Analysis and Graph Partitioning

5.1 OVERVIEW
The biological phenomena described in the previous chapter were corpse aggregation and brood sorting by ants. The clusters of items obtained with the models
introduced in sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 emerged at arbitrary locations. The underlying self-organizing process, whereby large clusters grow even larger because they
are more attractive than smaller clusters, does not ensure the formation of clusters
at specific locations.
In the two biological examples described in this chapter, the self-organizing
dynamics of aggregation is constrained by templates. A template is a pattern that
is used to construct another pattern. The body of a termite queen or a brood pile in
ants are two examples of structures—the second one resulting from the activities of
the colony—that serve as templates to build walls. Walls built around the termite
queen form the royal chamber; walls built around the brood pile form the ant nest.
When a mechanism combines self-organization and templates, it exhibits the
characteristic properties of self-organization, such as snowball effect or multistability, and at the same time produces a perfectly predictable pattern that follows the
template.
The two nonparametric algorithms presented in chapter 4, one for multidimensional scaling and the other for graph partitioning, can be made parametric

183

184

Swarm Intelligence

through the use of templates. The number of clusters of data points or vertices can
be predefined by forcing items to be deposited in a prespecified number of regions
in the space of representation, so that the number of clusters and their locations
are known in advance.

5.2 THE INTERPLAY OF SELF-ORGANIZATION AND
TEMPLATES
In the previous chapter, we saw how the attractivity of corpses or the differential
attractivity of items of different types could lead to the formation of clusters of
specific items. Self-organization lies in this attractivity, which induces a snowball
effect: the larger a cluster, the more likely it is to attract even more items. But selforganization can also be combined with a template mechanism in the process of
clustering. A template is a kind of prepattern in the environment, used by insects—
or by other animals—to organize their activities. For example, in the context of
building, the shape to be built is predefined by the prepattern, and insects build
along the prepattern. This prepattern can result from natural gradients, fields, or
heterogeneities that are exploited by the colony. Many ant species (for example,
Acantholepsis custodiens (Figure 5.1) [43], Formica polyctena [63], and Myrmica
rubra [64]) make use of temperature and humidity gradients to build their nests
and spatially distribute their brood.
The prepattern can also be the body shape of an animal, as illustrated by
the construction of the royal chamber in termites (Figure 5.2). The physogastric
queen of Macrotermes subhyalinus emits a pheromone that diffuses and creates a
pheromonal template in the form of a decreasing gradient around her
(Figure 5.3) [48], It has experimentally been shown that a concentration window exists, or a threshold, that controls the workers' building activities: a worker deposits
a soil pellet if the concentration of pheromone is within this window or exceeds the
threshold. Otherwise, workers do not deposit any pellet, or even destroy existing
walls. If one places a freshly killed physogastric queen in various positions, walls
are built at a more or less constant distance from the queen's body, following its
contours, while a wax dummy of the queen does not stimulate construction. What
defines the pattern that will be built is the queen's building pheromone which creates a chemical template. Building following this template ensures that the size of
the royal chamber is adjusted to the size of the queen.
If the template formed by the queen's body determines the overall shape of
the chamber, other factors play a role: tactile stimuli and pheromones other than
the queen's building pheromone, such as cement and trail pheromones, facilitate the
recruitment, coordination, and orientation of individual workers, and determine the
detailed shape of the reconstructed chamber. Moreover, the pheromonal template
alone cannot explain the two following observations:

Chapter 5

185

FIGURE 5.1 The spatial distribution of eggs, larvae, and pupae in the ant Acantholepsis custodiens depends on the temperature gradient along the depth axis. The gradient
changes between 3:00 a.m. (left) and 3:00 p.m. (right).

FIGURE 5.2 Chamber being built around the queen (after Grasse [158], p. 536, reprinted
by permission © Masson.), Ihl8 after the colony has been placed in a Petri dish and
provided with soil pellets. The queen was 9 cm long, the Petri dish 25 cm in diameter and
4 cm high. 1200 individuals were present in the Petri dish.

186

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 5.3 (a) Sketch of pheromonal template, representing the physogastric queen
and the king. Different pheromone concentrations are represented by different grey levels.
[Cmin, Cmax] is the concentration window within which depositions are most likely to occur,
(b) The template is three dimensional. Workers use the template as well as the queen's
body, over which they walk to build a roof protecting the queen.

1. Walls are not built uniformly along the chemical template from the beginning.
Schematically, pillars are first formed, and then the space between pillars is filled
to produce walls. This process was briefly described in section 1.2.3.
2. At the group level, one of the most noticeable dynamic effects during the construction process is that the rate of building increases very rapidly, especially in
large groups. The per capita rate of building increases disproportionately with
the number of builders. Sixty minutes after the beginning of the construction of
the royal chamber, there are about 0.2 depositions/worker on average in a group
of 20 workers, whereas after a similar interval a group of 80 workers makes about
2.5 depositions/worker on average (Figure 5.4(a)). The saturation in this increase
observed beyond 80 workers certainly means that the intrinsic maximum rate of
building per worker has been reached. Figure 5.4(b) shows the mean number of

Chapter 5

187

depositions (during 10 min) per worker added 50 min after the beginning of the
experiment, in which worker groups of different sizes are put in the experimental
arena with the queen to construct a new royal chamber. The number of depositions per added worker increases significantly with the number JV of workers
already present from t = 0 to t = 50 min (N = 10,20,40,80,160,320).

FIGURE 5.4 (a) Mean number (average over 6 to 10 experiments; error bars not shown)
of depositions per worker during 60 min for groups of different sizes (10, 20, 40, 80,
320) (after Bruinsma [48], pp. 14 and 36). (b) Mean number of depositions per worker
introduced 50 min after the beginning of Bruinsma's [48] experiment, where worker groups
of different sizes (10, 20, 40, 80, 160, 320) were put in the experimental arena with the
queen. The measures were taken in the 10 min following introduction. Error bars result
from 30 replicates of the experiment (after Bruinsma [48], p. 37, reprinted by permission).

188

Swarm Intelligence

Positive feedback mechanisms, involving a cement pheromone in the pellets that
triggers a chemotactic1 behavior from workers and spatial heterogeneities, such as
small obstacles, which attract workers within a small radius and stimulate them
to deposit pellets, can explain these two observations [33]. The more pellets at one
location, the more termites are attracted toward this location and deposit pellets.
A model of this positive feedback effect is given in the next section. It is very likely
that the construction of the royal chamber relies on a combination of template and
self-organizing mechanisms.

5.3

A REACTION-DIFFUSION MODEL OF THE
CONSTRUCTION OF THE ROYAL CHAMBER

The first step toward modeling the construction of the royal chamber is a simple
model of the emergence of pillars, briefly introduced in section 1.2.3 [83]. This
model shows how the different parameters characterizing the random walk of the
termites, the attractivity of the cement pheromone, the diffusion of the pheromone,
etc., determine the characteristic properties of the spatial distribution of pellets
and the possible emergence of pillars. Let H(r, t) be the concentration, at location
r and time t, of the cement pheromone that is emitted by the deposited material
and diffuses freely in air. Equation (5.1) describes the dynamics of H:

where k^ is the amount of pheromone emitted per unit of deposited material per unit
time, the total production being the product k%P, with P the amount of deposited
material that is still active. Pheromone decay is represented by —k^H, and DnV2H
accounts for pheromone diffusion, with DH being the diffusion coefficient, assumed
to be constant.
To determine the attractiveness of the cement pheromone, the dynamics of
the loaded termites, the density of which is denoted by C, has to be described.
We assume that the path of a termite results from the addition of two processes:
random walk and response to the pheromone gradient, or chemotactic behavior. The
simplest model of chemotactic behavior assumes that the response is proportional
to the gradient: the greater the gradient, the more attracted termites are. Greater
gradients attract termites toward peaks of concentration, which correspond to zones
where a lot of material has been deposited. The equation then reads:

In Eq. (5.2), it is assumed that 'yV(CVH) describes the attractiveness of the
pheromone gradient, 7 denotes the intrinsic strength of this attractiveness (7 is
'Chemotaxis is a gradient-following behavior: individuals move along a concentration gradient, toward regions of higher concentration.

Chapters

189

assumed to be positive: this corresponds to a case in which regions of higher H
concentration are indeed attractive): for the same value of the gradient, the greater
7, the greater the attractiveness. There is also a random component in individual
motion, described by DC V 2 C, where DC is the "diffusion" constant of termites. It
is further assumed that there is a spatially and temporally constant flow $ of loaded
termites into the system (that is, the flux of insects bringing new building material
into the modeled zone), and that the rate of unloading per termite per time unit is
a constant k\. Finally, Eq. (5.3) describes the dynamics of the active material P:
the amount of material P deposited per unit of time is equal to k\C, and the rate
of disappearance of P is k^P', the total production of pheromone emitted in space
per time unit (it is assumed the cement pheromone contained in pellets dissociates
from the pellets and can then diffuse freely in air):

When material is dropped, cement pheromone is emitted and diffuses, thereby attracting more termites toward its area of origin, where more material is therefore
dropped. This accumulation of material induces a stronger and stronger emission of
pheromone which attracts more of the termites. This positive feedback at different
sites also gives rise to competition between close pillars, leading to a regular spatial
distribution of pillars.
This mechanism of attractiveness does not always lead, however, to the emergence of regularly spaced pillars, and quantitative conditions are required to produce
such a pattern: when the density of termites or the rate of deposition is too low, the
development of pillars may be impossible, and only a spatially homogeneous stationary state is observed, that is, a uniform distribution of pellets in space. In this
homogeneous stationary state (Co, HO,PQ), both spatial and temporal derivatives
are equal to 0, so that:

Deneubourg [83] studied the condition under which a diffusive instability could occur. He performed a classical linear stability analysis [247], studying how a small
perturbation of the form eMtelkx on top of the homogeneous stationary state could
evolve into a spatially heterogeneous stationary state. The condition for the growth
of perturbations is Re(uj) > 0, which is usually satisfied for some values of the
spatial wavenumber k within a certain range of the parameters governing the nonlinear terms of the equations. The dispersion relation uj(k) depends on the values
of the parameters. For values of k such that Re(w(k)) > 0, a perturbation of that
particular wavelength can grow in principle, but generally, the diffusive instability
will have the wavenumber k for which Re(uj(k)), is maximal (since the instability
grows faster at this wavenumber). The relevant parameter here is the chemotactic

190

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 5.5 Spatial distribution of P for a 2D system (180 x 180) and ki = k2 = fc4 =
0.8888, DC = 0.01, DH = 0.000625, $ = 3, 7 = 0.004629, t = 100. The distribution of
pillars is only statistically regular, because of the random initial distribution of P. The
initially fastest-growing modes do not necessarily continue to be dominant after some time,
as structures can emerge locally and modify the physics of the system.

parameter 7. Deneubourg [83] has shown that a value

of 7 exists, such that no perturbation can grow for 7 < 7C. For 7 = 7C, there exists
a wavenumber kc = ( k i k ^ / D c D f f ) 1 ^ 4 for which w(k} =• 0, by means of numerical
integration, whereas u(k) < 0 for any other k: a perturbation with k = kc at 7 = -yc
is marginal. Deneubourg [83] has studied the dynamics of a one-dimensional system
with a value of 7 close to the marginal state, and found that the system converges to
a spatially periodic state. The same observation is true for a two-dimensional system
(Figure 5.5). Finally, let us briefly remark that the condition 7 > 7C for the existence
/

-1

JC\

1 I i~)\

of coherent structures can be expressed as <I> > l(k^Dc)
+ (fci-D/f)
j /7,
which is a condition of minimal flux given 7: this corresponds to the empirical
observation that a minimal number of individuals is required to produce a pattern
of pillars [158].
Let us now assume that there is a self-maintained pheromonal template because
of the queen. Let T(x,y) be the amount of queen pheromone at location ( x , y ) in

Chapter 5

191

FIGURE 5.6 Simulated pheromonal template created by the queen. T ( x , y ) =
exp(-[((x-a;o)/A x ) 2 + ((7/- 2 /o)/A !/ ) 2 ]) 1 Ax = 7, \y = 5, x0 = yo = 30, F ( x , y ) = l-T(x,y)
where T(x,y) = exp(-[((x - zo)/A*) 2 + ((y - y0)/\yT})-

the two-dimensional arena. Let us assume that the "geometric center" of the queen
is located at (x0,y0), and that the shape of the queen is roughly elliptic with the
principal axis along the x-direction, so that the pheromone template she creates by
emitting pheromone is given by
where Ax and Xy are characteristic distances for the decay of the pheromonal pattern, that can be assumed to be proportional to the size of the queen in the x and
y directions. The same chemotactic term as the one used to describe the attractive
effect of cement pheromone can be used here, so that the full equation reads:
where v is the force of attraction of the queen's pheromonal template. Bruinsma [48]
has shown that a mechanism inhibits the deposit of pellets when the concentration
of pheromone exceeds some threshold.
An inhibition function F(x, y) = l—T(x, y} prevents depositions from occurring
when pheromone intensity is too large: this is precisely the definition of a template,
which organizes the building activity at a constant distance from the queen. The
template mechanism can be included by modifying Eqs. (5.2) and (5.3) as follows:

192

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 5.7 Spatial distribution of P at t = 100 for a 2D system and k\ = fcz = £4 =
0.8888, DC = 0.01, DH = 0.000625, $ = 3, 7 = 0.004629, added chemotactic motion
toward the pheromonal template represented in Figure 5.6, with v = 0.02. A chamber
forms around the simulated template.

Since 0 < T(x,y) < 1, F(x,y) = l-T(x,y) also satisfies 0 < F(x,y) = l-T(x,y)
where T(x,y) — exp(-[((x-x0)/\x)2 + ((y — y 0 ) / X y ) 2 } ) . Bruinsma's [48] description
of this phenomenon is slightly more complicated than was assumed here: workers are
indeed first attracted toward the queen, and then, after some time, move away from
the queen until they deposit a pellet. In the model, it was assumed that individuals
do not exhibit this "double motion," first toward the queen and then away from
the queen. But, as a first approximation, the model describes a similar dynamics,
since individuals move toward the queen and deposit their pellet as soon as they
find a site to deposit a pellet. Figure 5.7 shows that a chamber can form around
the queen following the pheromonal template. Let us also mention that the force
of attraction v of the queen pheromone plays the role of a bifurcation parameter:
chamber "walls" can appear along the trail only if v > vc.
In addition to generating walls around the queen as illustrated by Figure 5.7,
this model can also explain the two observations that could not be accounted for by
the template alone: the formation of pillars and the snowball effect in deposition
behavior [48]. The formation of pillars is a property of the model when certain
conditions are met (such as 7 > 7C and v > vc). The snowball effect results from the
fact that pellet deposits stimulate even more pellet deposits because of the cement

Chapter 5

193

pheromone. To make the model more realistic, tactile stimuli and trail pheromone
should also be taken into account.
From this example, we see that the combination of self-organization and a
template exhibits the properties of self-organization, such as the snowball effect,
and at the same time produces a perfectly predictable pattern, the royal chamber
which is formed by walls built following the queen's pheromonal template.

5.4

WALL BUILDING IN LEPTOTHORAX

albipennis

Another example of a template, possibly in combination with self-organization, is
the construction of nest walls by the ant Leptothomx albipennis (formerly tuberointerruptus) [131,132]. These ants construct simple perimeter walls in a two-dimensional
nest (Figure 5.8). The walls, consisting of aggregated grains of sand (or fragments
of stone, or particles of earth), are constructed at a given distance from the tight
cluster of ants and brood, which serves as a chemical or physical template. The exact nature of this template remains unknown. Here again, the template mechanism
allows the size of the nest to be regulated as a function of colony size, including
both workers and brood. Each worker always has about 5 mm2 of floor area in the
nest [131]. But, as was the case with the construction of the termites' royal chamber, there may be an additional stigmergic self-organizing mechanism on top of the
template: grains attract grains (in the same way that corpses attract corpses in the
formation of cemeteries), so that deposition behavior is influenced by two factors,
the local density of grains and the distance from the cluster of ants and brood. The
probability of depositing a brick is highest when both the distance from the cluster
is appropriate and the local density of bricks is large; it is lowest when the cluster
is either too close or too far and when the local density of bricks is small. When
the distance from the cluster does not lie within the appropriate range, deposition
can nevertheless be observed if bricks are present; conversely, if the distance from
the cluster is appropriate, deposition can take place even if the number of bricks is
small.
This process can easily be simulated on a grid with the same ingredients as
in the simulation of cemetery formation (section 4.3.1), that is, probabilities of
picking up and depositing grains, combined with a template that represents the
worker-queen-brood cluster's template. The probability of depositing a grain is
given by pdPt, where pa depends only on the perceived number of grains and pt
accounts for the effect of the template represented in Figure 5.9. The template
function pt exhibits a maximum at some distance from the center of the cluster,
which is assumed to be circular. Grain deposits are most likely to happen when
both pd and pt are close to 1. Similarly, the probability of picking up a grain is
defined by pd(l ~~ pt), where pp depends only on the perceived number of grains.
Grains are more likely to be removed from outside the template. pp and pd are given
by Eqs. (4.1) and (4.2), respectively, where / is the perceived fraction of grains in
the agent's neighborhood. Figures 5.10(a), 5.10(b). and 5.10(c) show the result of

194

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 5.8 Leptothorax albipennis (formerly tuberointerruptus) nest in the laboratory.
The ants have been given a 0.8 mm deep cavity between 80 x 80 mm glass plates. They
have built a dense wall from sieved sand. The worker ants, each approximately 2.5 mm in
length, are densely clustered around the central queen, the largest individual present, and
the white brood. © Nigel R. Franks, printed with permission.

FIGURE 5.9 Template used for the simulation. The template represents the effects of the
cluster in which the queen, the brood, and most of the workers are aggregated.

Chapter 5

195

such a simulation at three different stages: t = 50, t = 1,000, and t = 10,000 time
steps; the four heaps at the four corners represent four reservoirs of grains. We see
that walls are progressively built along the template.
This double mechanism (template + self-organization) may be sufficient to
explain the hysteretic2 phenomenon observed by Franks and Deneubourg [132]. In
experiments in which approximately half of the adult ants in each nest were removed
and later reunited after the building was completed by the first half of the colony,
there was no increase in nest size following reunification. When three-quarters of
the adult ants were removed and returned after the building was completed by the
remaining quarter, nest size increased in three of the four experiments, and actually
decreased slightly in one experiment.
Franks and Deneubourg [132] propose a mechanism that combines selforganization and template to explain these observations. Their model is based on
grain picking up and dropping behavior, both of which are assumed to be under
the control of both amplifying effects and the influence of the template provided by
the cluster of brood and workers in the new nest site. An unladen ant (the density
of which is denoted by U) meets a grain (the density of which is denoted by S)
and can pick it up and become a laden ant (the density of which is denoted by L).
The rate of transformation of U into L when meeting S at location r is given by
P(r)US, where P(r) represents the influence of the template. P(r) is close to 1 in
regions from which grains should be removed and close to 0 where grains should be
deposited. Laden ants drop their grains at a rate D(r)L(l - S/K), where K is the
"carrying" capacity per unit area, that is, the maximum number of grains that can
be found per unit area. Here again, D(r) represents the direct influence of the template: it should be close to 1 at an appropriate distance from the cluster of brood
and workers to stimulate grain deposits, and should be close to 0 otherwise. The
number of grains present in a laden ant's perception area influences its probability
of depositing or picking up grains. The dropping rate is assumed to be transformed
into D(r)G(S)L(l-S/K), where G(S) = (gi +928) is a linearly increasing function
of the number of grains. g\ and g^ are, respectively, parameters that characterize
spontaneous grain dropping and dropping next to another grain. The picking-up
rate is assumed to be transformed into P(r)F(S)SU, where F(S) = (g\ + giS)~l
is a decreasing function of the number of grains, gi and g2 are assumed to be the
same for both G and F, so as to reduce the number of parameters. The resulting
dynamics of the population of grains in a given small area, neglecting loading and
unloading times, is given by:

2

Hysteresis occurs when the properties of a system depend not only on the system's state,
but also on its history. Another name for hysteresis is path-dependence. Here, the size of the nest
cannot be inferred from the sole knowledge of colony size, but requires knowledge of how the
colony has been formed.

196

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 5.10 (a) Simulation of wall building with 10 agents at t = 50, T = 50, k\ = 0.1,
fc2 = 0.3, 10 agents, (b) Same as (a) at t = 1,000. (c) Same as (a) at t = 10,000.

Chapter 5

197

In the stationary regime, characterized by dtS = 0, it is found that

where

This formulation allows the system to be analyzed. 77 is a measure of the tendency of the ants to build in a particular area. If D and L are large, 77 is large, and
if P and U are large, 77 is small. The influence of the template, reflected in D and
P, is easy to analyze. But what determines the respective numbers of laden and
unladen ants?
As experiments show, unladen ants are essentially ants that move outward from
inside the nest. If the wall perimeter is small and the number of workers inside is
large, U is large, leading to a small value of 77. If, for the same population, the wall
is built further away, U is smaller and 77 is larger. In short, the higher the density of
individuals inside the nest, the further away the wall is built because grain deposits
are prevented when population density is large. Franks and Deneubourg [132] provide estimates for most of the parameters: L/U < 0.1 in the zone of active building,
with U « 2 cm~ 2 , g\ w 25g2, 9i « 10~2s"1, and P sa 10~4s (in the building zone).
They find that the model exhibits multistationarity as a function of gi/g?, when the
stationary value of 5 is expressed as a function of 77 (because population dynamics
occurs on a faster time scale than grain dynamics, it can be assumed that 5 reaches
its stationary value within a time where 77 remains constant).
1. When gi/g-2 > Q.125K, the solution of 5 is unique, and S grows with 77
(Figures 5.11(a) and 5.11(c)).
2. When gi/gz < 0.125K, several solutions can be reached for 77 > »?c(51/^2),
depending on the history of the system (Figure 5.11(b)). This phenomenon is
called hysteresis.
77 is directly related to local building activity and colony characteristics: for a
given zone initially located far from the center of the nest, 77 is small, but grows as
population increases and may eventually decrease when the population becomes so
large that walls should be built beyond this zone.
Let us consider 77 as a function of population size only: 77 = 77(71), where n is
the size of the population. If one assumes that g\/g<2 < 0.125K, which, according
to Franks and Deneubourg [132], is indeed the case, 5 may lie on a given branch
of solutions when a fraction of the workers is removed and may or may not jump
to another branch of solutions when the missing individuals are returned. The
perturbation associated with multiplying the population by 2 (when 50% of the
colony is removed and returned) may not be sufficient to induce nest increase,
whereas the perturbation associated with multiplying the population by 4 (when

198

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 5.11 (a) Behavior of Eqs. (5.11) and (5.12): S is shown as a function of r\. S
is the number of grains and 77 is a measure of the tendency of the ants to build in a
particular area. Here, g\ = 0.75, #2 = 0.01, K = 400. The relationship between S and 77 is
simply sigmoidal: the system does not have multiple stationary states. After Pranks and
Deneubourg [132]. (b) The same as in Figure 5.11(a), with gi = 0.1, gi = 0.01, K = 400.
The relationship between S and 77 is a classic hysteresis curve: the system has multiple
stationary states. After Franks and Deneubourg [132]. (c) The temporal dynamics of grain
dropping in the zone for the set of parameters corresponding to Figure 5.11(a). g\ = 0.75,
gi = 0.01, K = 400, D = 0.4, P = 0.0002, L = 0.2, [7 = 2. Initial condition 5 = 0. After
Franks and Deneubourg [132]. Reprinted by permission @ Academic Press.

75% of the population is removed and returned) may be sufficient to induce an
increase of the nest, but not necessarily, depending on the history of the system. In
the experiment where 75% of the adult population was removed and then returned
without an increase in nest size, Franks and Deneubourg [132] observed that the
nest built by the remaining 25% of the population was unusually large, which may
explain why the nest was not enlarged after reunification. This model may therefore
explain the empirical observations.
In this example, again, the combination of self-organization and template exhibits the properties of self-organization, such as hysteresis, and at the same time
produces a perfectly predictable pattern—the nest walls constructed at a given
distance from the cluster of ants.

Chapter 5

199

5.5 APPLICATIONS
The idea that template mechanisms can be combined with self-organizing mechanisms, or that a system can self-organize along a template, has applications in the
context of the data analysis and graph partitioning models of the previous chapter. These models were intrinsically nonparametric (with respect to the number of
emerging classes of objects in the case of data analysis, and with respect to the
number of emerging clusters in the case of graph partitioning). Being nonparametric can be a great strength on some occasions, but can be problematic in others. For
example, in the customer profile application sketched in section 4.4 (Figure 4.9),
the bank might want to divide its customers into a predefined number of categories.
In electronic circuit design, using a graph partitioning method requires the ability
to control the number of clusters that will be formed. Each cluster corresponds to
a particular region on a chip, and the goal is to distribute elements among these regions to minimize connections between regions and balance the number of elements
per region. The number of regions is known in advance.
Combining the underlying self-organizing mechanisms of the algorithms described in section 4.3 with templates is an elegant, and biologically inspired, way
of restoring parametricity: for example, it is possible to impose that all items be
deposited in some particular regions of space, and objects that are deposited within
a given region are considered to belong to the same class or cluster. In this way, the
desired number of classes or clusters can be predefined. In order to define a template, we have to introduce a "template" probability Pt(x,y), where ( x , y ) are the
planar coordinates of the agent. If we assume for simplicity that projection space
or clustering space is restricted to [0,1] x [0,1], and we wish to have four separated
dropping zones, Pt(x,y) can simply be defined by, for example:

where <r2 determines the steepness of the template, and a and b are parameters that
have to be adjusted to cr2 so that 0 < Pt(x,y) < 1. Figure 5.12 shows the template
given by Eq. (5.13). The four corners of the square are the zones where dropping
behavior is favored.
The template probability Pt(x, y) can now be used in combination with the two
algorithmic applications of the previous chapter, namely data analysis and graph
representation and partitioning.
5.5.1

DATA ANALYSIS

Modifying the LF algorithm to include a template is straightforward. Let (r» =
(xi,yi) be the location of item 04. The two Eqs. (4.5) and (4.6) of section 4.4 are
transformed into:

200

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 5.12

Template function PT(x,y)(a = 1.9,6= 0.5, <r2 = 0.1).

FIGURE 5.13 Distribution of items at t = 500,000 obtained with the LF algorithm
supplemented with the template probability represented in Figure 5.12. The simulation
parameters are identical to those of Figure 4.6.

Chapters

201

so that picking-up behavior is favored where Pjfo) is close to 1, and dropping behavior is favored where Pt(ri) is close to 0. This procedure can be tested with the
same simple example as in section 4.4. Four clusters of 100 points each are generated in attribute space, with x and y distributed according to normal distributions
N(n,a): [x ex JV(0,2), y oc N(0,2)}, [x oc JV(0,2), y oc N(8,2)}, [x cc N(8,2),
y oc N(0, 2)], [x oc AT(8,2), y oc N(8,2)} (Figure 4.5). The data points were then
assigned random locations on a 100 x 100 lattice, with 1 lattice unit = 0.1, and
the clustering algorithm was run with 10 ants. Figure 5.13 shows the system at
t = 500,000. The items distribute themselves in the grid according to both the
dissimilarity measure and the template.
5.5.2

GRAPH PARTITIONING

Several graph partitioning problems exist. One problem of particular interest is
when one has to partition the graph into c clusters of (approximately) equal size
while minimizing the number of intercluster connections. This problem is NPcomplete. Adding a template mechanism to the KLS algorithm solves this particular
problem. Inclusion of the template is straightforward. Equations (4.12) and (4.13)
in section 4.5 are transformed into:

where Wi is the location on the plane of vertex Uj. The template function given
by Eq. (5.13) allows us to solve the problem of partitioning the graph into four
clusters. Figure 5.14(a) shows the resulting distribution of vertices on the plane for
a random graph of the type F(25,4,0.8,0.01) (see section 4.5 for detail). We observe
exactly four well-segregated clusters of vertices that correspond to the four clusters
of the graph. This spatial distribution reflects on the plot of \\Wi -Wj\\ vs. d(vi,Vj)
(Figure 5.14(b)). Of course, this instance is particularly adapted to the template,
since the graph contains four clusters (the same number as there are regions in the
template) with the same number of vertices. Frustration may be observed when
there are more clusters in the graph than regions in the template or vice versa. As
regards the number of vertices in each region, it can be controlled with the help of an
additional regulating mechanism that inhibits picking up (respectively, dropping)
in regions which do not contain enough (respectively, contain too many) vertices.
This "load-balancing" mechanism allows an equal repartition of the vertices into
the regions. For example, in the absence of load balancing, if the template contains
four clusters and the graph contains only three clusters, one might observe the
result shown in Figure 5.15, where one corner of the template is not filled.

202

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 5.14 (a) The algorithm has isolated the four clearly separated clusters of the
graph. Vertices distribute themselves in space, following the template function, ki — 0.03,
ki — 0.1, a2 = 9, T = 2.106 6 steps, (b) \\Wi — Wj\\ vs. d(vt,Vj) for the graph representation
of Figure 5.14(a).

Chapter 5

203

FIGURE 5.15 Result obtained with a template that has four corners (represented in
Figure 5.14) for a graph F(33,3, 0.8, 0.01) that has only three clusters. Vertices distribute
themselves in space, only partially following the template function: three clusters can be
clearly observed, ki = 0.03, fe = 0.1, s2 = 9, T = 2.106 steps.

5.6

POINTS TO REMEMBER

• A template is a pattern used by insects to organize their activities. Building following a template is typical. The construction of the royal chamber in Macrotermes termites consists of depositing soil pellets at a certain distance from the
queen, following a chemical template emitted by the queen. Wall building in Leptothorax ants consists of depositing grains of sand at a certain distance from the
central cluster that contains the workers, the queen, and the brood, following the
contour of the cluster.
• In these two examples, the deposition of items following the template is selforganized: pellets attract pellets, and grains attract grains, leading to snowball
effect and multistability.
• The combination of self-organization and template is useful to transform the nonparametric data analysis and graph partitioning algorithms presented in chapter
4 into parametric algorithms. The number of clusters, as well as the locations of
these clusters, can be prespecified by constructing a template function characterized by as many regions as desired clusters.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 6

Nest Building and Self-Assembling

6.1

OVERVIEW

Social insect nest architectures can be complex, intricate structures. Stigmergy (see
section 1.2.3), that is, the coordination of activities through the environment, is
an important mechanism underlying nest construction in social insects. Two types
of stigmergy are distinguished: quantitative, or continuous stigmergy, in which the
different stimuli that trigger behavior are quantitatively different; and qualitative,
or discrete stigmergy, in which stimuli can be classified into different classes that
differ qualitatively. If quantitative stigmergy can explain the emergence of pillars
in termites, the building behavior of the paper wasps Polistes dominulus seems to
be better described by qualitative stigmergy.
In this chapter, a simple agent-based model inspired by discrete stigmergy is
introduced. In the model, agents move in a three-dimensional grid and drop elementary building blocks depending on the configuration of blocks in their neighborhood.
Prom the viewpoint of bricks, this model is a model of self-assembly. The model
generates a large proportion of random or space-filling forms, but some patterns
appear to be structured. Some of the patterns even look like wasp nests.
The properties of the structured shapes obtained with the model, and of the
algorithms that generate them, are reviewed. Based on these properties, a fitness
function is constructed so that structured architectures have a large fitness and

205

206

Swarm Intelligence

unstructured patterns a small fitness. A genetic algorithm based on the fitness
function is used to explore the space of architectures.
Several examples of self-assembling systems in robotics, engineering, and architecture are described. Self-assembling or self-reconfigurable robotic systems, although they are not directly inspired by nest construction in social insects, could
benefit from the discrete-stigmergy model of nest building. The method of evolutionary design, that is, the creation of new designs by computers using evolutionary
algorithms, is a promising way of exploring the patterns that self-assembling models
can produce.

6.2

NEST BUILDING IN SOCIAL INSECTS

Many animals can produce very complex architectures that fulfill numerous functional and adaptive requirements (protection from predators, substrate of social life
and reproductive activities, thermal regulation, etc.). Among them, social insects
are capable of generating amazingly complex functional patterns in space and time,
although they have limited individual abilities and their behavior exhibits some degree of randomness (see examples in Wilson [328] and Hansell [165]). Among all
activities performed by social insects, nest building is undoubtedly the most spectacular, as it demonstrates the greatest difference between individual and collective
levels. Figures 1.5, 1.6, and 1.7 in chapter 1 show some examples of nest architectures built by several wasp and termite species. One question that arises is: how
can insects in a colony coordinate their behavior in order to build these highly
complex architectures?
There is no evidence that the behavior of an individual in a social species is
more sophisticated than that of an individual in a solitary species. Yet, the difference between nests produced by solitary and social species can be enormous. The
first hypotheses put forward to explain complex nest building in social insects were
anthropomorphic: individual insects were assumed to possess a representation of
the global structure to be produced and to make decisions on the basis of that representation. Nest complexity would then result from the complexity of the insects'
behavior.
Insect societies, however, are organized in a way that departs radically from the
anthropomorphic model in which there is a direct causal relationship between nest
complexity and behavioral complexity. Recent work suggests that a social insect
colony is a decentralized system composed of cooperative, autonomous units that
are distributed in the environment, exhibit simple probabilistic stimulus-response
behavior, and have access to local information [85, 31]. Insects are equipped with a
sensory-motor system (including chemoreceptors, mechanoreceptors, thermoreceptors, hygroreceptors, etc.) that enables them to respond to stimuli which are either
emitted by their nestmates or originate from the environment. Although such signals are not equivalent to signs which could have symbolic value—these signals are
simply attractive or repulsive, activating or inhibiting—they affect behavior in a

Chapter 6

207

way that depends on their intensity and on the context in which they are released.
Nest complexity may therefore result from the variety of stimuli that surround insects in a social context, as stimuli include not only environmental cues but also
interactions among nestmates. The set of stimuli need not be stationary: for example, as a colony grows, starting from a single unhelped foundress, more and more
stimuli are likely to appear because of the emergence of new individuals, thereby
forming a richer and richer stimulatory environment for the insects. When applied
to nest construction, this idea is very attractive: the stimuli that initially trigger
building behavior may be quite simple and limited in number, but as construction
proceeds, these stimuli become more complex and more numerous, thereby inducing
new types of behavior. Construction can best be seen as a morphogenetic process
during which past construction sets the stage for new building actions. This principle can be coupled with the above-mentioned demographic effects: as the nest
gets bigger, the greater the variety of signals and cues it is likely to encompass (the
probability of finding heterogeneities also increases when the colony expands its
territory). This may explain, for example, why the most populous termite societies
have the most complex nests [158].
We have seen in the last chapter that templates are widely used by social insects to organize and coordinate their building activities: a "blueprint" of the nest
"already exists" in the environment in the form of physical or chemical heterogeneities. More complex types of templates may also exist: those heterogeneities
that result from the colony's activities and that, in turn, influence the colony's future activities. Indeed, a single action by an insect results in a small modification
of the environment that influences the actions of other insects: this form of indirect communication through the environment is an important aspect of collective
coordination and has been coined "stigmergy" by Grasse [157]. Briefly described
in chapter 1 (section 1.2.3), stigmergy has been present, explicitly or implicitly, in
every chapter.
Stigmergy offers an elegant and stimulating framework for understanding the
coordination and regulation of building activities. The main issue is to determine
how stimuli are organized in space and time to result in a robust and coherent
construction—for example, colonies of a given species build qualitatively similar
architectural patterns. Stigmergy is basically just a mechanism that mediates or
implements worker-worker interactions; therefore, it has to be supplemented with a
mechanism that makes use of these interactions to coordinate and regulate collective
building. Recent investigations indicate that at least two such mechanisms play a
role in the building activities of social insects: self-organization (SO) [85, 31] and
discrete stigmergy [310, 311].
6.2.1

STIGMERGY AND SELF-ORGANIZATION

Deneubourg [83] has shown that SO, combined with stigmergy, can explain the
construction of pillars in the termites studied by Grasse [157]. Deneubourg's [83]
chemotaxis-based model was described in the previous chapter (sections 5.2 and

208

Swarm Intelligence

5.3). The pillar construction example was also used to illustrate bifurcation in a selforganizing system in section 1.2.2 and stigmergy in section 1.2.3. In section 1.2.2,
we learned that one of the main ingredients of SO is multiple interactions. Such
interactions can be direct or indirect: stigmergy covers all indirect interactions
through the environment. In the example of the emergence of pillars, stigmergy
is merely an ingredient of SO. SO is made possible by the fact that the intensity
of the stigmergic interactions among termites can take on a continuous spectrum
of values: the more intense the interactions (that is, the higher the pheromone
concentration), the more likely the self-organizing effect (or the snowball effect)
is to engage. Because coordination is facilitated by quantitative variations in the
intensity of the interactions, the combination of stigmergy and self-organization is
also called quantitative stigmergy.

6.2.2

DISCRETE STIGMERGY

6.2.2.1 Introduction Qualitative or discrete stigmergy differs from quantitative stigmergy in that individuals interact through, and respond to, qualitative or discrete stimuli: when termites build pillars they respond to quantitative stimuli—
pheromone fields and gradients. Discrete stigmergy in insects is based on a discrete
set of stimulus types: for example, an insect responds to a type-1 stimulus with
action A and responds to a type-2 stimulus with action B. In other words, qualitatively different stimuli result in different responses. It is easy to see how such a
mechanism is still compatible with stigmergic interactions: for example, a type-1
stimulus triggers action A by individual /i; action A transforms the type-1 stimulus
into a type-2 stimulus that triggers action B by individual /2- It is more difficult,
however, to see how coordination and regulation can be achieved with discrete
stigmergy than with SO: because stimuli are qualitatively different, no positive
feedback effect can amplify a stimulus to transform it into a more intense version of
the same stimulus. A stimulus is transformed into another, qualitatively different,
stimulus under the action of an insect. Also, in principle, there is no such thing
as the intensity of a stimulus: all stimuli are equally likely to elicit a behavioral
response. Building in social wasps seems to provide an example of qualitative stigmergy (Fig. 6.1). In reality both types of stigmergy can, and are likely to, coexist
if, for example, stimuli have a variable intensity within a given stimulus type.
Imagine that each individual is carrying a building element of a certain type,
such as a soil pellet or a load of wood pulp, and deposits this element only when
specific "qualitative" conditions are met, for example, when that individual is
surrounded by three walls: the building element will be added to the individual's current location under these conditions. Therefore, from the viewpoint of
the building element, a form of self-assembly, mediated by the individual, is taking place: building elements self-assemble whenever appropriate. Theraulaz and
Bonabeau [310, 311] and Bonabeau et al. [26] have introduced a model of selfassembly, inspired by the building behavior of wasps (see also Karsai and Pen-

Chapters

209

FIGURE 6.1 The equivalent of Figure 1.13 for wasps: local configurations of cells around
the nest are modified each time a new cell is added by a wasp. Only a small number of
these configurations trigger the addition of a new cell.

zes [194]), that illuminates how coordination may emerge. This model is described
in the next subsection.
6.2.2.2 Construction in social wasps Social wasps have the ability to build nests
that range from very simple to highly organized. Nests are made of plant fibers
that are chewed and cemented together with oral secretion. The resulting carton
is then shaped by the wasps to build the various parts of the nest (pedicel, combs
of cells, or external envelope). Wenzel [324] has classified wasp nest architectures
and found more than 60 different types, with many intermediates between extreme
forms. A mature nest can have from a few cells up to a million cells packed in
stacked combs, the latter generally being built by highly social species. Modularity
is another widespread feature of nest architectures: a basic structure is repeated.
Previous studies showed that individual building algorithms consist of a series
of if-then decision loops [89, 114, 115]. The first act usually consists, with only a few
exceptions, of attaching the future nest to a substrate with a stalk-like pedicel of

210

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.2 The first steps of nest building in a Polistes dommulus (Christ) wasp society:
the three pictures show the initiation of the nest, with the construction of a pedicel (6.2(a)),
of the first cell (6.2(b)), and of a few subsequent cells (6.2(c)). Papers of different colors are
offered to the wasps at regular intervals to track the building dynamics. After Theraulaz
and Bonabeau [311]. Reprinted by permission © Academic Press.

wood pulp [324] (Figure 6.2). Then, wasps initiate the nest by building two cells on
either side of a flat extension of the pedicel. Subsequent cells are added to the outer
circumference of the combs between two previously constructed cells. As more cells
are added to the evolving structure, they eventually form closely packed parallel
rows of cells and the nest generally has radial or bilateral symmetry around these
initial cells. A wasp tends to finish a row of cells before initiating a new row, and
rows are initiated by the construction of a centrally located first cell.
The number of potential sites where a new cell can be added increases significantly as construction proceeds: several building actions can, in principle, be

Chapter 6

211

FIGURE 6.3 (a) Number of cells of different types as a function of time in a paper wasp
nest (Polistes dominulus). (b) Development of nest structure and dynamics of the local
building configurations, (c) Differential probability to add a new cell to a corner area where
three adjacent walls are present and on the side of an existing row where two adjacent
walls are present.

212

Swarm Intelligence

made in parallel—and this is certainly an important step in the emergence of complex architectures in the course of evolution. Parallelism, however, could deorganize
the building process by introducing the possibility of conflicting actions being performed simultaneously. But the architecture seems to provide enough constraints to
canalize the building activity. It can be seen, with a careful study of the dynamics
of local configurations of cells during nest development (Figure 6.3(a)) in the primitively eusocial wasp Polistes dominulus, that there are not equal numbers of sites
with one, two, or three adjacent walls. The great majority of them is composed of
sites with two adjacent walls (Figure 6.3(b)). Cells are not added randomly to the
existing structure: wasps have a greater probability to add new cells to a corner
area where three adjacent walls are present, than to initiate a new row by adding
a cell on the side of an existing row (Figure 6.3(c)). Therefore, obviously, wasps
are influenced by previous construction, and building decisions seem to be made
locally on the basis of perceived configurations in a way that possibly constrains
the building dynamics.

6.3

MODEL OF SELF-ASSEMBLY

6.3.1

MODEL

In order to explore the potential of discrete stigmergy, Theraulaz and Bonabeau [310,
311] introduced an ensemble of algorithms that could hardly be made simpler:
asynchronous automata that move in a three-dimensional discrete space and behave locally in space and time on a pure stimulus-response basis. The deposit of
an elementary building block (hereafter called a brick) by an agent depends solely
on the local configuration of bricks in the cells surrounding the cell occupied by
the agent. When a stimulating configuration is encountered, the agent deposits a
brick with probability one (brick deposits are deterministic). Figure 6.4 shows a
schematic representation of the surrounding cells that an agent can perceive in a
cubic lattice. Two types of bricks can be deposited. No brick can be removed once
it has been deposited. All simulations start with a single brick: in the absence of
this initial brick in the environment, one rule would have to allow the spontaneous
deposit of bricks when no other brick is present, but such a rule would result in
random brick deposits that would fill space. We call microrule the association of
a stimulating configuration with a brick to be deposited, and we call algorithm
any collection of compatible microrules. Two microrules are not compatible if they
correspond to the same stimulating configuration but result in the deposition of
different bricks. An algorithm can therefore be characterized by its microrule table,
a lookup table comprising all its microrules, that is, all stimulating configurations
and associated actions. See Algorithm 6.1.
A single agent in this model is capable of completing an architecture. In that
respect, building is a matter of purely individual behavior. But the individual building behavior, determined by the local configurations that trigger building actions,
has to be organized in such a way that a group of agents can produce the same

Chapters

213

FIGURE 6.4 Schematic representation of the perception range of an agent in a cubic
lattice. After Theraulaz and Bonabeau [311]. Reprinted by permission © Academic Press.

Algorithm 6.3 High-level description of the construction algorithm
/* Initialization */
Construct lookup table /* identical for all agents */
Put one initial brick at predefined site /* top of grid */
For k = 1 to m do
assign agent k a random unoccupied site /* distribute the m agents */
End For
/* Main loop */
For i = 1 to imax do
For k = I to m do
Sense local configuration
If (local configuration is in lookup table) then
Deposit brick specified by lookup table
Draw new brick
Else
Do not deposit brick
End If
Move to randomly selected, unoccupied, neighboring site
End For
End For
/* Values of parameters used in simulations */
TO = 10

architecture as well. Some natural wasp species face the same problem, since nest
construction is generally first achieved by one female, the founder, and is then taken
over by a group of newly-born workers. The group of agents has to be able to build
the architecture without the combined actions of the different agents interfering
and possibly destroying the whole activity of the swarm. In other words, individual
activities have to be coordinated to ensure coherent construction.
The model can also be considered a generalization of diffusion-limited aggregation (DLA) and other growth models. In DLA, a randomly moving brick sticks
to a cluster as soon as the cluster is encountered. DLA is a specific case of the
model, where more complicated microrules can be implemented. DLA, however, is

214

Swarm Intelligence

not efficiently coded in the present model: 63 x 2 20 (« 66.1 x 106) microrules are
required to code DLA in three dimensions, and 240 microrules in two dimensions.
This shows that very simple physical laws may be very hard to implement in the
model, unless some kind of alternative coding is adopted, such as don't-care-cells,
that is, cells whose state does not alter the decision to deposit a brick, that is, a
brick is deposited or not deposited, irrespective of the state of don't-care-cells: if
such a procedure is used, the coding of DLA requires only 6 microrules in three
dimensions and 4 microrules in two dimensions. Conversely, it also indicates that
some architectures which appear to require numerous microrules may be simply
and more compactly expressed in terms of meaningful physical laws.
6.3.2

SIMULATIONS

A random exploration of the space of the algorithms defined by the model of section 6.3.1 yields no interesting result but only random or space-filling shapes. However, it is possible to produce complex shapes, some of them strikingly similar to
those observed in nature, with algorithms belonging to this simple family [26], by
working backward from some shapes to be generated to their corresponding algorithms. Theraulaz and Bonabeau [310, 311] found a posteriori that structured
shapes can be built only with special algorithms, coordinated algorithms, characterized by emergent coordination: stimulating configurations corresponding to
different building stages must not overlap, thereby avoiding the deorganization of
the building activity. This feature creates implicit handshakes and interlocks at every stage, that is, constraints upon which structures can develop consistently. This
coordination is essential, since parallelism, that has a clear adaptive advantage by
allowing a real colony to build at several locations at the same time, introduces the
possibility of conflicts. This approach (which is described at length in Bonabeau
et al. [26] and Theraulaz and Bonabeau [310, 311]), therefore shows how the nest
itself can provide the constraints that canalize a stigmergic building behavior into
producing specific shapes.
In Figure 6.5, all architectures, except 6.5(g) and 6.5(h), have been obtained
with coordinated algorithms. The difference between (6.5(g), 6.5(h)) and all other
architectures is striking, though hard to formalize. One given coordinated algorithm
always converges toward architectures that possess similar features. On the other
hand, algorithms that produce unstructured patterns may sometimes diverge: the
same algorithm leads to different global architectures in different simulations. As an
illustration of this fact, architectures 6.5(d) and 6.5(e) result from two different simulations using the same coordinated algorithm, and architectures 6.5(g) and 6.5(h)
result from two different simulations of the same noncoordinated algorithm. We see
that there is a high degree of structural similarity between 6.5(e) and 6.5(d), in
sharp contrast with 6.5(g) and 6.5(h). This tendency of noncoordinated algorithms
to diverge results from the fact that stimulating configurations are not organized in
time and space and many of them overlap, so that the architecture grows in space
without any coherence. It is not true, however, that every unstructured architec-

215

Chapter 6

FIGURE 6.5

Caption on next page.

216

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.5 Simulations of collective building on a 3D cubic lattice. Simulations were
made on a 20 x 20 x 20 lattice with 10 wasps. For those architectures which are reminiscent of natural wasp nests, we give the name of the genera exhibiting a similar design.
After Theraulaz and Bonabeau [311]. Reprinted by permission © Academic Press, (a)
Nest-like architecture (Parapolybia) obtained after 20,000 steps, (b) Nest-like architecture
(Parachartergus) obtained after 20,000 steps, (c) Achitecture obtained after 20,000 steps,
(d) Nest-like architecture (Stelopolybia) obtained after 20,000 steps, (e) Nest-like architecture (Stelopolybia) obtained after 20,000 steps, (f) Nest-like architecture (Stelopolybia)
obtained after 20,000 steps, (g) Architecture obtained after 15,000 steps using a noncoordinated algorithm, (h) Architecture obtained after 15,000 steps using the same noncoordinated algorithm as in Figure 6.5.g. (i) Nest-like architecture (Vespa) obtained after 20,000
steps, (j) Architecture obtained after 80,000 steps, (k) Nest-like architecture (Chatergus)
obtained after 185,000 steps. (1) Architecture obtained after 125,000 steps, (m) Architecture obtained after 85,000 steps, (n) Nest-like architecture (Chatergus) obtained after
100,000 steps.

ture is generated with a nonconvergent algorithm: some of them can be produced
consistently in all simulations. Moreover, even in shapes built with coordinated algorithms, there may be some degree of variation, which is higher in cases where the
number of different choices within one given building state is large. For example,
we see that 6.5(d) and 6.5(e) are similar but not perfectly identical: this is because
there are several possible options at many different steps in the building process,
or, in other words, the process is not fully constrained. Architectures 6.5(k), 6.5(1),
6.5(m), and 6.5(n) provide examples of fully constrained architectures: two successive runs produce exactly the same shapes.
Some of the structured architectures of Figure 6.5 are reminiscent of natural wasp nests. Among these architectures the presence of plateaus is observed in
6.5(b), 6.5(d), 6.5(e), 6.5(f), 6.5(i), and the different levels of the nest are linked together with either a straight axis (6.5(b), 6.5(i)) or with a-set of artificial one-brick
"pedicels" (6.5(d), 6.5(e), 6.5(f)). Some others possess an external envelope: architectures 6.5(k) and 6.5(n) are shown with a portion of the front envelope cut away
to allow for the visualization of the nest's interior, and correspond to nests found
in the Chartergus genera. Figures 6.5(c), 6.5(j), 6.5(1) and 6.5(rn), are examples of
structured patterns that do not look like real nests.
One limitation, among others, of the model (if considered as a model of wasps'
building behavior) is that the simulated swarms live in an abstract space using cubic
bricks to build architectures, while natural wasp nests are built with hexagonal
cells as constituent units: symmetry properties are not equivalent. To overcome
this limitation, simulations have been performed with bricks that are hexagonal
in the xy-planes (horizontal planes are triangular lattices). Figure 6.6 shows the
equivalent of Figure 6.4 for a hexagonal lattice. Figure 6.7 presents a few of the
architectures obtained with this particular topology. We can see that these shapes
look more "biological" than shapes generated with cubic bricks.

Chapter 6
6.3.3

217

ANALYSIS

Obtaining "structured" architectures with the very simple model introduced in
sections 6.3.1 and 6.3.2 is an interesting result. But still more interesting is to go
one step further and to try to understand the properties of those algorithms that
generate structured architectures. In that respect, several useful observations have
been made by Theraulaz and Bonabeau [310, 311]. They noticed:
1. The smoothness, or more precisely the consistency, of the mapping from algorithms to architectures in the structured subspace: two close-structured architectures appear to be generated by two close-coordinated algorithms. This result
extends to unstructured patterns generated by coordinated algorithms. That two
close algorithms generate two close architectures could not be fully tested but is
certainly not generally true: for example, removing a microrule from a coordinated algorithm's microrule table may result in a deorganization of the building
process. Moreover, outside the subspace of coordinated algorithms, one given
algorithm may produce quite different patterns in different runs, so that comparing noncoordinated algorithms among themselves is irrelevant. Therefore, we
expect the algorithmic landscape to be generally rugged but somewhat smoother
in the coordinated subspace.
2. The compactness of the subspace of structured shapes: a factorial correspondence analysis [19, 215] showed that not only are such shapes rare, but they

FIGURE 6.6 Schematic representation of the perception range of an agent in a hexagonal
lattice. Symbol 0 represents an empty site. Symbols 1 and 2 represent sites occupied by
bricks of type-1 and type-2, respectively.

218

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.7 Simulations of collective building on a 3D hexagonal lattice. Simulations
were made on a 20 x 20 x 20 lattice with 10 wasps. Some architectures are reminiscent of
natural wasp nests and exhibit a similar design, (a) Nest-like architecture (Vespa) obtained
after 20,000 steps, (b) Nest-like architecture (Parachartergus) obtained after 20,000 steps.
(c,d) Nest-like architecture (Chatergus) obtained after 100,000 steps. A portion of the
front envelope has been cut away in 6.7(d). (e) Lattice architecture including an external
envelope and a long-range internal helix. A portion of the front envelope has been cut
away.

also all lie in the same, small region (Figure 6.8). This property suggests that
the type of shapes that can be produced with this family of algorithms is highly
constrained.
To better understand what a coordinated algorithm is. let's review an example—
depicted in Figure 6.9. This figure represents the successive steps of the construction
of an architecture which looks like nests built by Epipona wasps. The transition between two successive building steps is shown to depend on a given number of local
configurations that stimulate the deposit of a brick. Once all the bricks in the current step have been deposited, the building process goes on to the next step. Steps 1

Chapter 6

219

FIGURE 6.8 Factorial Correspondence Analysis (FCA). The three axes are the leading
three eigenvectors of a matrix M the columns of which represent 12 architectures of
Figure 6.5, and the rows of which represent the 211 associated stimulating configurations:
for instance My = 0 if architecture j has not been obtained with i as a stimulating
configuration, and Mij = 1 if i is a stimulating configuration necessary for the generation
of architecture j. The subspace occupied by the architectures grown with coordinated
algorithms is magnified. After Theraulaz and Bonabeau [311]. Reprinted by permission ©
Academic Press.

220

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.9 Successive building steps in the construction of an Epipona nest with a lattice swarm. The completion of each step gives rise to stimulating configurations belonging
to the next step. All stimulating configurations are organized to ensure a regular building
process. In particular, within a given step, the stimulating configurations do not have to
be spatially connected and can occur simultaneously at different locations. In steps 7 to 9,
the front and right portions of the external envelope have been cut away. After Theraulaz
and Bonabeau [311]. Reprinted by permission © Academic Press.

Chapters

221

to 5 correspond to the enlargement of the top of the nest, including the first sessile
comb of cells (step 3). Step 6 represents the construction and lengthening of the
external envelope, from which parallel combs will be built (steps 7 and 8). These
steps determine the distinction between this nest, where the entrance and access
holes at the different levels lie in the periphery of the comb, from the Chartergus
nest represented in Figures 6.5(k) and 6.5(m), where the hole lies in the middle of
the nest.
Coordination appears to be a necessary but not sufficient condition to produce
structured architectures: there is coordination in many cases, but the architecture
produced exhibits no obvious structure. Therefore algorithms must have additional
properties that produce structured architectures to explain their ability to generate
such architectures.
Figure 6.10 illustrates the concept of modularity. Recurrent states may appear,
inducing a cyclicity in the group's behavior. From the architectural viewpoint, this
corresponds to a modular pattern, where each module is built during a cycle. All
modules are qualitatively similar. The two figures on the right of Figure 6.10 show
how modularity is implemented in a nest with successive plateaus: each cycle corresponds to the addition of a plateau. Figure 6.10(a) shows the final architecture
(Stelopolybia), with the various stages, while Figure 6.10(b) explicitly shows the
successive steps. Figure 6.10(c) shows a complete architecture of Chartergus and
Figure 6.10(d) how modularity is implemented.
6.3.4 EXPLORING THE SPACE OF ARCHITECTURES
6.3.4.1 Defining a fitness function In order to explore the space of architectures
grown by the simple agents described in section 6.3.1, Bonabeau et al. [36] use a
genetic algorithm (GA). The goal of a genetic algorithm (GA) [126, 152] is to explore a space of solutions with a fitness function (a solution being simply a point in
that space: the goal is to find a point that has a high fitness), by a mechanism inspired by natural selection. At each generation, a pool of individuals, characterized
by their genes or genotype, is selected according to the fitness function: only the
fittest individuals, that is, those individuals that have a high fitness given the problem to be solved, are allowed to reproduce and be present in the next generation.
During reproduction, two mechanisms may be applied: (1) mutations, which are
usually implemented as random alterations of genotypes, and (2) crossover, which
consists of exchanges of portions of genotypes between two selected individuals.
These two mechanisms allow exploration of the space of solutions from existing
good solutions: in effect, mutations are small alterations which, when applied to
good genotypes, may produce nearby good solutions, and crossover relies on the
idea that combinations of good solutions may result in even better solutions.
Owing to the difficulty of defining a fitness function for architectural phenotypes (it is difficult to define formally the adaptive value or the biological plausibility of the shape of a nest), Bonabeau et al.'s [36] fitness function is based on
a set of subjective criteria: the properties of structured architectures, described in

222

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.10 Formation of modular structures as a by-product of recurrent stimulating
configurations in the architecture. A Stelopolybia-like nest (a, b) and a Chartergus-like
nest (c, d) are depicted. After Theraulaz and Bonabeau [311]. Reprinted by permission ©
Academic Press.

sections 6.3.2 and 6.3.3, are transformed into quantitative traits measured during
the construction of the architecture. The fitness function, which can be measured
automatically without any human intervention, reflects the ratings of 17 human
observers who were asked to evaluate the amount of "structure" in a set of 29
patterns [36]. The fitness function is based on the following observations:
1. In algorithms that generate coherent architectures many microrules are used,
whereas in algorithms that generate structureless shapes only one microrule or
a few microrules are actually used in the course of the simulation. A given al-

Chapters

223

gorithm is defined by its microrule table, which assigns an action to be taken
to each configuration of bricks. Some of the microrules may never be used, because the configurations of bricks they represent never occur. Only algorithms in
which many microrules are actually applied in the course of the simulation can
produce coherent architectures, because such architectures require a subtle and
complex sequence of correlated deposits. Obviously, this condition is necessary
but not sufficient, but a population of algorithms containing a large proportion
of algorithms that satisfy this criterion is certainly a much better point to start
from.
In relation to this observation, it is also interesting to mention that it usually
takes more time to generate a complex architecture because of the constraints
that are generated in the course of construction. Each constraint acts as a bottleneck, preventing any progress from being made until the constraint is satisfied.
This result relates to the notion of logical depth, which is defined as the time
it takes for a program to generate a given pattern [17]. Interesting architectures
are logically deep.
2. Most structured architectures are compact in the following sense: bricks have
adjacent faces with many of their neighbors. Building compactly requires collections of complementary, correlated microrules.
3. Structured architectures are most often characterized by modular patterns, that
is, patterns that repeat themselves (see Figures 6.5 and 6.7). This modularity
requires coordination. More complex architectures are characterized by more
complex and larger atomic modules. Therefore one has to look for (1) large
patterns that (2) repeat themselves.

6.3.4.2 Genetic algorithm A genetic algorithm was designed to make use of the observations made in section 6.3.4.1 [36]. Each generation is composed of 80 individuals. A straightforward fitness-proportionate selection GA is used: the probability
for an individual to be selected into the reproductive pool is proportional to its
fitness (roulette-wheel sampling [152]). New individuals are generated until a new
generation of 80 individuals is formed. Algorithms are encoded with a variablelength genotype. A gene is the equivalent of a microrule. An algorithm that has n
microrules in its rule table is encoded into n genes. Genes cannot be cut by crossover
(Figure 6.11). The number of microrules of a newly generated algorithm in the initial population is a random variable. Its probability distribution is gaussian with
mean /j, = 50 and standard deviation a = 10.
The selection of microrules in the initial population, and when new random
microrules are injected into subsequent generations, must be biased to allow construction to start:
1. Stimulating configurations containing a large number of bricks must be avoided
because they may never be encountered in the course of one simulation. This

224

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.11 (a) Genotype of an n-gene individual that implements an algorithm with n
rnicrorules with two types of bricks, grey and black. Each gene corresponds to a microrule:
the central site of the central 9 x 9 square is occupied by the brick to be deposited, where
the agent is located; the remaining 26 sites are either empty or occupied by a neighboring
brick, (b) Genotypes of a 5-gene individual and a 4-gene individual selected for crossover.
Vertical bars indicate locations of crossover application, continued.

Chapter 6

FIGURE 6.11
operator.

225

continued, (c) Genotypes obtained after application of the 2 point crossover

bias is implemented by using probabilistic templates that, in addition to probabilistically ensuring that all directions are evenly covered, implement a rapidly
decaying probability distribution for the number of bricks in stimulating configurations. A template simply defines the probability of putting a brick in each of
the 26 cells that make a stimulating configuration. About 10 templates are used:
for each stimulating configuration to be generated, one template is randomly
selected.
2. Simulations start with one and only one brick in space, so that there must be
one microrule in which the stimulating configuration contains only one brick.
3. Diagonal brick deposits are not allowed, because they often lead to quick random space filling and are never necessary to obtain interesting architectures.
A diagonal brick deposit is one in which the deposited brick has only adjacent
edges (as opposed to adjacent faces) with already present bricks. Only stimulating configurations which allow the deposit of bricks that have at least one face
in common with at least one other brick are used.

In addition to randomly generated algorithms, the initial population also contains a small number of algorithms that are known to produce structured patterns.

226

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.12

Best, average, and worst fitnesses as a function of generation number.

Such algorithms focus evolutionary exploration in the vicinity of coordinated algorithms.
Mutations are applied to every gene of every algorithm that results from the
combination of two algorithms in the reproductive pool. Mutations are applied as
follows: if a microrule has not been used during a simulation, its corresponding
gene is replaced with a randomly generated microrule with probability p\\ if the
microrule has been used, the same procedure is applied, but with probability p2,
with pz -C pi, in order to favor applicable microrules. In the simulations, pi = 0.9
and p2 = 0.01.
Crossover is applied to randomly selected pairs of genotypes with probability
pc = 0.2. In the simplest version of the GA, a two-point crossover is performed at
two randomly selected points (Figures 6.11(b) and 6.11(c)).
A given simulation stops either when a predefined number of bricks have been
deposited in a 16 x 16 x 16 grid, or after a predefined number of steps. In all
simulations, the maximum number of bricks is 500 and the maximum number of
iterations is 30000, where one iteration corresponds to all agents taking one action
(10 agents are used in the runs). Most algorithms generate random space filling quite
rapidly: limiting the number of bricks permits advancement to the next simulation
without spending too much time waiting for the end of a run that would not produce
anything interesting. On the other hand, simulations have to be long enough because
it takes time to produce coherent architectures, owing to the numerous constraints
they induce.

227

Chapter 6

FIGURE 6.13

Example of patterns obtained with the genetic algorithm.

228

FIGURE 6.13

Swarm Intelligence

continued.

229

Chapter 6

Fl G U R E 6.13

continued.

230

FIGURE 6.13

Swarm Intelligence

continued.

231

Chapter 6

FIGURE 6.13

continued.

232

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.13 continued.

Chapter 6

233

Figure 6.12 shows a typical example of how the fitness function evolves with
generations. The average and best fitnesses increase, while the lowest fitness always
remains close to 0, most often because of algorithms for which no microrule gets
activated. The increase of the fitness function is slow, because of the epistatic interactions among genes. In effect, the application of some microrules requires the prior
application of other microrules: the architectural fitness landscape is more rugged
than the factorial correspondence analysis of section 6.3.3 suggests. The patterns
generated by the model are inherently polygenic [249], that is, in the context of the
model, they require the "cooperation" of several microrules. Other models that lead
to similar conclusions (that whether a particular gene is perceived to be a major
gene, a modifier gene or a neutral gene depends entirely on the genetic background
in which it occurs, and that this apparent attribute of a gene can change rapidly
in the course of evolution [249]) include Nijhout and Paulsen's [249] development
model that uses a diffusion gradient and threshold mechanism, the parameters of
which are affected by genes and in turn affect the phenotype; or Eggenberger's [118]
model of multicellular organisms using cell division and differential gene expression in identical cells. In both cases, the fitness function is extremely simple. For
example, Eggenberger's [118] fitness function is simply a function of the number
of cells in the organism and of the symmetry of the organism with respect to a
predefined axis. Despite the simplicity of the fitness function, understanding the
evolutionary dynamics of these models is difficult because of interactions among
genes. Another interesting conclusion is that epistatic processes reduce the need
for a long genome [118]: in the model, interactions among microrules generate constraints and lead to the precise unfolding of the architecture without any need for
the architecture to be encoded in its entirety.
Some structured patterns can, however, be found with the genetic algorithm.
Figure 6.13 shows a few examples of patterns obtained with the genetic algorithm
together with their associated fitness value F. Structured patterns include Figures 6.13(1), 6.13(5), 6.13(6), 6.13(7), 6.13(8), 6.13(9). It is particularly interesting
that some of these patterns make use of submodules (Figures 6.13(5), 6.13(7),
6.13(9)).
6.3.4.3 Structure and function In the previous subsection, the genetic algorithm
made use of a fitness function related to the structure of the generated pattern.
One may argue that function, rather than structure, is the relevant property of
social insect nest architectures. However, the level of functionality or adaptiveness
of a model architecture is particularly difficult to test. Krink and Vollrath [204], in
a remarkable work, have been able to do just that with a model of web construction
behavior in orb web-building spiders: they measured the fitness associated with a
given artificial web by computing costs and benefits. Costs were determined by
construction time and the amount of silk used in the web, subdivided into sticky
and nonsticky silk. Benefits were determined by measuring the response of the
web to artificial prey items (total amount of prey caught, weighted by the impact
position, size and value of each single item). Their model lends itself well to this type

234

Swarm Intelligence

of fitness evaluation. The model presented in sections 6.3.1-6.3.3 is too abstract to
allow functional features to be examined directly. In addition, it is difficult to define,
for example, what the antipredator function exactly is, or how thermoregulation is
achieved, all the more as ethologists themselves often do not know with certainty
how such functions are actually implemented in real insect colonies. But ultimately,
one hopes to be able to evolve architectures according to their functionality.
If function is difficult to formalize, an alternative choice for exploring the space
of architectures consists of using an interactive GA, whereby a human observer
evaluates the fitness of a pattern according to her taste or goal, and algorithms
which generate the most "interesting" architectures would be selected [289]. The
term interesting may refer to biological resemblance or to any other criterion, subjective or objective: biologists would prefer biologically plausible architectures and
engineers may be looking for useful or simply appealing patterns. But, up to now,
attempts to involve a human agent to interact with the evolutionary algorithm have
been unsuccessful, perhaps because of the ruggedness of the landscape and/or the
rarity of structured shapes.

6.4

BEYOND BIOLOGY

6.4.1

INTRODUCTION

The problem of coherent distributed building or self-assembly has counterparts
in computer science and engineering. The model described in the previous sections
can provide engineers with valuable insight into the design of programs or machines
that exhibit collective problem-solving abilities, such as self-assembling machines or
robots (e.g.: Bowden et al. [38], Hosokawa et al. [176,177, 178, 179,180], Fukuda et
al. [136], Chirikjian [69], Murata et al. [245], Kokaji et al. [200], Tomita et al. [315],
Yoshida et al. [336, 337]). Areas of current potential applications for self-assembly
include microelectronics, optics, micro-electromechanical systems and displays.
Hosokawa et al. [176] studied the self-assembly of macroscopic triangular objects with magnets on two sides of the triangle. Hosokawa et al. [177,178] designed a
self-assembling system of mesoscopic objects (polyimide and polysilicon thin films,
400 [im wide) using surface tension as the bonding force. Bowden et al. [38] designed two-dimensional arrays made out of mesoscale objects (from 1 mm to 1 cm)
by self-assembly. The objects are floating at the interface between perfluorodecalin
and water and interact by lateral capillary forces. The shapes of the assembling
objects and the wettability of their surfaces determines the structure of the arrays.
What all these examples have in common is that they deal with objects that are
either macroscopic or at least of the order of a half millimeter: in these examples,
self-assembly relies on very different principles than in molecular systems [198, 326].
One step further, one promising area of application for macroscopic self-assembly is
the design of self-assembling, reconfigurable robotic systems composed of numerous
interacting macroscopic submodules. Self-assembling swarm-based robotic systems

Chapter 6

235

in which each robot is very small and endowed with limited perception and computation are perhaps the most promising application of swarm-based approaches in
robotics. In section 6.4.2, we describe three examples of successful implementations
of self-assembling robots.
In the design of self-assembling robotic systems, engineers face the same "inverse problem" as biologists: given a desired shape, find an algorithm (if possible a simple one) that can generate it under some material constraints. The selfassembling robotic systems described in the next section have not been inspired
by the model of collective building developed in this chapter, but they do constitute an instance of self-assembly in the robotic domain. The model, by providing
a better understanding of the dynamics of self-assembling systems in which each
building block is a computational unit that can be programmed to respond to tunable specific local configurations, is obviously of relevance to these robotic systems.
One cannot deny the technical tour de force that was necessary to implement these
systems, but the development of "software" for such systems is still in its infancy.
The model in this chapter provides guidelines for the development of such software.
Another area of potential application for the model described in this chapter
is architecture [46, 75] or art [289]. A relatively recent trend in art, design, and
architecture consists of using computer-based generative mechanisms. The artist,
the designer, or the architect then has to pick from among all patterns generated
by the computer those that are "appealing." This approach is described briefly in
section 6.4.3.
Finally, the use of evolutionary algorithms to "evolve" useful self-assembling
robotic systems or appealing forms is very promising. This is described in section 6.4.4.
6.4.2

SELF-ASSEMBLING ROBOTS

A pioneer of the idea of designing self-assembling machines, Penrose [260] was interested in self-reproduction. But the concept of self-assembling robots was seriously
introduced into the robotics community only by Fukuda et al. [136]. Since then,
several attempts have been made to design collective robotic systems that selfassemble. In this section we discuss four recent remarkable advances for generating
self-assembling robots. These works are remarkable in that they combine a lot of
technical skills to produce collective reconfigurable robotic systems, where each
robot is a (relatively) small object with a set of simple behaviors. Although these
works are not directly inspired by construction in social insects, they follow the same
spirit as the model introduced in section 6.3 (simple agents, local information) and
could benefit from the model.1

J
The interesting work of Yim [334, 335], who designed modular robots composed of a few
elementary building blocks that can be composed into complex robots for various types of locomotion, is not described in this book because it deviates from the spirit of self-assembly.

236

Swarm Intelligence

6.4.2.1 Metamorphic robots Chirikjian [69] defines a metamorphic robotic system
as a collection of independently controlled mechatronic modules [69, 70, 257, 258],
each of which has the ability to connect, disconnect, and climb over adjacent modules. Each module can be considered a robot. The four self-assembling robotic
systems described in section 6.4.2 are of that type: motion is restricted to relative
motion of the modules. Every module is always in contact with at least one other
module, but has enough degrees of freedom to walk over or around other modules
when constraints (connection with other modules) permit and reconfigure without
any external help. The symmetry properties of the modules are such that lattices of
modules can be formed which fill spatial regions with minimal gaps. Because of the
permanent connectedness of the ensemble of modules, the system as a whole acts
as a single physical object. All modules have the same physical structure (homogeneity) , and each module is autonomous from the viewpoint of computation and
communication.
Pamecha et al. [258] identify the following potential applications of metamorphic robotic systems:
1. Obstacle avoidance in highly constrained and unstructured environments.
2. Formation of bridges, buttresses, and other civil structures in times of emergency.
3 Envelopment of objects, such as recovering satellites from space.
4. Performing inspections in constrained environments such as nuclear reactors.
More generally, this type of system can be used for the self-organizing unfolding
of structures without any human intervention, from spatial stations or satellites to
scaffolds.
Pamecha et al. [257] introduce two types of modules, hexagonal and square,
and explore how they can move with respect to one another while always keeping
in contact. A planar hexagonal module is a closed six-bar linkage with three degrees of freedom controlled by placing actuators at alternate joints of the module
(Figure 6.14).
The modules have electromechanical connectors or a coupling mechanism actuated by dc motors. Implementation issues due to the finite thickness of the bars
(the axes of rotation of the joints of two mating links are coincident) were solved
by designing ingenious error-tolerant connectors that connect modules and align
mating links together. Each module carries male and female connectors of different polarities on alternate links. A male connector of a given module can only be
connected with a female connector of an adjacent module. Figure 6.15 shows a
schematic representation of "polarity matching" during reconfiguration, when one
module is moving around another, fixed, module. Figure 6.16 shows a real robot
(module) moving one step around a fixed robot. Refer to Pamecha et al. [257, 258]
for a more detailed technical description of the connectors.
Unlike the hexagonal modules, which had the required kinematic degrees of
freedom to move around neighboring modules by changing their joint angles, the
square modules are rigid modules supplemented with a sliding mechanism that

Chapter 6

237

FIGURE 6.14 A planar hexagonal module. After Pamecha et al. [257]. Reprinted by
permission © ASME.

allows relative motion of modules. Figure 6.17 shows how a square module moves
diagonally along another square module. Figure 6.18 shows two real mating square
modules.
These metamorphic robots set the stage for complex reconfigurations. But the
modules have to be programmed to exhibit the desired global behavior. How does
one find the appropriate "software" ? One solution is to plan the complete sequence

FIGURE 6.15 Polarity matching in the process of reconfiguration. After Pamecha et
al. [257]. Reprinted by permission © ASME.

238

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.16 The locomotion of one module around another. One of the links of the
mobile module always remains connected to the fixed module. After Pamecha et al. [258].
Reprinted by permission © IEEE Press.

FIGURE 6.17 Illustration of the diagonal motion of a square module. After Pamecha et
al. [257]. Reprinted by permission © ASME.

Chapter 6

239

FIGURE 6.18 Two implemented mating square modules. After Pamecha et al. [257].
Reprinted by permission © ASME.

of actions in advance, but this is problematic when the environment is changing.
Another solution is to endow the modules with the same local behavior and let
the system self-assemble, which requires a knowledge of what can be done with a
self-assembling system.
Chirikjian et al. [70] and Pamecha et al. [258] have developed a framework for
studying motion planning and reconfiguration. The problem is to find a sequence of
module motions from any given initial configuration to any given final configuration
in a reasonable (close to minimal) number of moves, under the following constraints:
• A module can only move into a space which is accessible and not already occupied.
• Every module must remain connected to at least one other module. In the experimental setup used by Chirikjian et al. [70] and Pamecha et al. [258], one module,
the base, remains fixed. At least one of the other modules must remain connected
to the fixed base.
• At each time step only one module may move, by one lattice site only.
The problem of finding a minimal set of moves for reconfiguring metamorphic
robots is computationally complex. The number of connected configurations of n
modules increases exponentially with n. Chirikjian et al. [70] provide upper and
lower bounds for the minimal number of moves required to change any initial configuration into any final configuration. These bounds are useful in evaluating the
efficiency of reconfiguration heuristics. Pamecha et al. [258] define several distances
between configurations that can be used to construct such heuristics. They suggest simulated annealing as a possible heuristic: the next configuration is selected

240

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.19 Murata et al.'s [245] fractum. After Yoshida et al. [337]. Reprinted by
permission © Springer-Verlag.

among neighboring configurations on the basis of how far, according to the selected
distance, it is from the final configuration. Neighboring configurations are those
that are accessible in one move. After testing this approach with different metrics
and combinations of metrics on a variety of problems (initial and/or final configurations that are simply connected or contain loops, obstacle envelopment), they
conclude that "even though simulated annealing is a powerful technique, it has the
uncertainties associated with a randomized approach" (Pamecha et al., p. 543 [258])
and suggest that it is best suited for off-line simulations. The best solution found
by the algorithm can be used to reconfigure the real robotic system.
6.4.2.2 Fracta Murata et al. [245] have developed a remarkable metamorphic distributed robotic system composed of many identical units called fracta. Technical
details can be found in Murata et al. [245], Kokaji et al. [200], Tomita et al. [315],
and Yoshida et al. [336, 337]. Recent "self-repair" experiments by Yoshida et al. [337]
involve 20 units. Each unit is hexagonal but in contrast with Chirikjian et al.'s [70]
hexagonal units, they do not change their shape. A unit is a three-layered structure
(Figure 6.19) with three pairs of permanent magnets (with a 120° angle between
them) in the top and bottom layers and three electromagnets (rotated by 60° with
respect to the magnets in the top and bottom layers).
When the polarity of an electromagnet is changed, the electromagnet is attracted toward, or repulsed from, the gap between the top and bottom layers of
another unit. Two units change their connection by a specific sequence of electromagnet polarity changes. A unit can connect to at most six units. Each unit is
equipped with serial optical channels for local bilateral communication.
A unit can be characterized by its connection pattern. There are 12 such connections patterns (other patterns can be readily derived from those 12 types by

Chapters

241

FIGURE 6.20 Connection patterns and how they are related. After Yoshida et al. [337].
Reprinted by permission © IEEE Press.

60°-rotations around the center of the hexagon), which are all represented in Figure 6.20. Links within units in Figure 6.20 represent connections with neighboring
units. A movable unit is one that can move without carrying other units and keeps
the whole system connected after the move. Connection patterns "e," "o," and V
correspond to movable units. Relationships between connection patterns are also
depicted in Figure 6.20: a link between two connection patterns A and B indicates
that it is possible to go from pattern A to pattern B with one move. The distance
between two connection types A and B is the number of links necessary to go from
A to B.
As was the case in section 6.4.2.1, the crucial issue is programming the units.
Murata et al. [245] and Yoshida et al. [337] suggest using a "difference-based"
algorithm, which makes use of purely local information. With this algorithm, each
unit computes a "distance" or "difference" between the current state and the goal,
computes the average distance to the goal of other neighboring units through interunit communication, and a unit that has a large distance to the goal moves into a
space that reduces the distance.
First, the goal must be described. Yoshida et al. [337] use a 10-unit triangle
as an example goal configuration. The triangle can be represented by "goal types,"
which are the connection patterns that the units should have in the final state,
together with the final or desired connection pattern of their neighbors. Figure 6.21
shows the 10-unit triangle with the connection types of all units. For the 10-unit
triangle, the goal types are:
To have connection type "o" and be connected to two units of respective connections types "K" and "K," or
to have connection type "K" and be connected to four units of respective connections types "o," "K," "#," and "s," or
to have connection type "s" and be connected to six units that all have connection
type "K."

242

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE6.21 Representation of the 10-unit triangle. After Yoshida et al. [337]. Reprinted
by permission © IEEE Press.

The goal of a unit is to reach one of the goal types. At each time step, each unit
computes the difference between the various goals and its current state, including
the connection types of its neighbors. The difference di(i) that is eventually taken
into account by unit i at time t is the one that is minimal. Then unit i computes an
average !,(£) of the distances computed by its neighbors, with a diffusion coefficient
D and a "leak" constant L:

Ifdi(t)/Xi(t) > G, where G is an activation threshold, unit i moves into a space that
is selected probabilistically in such a way that a space that reduces the distance of
a unit to the goals is more likely to be selected.
Because deadlocks may occur, frustrated nonmovable units are given a chance
to force moves in their neighborhood [336, 337]. In addition, Yoshida et al. [336, 337]
introduce a "self-repair" function by using extended goal descriptions that include
spare units. The set of goals that include a spare unit has a lower priority than the
set of goals that do not include a spare unit. Only when a unit fails is the lowerpriority set of goals used. Figure 6.22 shows the self-assembly of an ensemble of 10
fracta units into a triangle, starting from an arbitrary initial condition. Figure 6.23
shows the self-repair function: a defective unit is removed from the system and
self-repair takes place with the spare unit.fractalprogramming—)
6.4.2.3 Vertically self-assembling robots Hosokawa et al. [179, 180] designed a selfassembling robotic system which is also two-dimensional but in the vertical plane.
Although the technical issues related to gravity make this implementation very dif-

Chapter 6

243

FIGURE 6.22 Four steps of self-assembly. After Yoshida et al. [337]. Reprinted by permission © IEEE Press.

ferent from the previous ones, the spirit is similar. The high-level description of the
robots is, however, somewhat simpler. Each robot is a small (90 mm) cubic unit
equipped with a pair of arms that can rotate within the xz-vertical-plane around
the y-axis and can be extended or retracted to connect and disconnect robots. The
robots can change their bonding configurations in the xz-plane using their arms:
they connect their arms through a lock-and-key structure, extend them to disconnect their bodies, rotate them by an appropriate angle, and contract them. When
the arms are contracted, bonding between two robots is made through the magnetic
faces of the cube. A simple alignment correction mechanism is implemented on the
faces to avoid the propagation and amplification of alignment errors. The behavior
of each robot is determined by its own state and by the states of adjacent robots,
that is, robots that have a face in common. Two adjacent robots communicate
explicitly. In some configurations, depending on the task to be performed, displacement of one of the robots results from the communication between two adjacent
robots.

244

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.23 Illustration of self-repair. After Yoshida et al. [337]. Reprinted by permission © IEEE Press.

What tasks can be carried by such a group of robots? Hosokawa et al. [179, 180]
suggest two possible tasks, depicted in Figure 6.24: the formation of a stair-like
structure or the formation of a bridge.
The first task was used by Hosokawa et al. [179, 180] to illustrate the capabilities of their robotic system, which needs to be programmed so that robots will

FIGURE 6.24 Examples of applications. After Hosokawa et al. [180]. Reprinted by permission © IEEE Press.

Chapter 6

245

reconfigure to form a stair-like structure. The following algorithm is used to move
a generic robot A:
1. To move up. If there is a robot B on the left of A, no robot on top of A, and no
robot on the right of A, then A sends a Lift-Me-Up request to B. If there is no
robot on top of B, and if there is a robot below B or on the left of B, B accepts
the request and A is moved on top of B. Otherwise the request is rejected.
2. To move left. If there is a robot B below A, no robot on top of A, and no robot
on the left of A, A sends a Move-Me-Left request to B. If there is a robot on the
left of B, then B accepts the request and A is moved to the left. Otherwise the
request is rejected.
These two behaviors are sufficient to generate a stair-like structure, starting
from a linear configuration of robots. Figure 6.25 illustrates the formation of a stairlike structure with four robots, starting from an arrangement where robots are in
line. In order to get the last robot to climb the obstacle, another rule must be added
that permits the transfer of a robot on top of the obstacle. Hosokawa et al. [179]
also studied the deconstruction of a stair-like structure.
6.4.2.4 Three-dimensional self-reconfiguration Yoshida et al. [337] recently started
experimenting with three-dimensional metamorphic robots. Each unit has six connecting arms, as shown in Fig. 6.26. Each arm can rotate independently. Unit motion
is implemented as follows. Consider two connected units X and Y (Figure 6.27(a)).
In order for unit Y to move to the location represented in Figure 6.27(b), unit X
rotates around the b — b axis after the connection of Y to Z has been released.
The system can be reconfigured from any initial configuration to any final
configuration using such elementary moves. Figure 6.28 shows an example of a
simulated reconfiguration in 70 steps of 12 units, initially arranged linearly, into a
"box." The sequence of moves was found using the same algorithm as for the fracta
robots, combined with a form of simulated annealing. Yoshida et al. [337] designed
a prototype unit that exhibits the expected reconfiguration properties. This work
is extremely promising.
6.4.3 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
In the context of architectural design, Coates et al. [75] have used three-dimensional
cellular automata to explore new possible types of architecture, at a time when the
constraints of structure have almost disappeared, with "form becoming the precursor of function rather than its determinant." In other words, any architectural
function can be implemented in virtually any form. According to Coates et al. [75],
experimenting with cellular automata permits a "more rigorous analysis of the basic
determinants of form, where the global form of an object not only should but actually cannot be predetermined on an aesthetic whim." Coates et al. [75] use cellular
automata as a generative mechanism to find forms that are totally embedded in the

246

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 6.25 (a) Schematic representation of the formation of a stair-like structure, (b) Eight successive steps in the formation of a stair-like structure. After
Hosokawa et al. [180]. Reprinted by permission © IEEE Press.

FIGURE 6.26 Schematic representation of a unit. After Yoshida et al. [337], Reprinted
by permission © IEEE Press.

Chapter 6

247

FIGURE 6.27 (a) Position of six units before unit Y moves, (b) Position of the six units
after unit Y has moved. After Yoshida et al. [337]. Reprinted by permission © IEEE
Press.

FIGURE 6.28 Illustration of a reconfiguration. After Yoshida et al. [337]. Reprinted by
permission © IEEE Press.

248

Swarm Intelligence

function to be solved. In that process, the central role of the architect and the role
of the "architectural ego" are minimized. The model of collective building in wasps
described in this chapter can be viewed as another generative mechanism, in line
with a recent trend in architecture that proposes to use self-organizing development
in natural systems as a source of new architectural forms. This approach, however,
is quite limited if all that is done is a random exploration, with no explicit function
and no selection of forms on the basis of their function. In the next section, we see
that this limitation can be overcome by resorting to artificial evolution: the fitness
function orients the search for new forms, based on aesthetic or functional criteria,
or a combination of both.

6.4.4

EVOLVING FUNCTION

In all the examples of sections 6.4.2 and 6.4.3, the algorithm used to reconfigure
modules or grow structures was planned in advance, prewired, tuned by hand, or
randomly explored. Following the example of section 6.3.4, it is possible and useful
to make use of a more systematic way of exploring the space of behaviors of a
"metamorphic" robotic system or the space of forms generated by a growth model.
Evolutionary design (ED) [18], the creation of new designs by computers using
evolutionary techniques, is a promising approach. The emphasis of ED is on the
generation of novelty and not so much on optimization. ED involves two separate
aspects: (1) a generative mechanism and (2) a mechanism for artificial evolution.
The generative mechanism is extremely important because it must be able to produce enough diversity and novelty. Artificial evolution is equally important because
its function is to pick from among the many forms produced by the generative
mechanism those that meet certain functional or aesthetic criteria.
Open-ended artificial evolution requires that the generative mechanism itself
be open-ended, which often implies that the designs, or the algorithms that generate them, be represented with variable-length genotypes. For example, in section 6.3.4 building algorithms were represented with variable-length genotypes.
Mappings from the representation used in the evolutionary algorithm to the final form, the fitness of which is evaluated, range from very simple (for example,
direct one-to-one mapping between genes and pixels of an image) to quite complex
(the representation may code for differential equations or cellular automata that
generate forms).
Design selection is made on the basis of the design's degree of functionality,
which can (often) be evaluated automatically, or on the basis of an observer's goals
and desires, which cannot generally be coded. Sometimes both types of fitness
evaluation coexist, when aesthetic criteria are used in addition to functional requirements. For example, Rosenman [276] used a combined approach, that is, a
coded fitness function based on function and human interactions, to obtain complex arrangements of elements representing house plans, using a design grammar
of rules to define how polygons should be constructed out of edge vectors.

Chapter 6

249

FIGURE 6.29 Representation of a Img bridge built with simulated Lego™ blocks obtained
by Punes and Pollack [137]. Centers of mass have been marked with circles. Each start is a
joint between two centers of them and line thickness is proportional to the capacity of each
joint. The bridge is made out of 97 bricks and is 1.67 m long. The x scale is compressed
at a variable rate for visualization of the entire structure. After Punes and Pollack [137].
Reprinted by permission © MIT Press.

Most examples, however, involve one type of fitness evaluation. Sims [289] or
Todd and Latham [313] evolve computer graphics based on interactions with humans. Sims [290] evolves creatures that move in a simulated physical world and
compete to get one resource: here, the fitness function, which does not involve
any observer, depends on how quickly the creature can move to reach the resource. Broughton et al. [46] use genetic programming (GP) [202] to evolve threedimensional structures generated by L-systems [224]. One fitness function is the
ability of the generated architecture to avoid being hit by a stream of particles
moving across the area where the architecture is constructed. Another fitness function is the ability to capture (or be hit by) as many particles as possible. Yet another
fitness function, perhaps more useful in the context of architecture, is the volume
enclosed by the architecture compared to the volume of material used to grow the
architecture itself. They also used symbiotic coevolution of two types of L-systems
that produce space and enclosure, respectively. For example, "enclosure"-L-systems

250

Swarm Intelligence

must generate forms that enclose as much space as possible generated by "space"L-systems.
An interesting use of ED is Funes and Pollack's [137] GP-based evolution of
buildable Lego™ structures to perform specific tasks (crane arm, rotating crane,
scaffold, or bridge). Funes and Pollack [137] have developed a simple physical model
of the union of two Lego™ bricks together. Their fitness function is based on such
concrete attributes as the length of the structure in one direction, the normalized
distance to a target point, or the maximum external weight that the structure
can support under the physical constraints of their model. After obtaining a structure that satisfies the physical constraints (basically, as long as there is a way to
distribute the weights among the network of bricks such that no joint is stressed
beyond its maximum capacity, the structure does not break), the corresponding
real Lego™ structure is built to validate the artificial structure. Figure 6.29 shows
an example of a structure they obtain when the goal is to generate a long bridge.
Funes and Pollack's [137] model does not rely on self-assembly. But it is without any doubt possible to combine a concrete functional perspective with a selfassembling design algorithm. For example, the self-assembling algorithm leading to
the formation of a functional bridge by a homogeneous group of robots such as
Hosokawa et al.'s [179, 180] robots or Yoshida et al.'s [337] units could be obtained
using ED. The space of multirobot configurations can be explored in the same way
as the nest-building algorithm but with function being taken into account explicitly. Evolving self-assembling functional systems is definitely a promising avenue of
research.

6.5

POINTS TO REMEMBER

• Stigmergy, that is, indirect interactions among nestmates through modifications
of the environment, appears to be an important mechanism underlying nest construction in social insects.
• Two types of stigmergy exist: quantitative or continuous stigmergy, in which the
different stimuli that trigger behavior are quantitatively different, and qualitative
or discrete stigmergy, in which stimuli can be classified into different classes that
differ qualitatively. Quantitative stigmergy results in the emergence of pillars in
termites. Qualitative stigmergy operates in the building behavior of the paper
wasps Polistes dominulus.
• A model of multiagent building in a three-dimensional discrete lattice, motivated
by the observation of the building behavior of wasps, produces structured patterns
without any direct or explicit communication between the agents. This model,
however, produces many random or space-filling patterns.
• When a structured pattern is being generated, the architecture itself governs the
dynamics of construction by providing constraints as to where new brick deposits
should be made. These constraints permit the construction of compact architec-

Chapters

251

tures which require sequences of correlated deposits. Moreover, most structured
patterns involve the repetition of a modular subpattern.
These important properties of structured patterns provide a basis for denning a
fitness function to be used with an evolutionary algorithm. A genetic algorithm
(GA) based on this fitness function does find a few interesting patterns, some
of them making use of existing submodules, but the progression of the GA is
impeded by epistasis, that is, interactions among genes. In effect, correlations
among brick deposits are necessary to produce structured patterns but such correlations are destroyed by mutation and crossover. The evolutionary approach
remains promising if one finds a way of making sure that certain, appropriately
selected, brick deposits remain correlated over several generations.
The discrete-stigmergy model of building can help design self-assembling macroscopic systems, such as self-assembling or self-reconfigurable robotic systems.
Combined with evolutionary algorithms, self-assembling models can be explored
to generate functional self-assembling systems. In addition to function, aesthetic
criteria can be used to guide artificial evolution.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 7

Cooperative Transport by Insects and Robots

7.1

OVERVIEW

Collective robotics is a booming field, and cooperative transport—particularly cooperative box-pushing—has been an important benchmark in testing new types of
robotic architecture. Although this task in itself is not especially exciting, it does
provide insight into the design of collective problem-solving robotic systems. One
of the swarm-based robotic implementations of cooperative transport that seems
to work well is one that is closely inspired by cooperative prey retrieval in social
insects.
Ants of various species are capable of collectively retrieving large prey that
are impossible for a single ant to retrieve. Usually, a single ant finds a prey item
and tries to move it alone; when successful, the ant moves the item back to the
nest. When unsuccessful, the ant recruits nestmates through direct contact or trail
laying. If a group of ants is still unable to move the prey item for a certain time,
specialized workers with large mandibles may be recruited in some species to cut the
prey into smaller pieces. Although this scenario seems to be fairly well understood
in the species where it has been studied, the mechanisms underlying cooperative
transport—'that is, when and how a group of ants move a large prey item to the
nest—remain unclear. No formal description of the biological phenomenon has been
developed, and, surprisingly, roboticists went further than biologists in trying to
model cooperative transport: perhaps the only convincing model so far is one that

253

254

Swarm Intelligence

has been introduced and studied by roboticists [207] and, although this model
was not aimed at describing the behavior of real ants, few adjustments would be
required to make it biologically plausible. This chapter first describes empirical
research on cooperative transport in ants, and then describes the work of Kube and
Zhang [205, 206,207, 209].

7.2

COOPERATIVE PREY RETRIEVAL IN ANTS

A small prey or food item is easily carried by a single ant. But how can ants "cooperate" to carry a large item? Cooperative prey (or large food item) retrieval
and transport has been reported in several species of ants [303, 274, 317]: weaver
ants Oecophylla smaragdina [173] and Oecophylla longinoda [172, 333], army ants
Eciton burchelli [128], African driver ants Dorylus [155, 240], and other species
such as Pheidole crassinoda [302], Myrmica rubra [304], Formica lugubris [304],
Lasius neoniger [316], the desert ants Aphaenogaster (ex-Novomessor) cockerelli
and Aphaenogaster albisetosus [175, 234], Pheidologeton diversus [240], Pheidole
pallidula [93, 94], Formica polyctena [65, 66, 238, 319], Formica schaufussi [274,
275, 317] and the ponerine ants Ectatomma ruidum [263] and possibly Paraponera clavata [41]. This cooperative behavior can be quite impressive. For example,
Moffett [240] reports that a group of about 100 ants Pheidologeton diversus was
able to transport a 10-cm earthworm weighing 1.92 g (more than 5000 times as
much as a single 0.3-mg to 0.4-mg minor worker) at 0.41 cm/s on level ground.
By comparison, ants engaged in solitary transport of food items on the same trail
were carrying burdens weighing at most 5 times their body weight at about 1 cm/s:
this means that ants engaged in the cooperative transport of the earthworm were
holding at least 10 times more weight than did solitary transporters, with only a
modest loss in velocity [240].
We believe that the phenomenon of cooperative transport is much more common in ants than these few studies suggest: to the best of our knowledge, these
studies are the only ones that report detailed observations of cooperative prey
transport. This phenomenon involves several different aspects:
1. Is there an advantage to group transport as opposed to solitary transport? Is
worker behavior in group transport different than in solitary transport?
2. When and how does an ant know that it cannot carry an item alone because it
is either too large or too heavy?
3. How are nestmates recruited when help is needed?
4. How do several ants cooperate and coordinate their actions to actually transport
the item?
5. How do ants ensure that there is the right number of individuals involved in
carrying the item?
6. How does a group of transporting ants handle deadlocks and, more generally,
situations where the item to be transported is stuck, either because of antago-

Chapter 7

255

FIGURE 7.1 Weaver ants (Oecophylla longinoda) collectively carrying a large prey (a
grasshopper).

nistic forces or because of the presence of an obstacle or heterogeneities in the
susbtrate?
All these questions, that have been more or less satisfactorily dealt with in
the above-mentioned studies, are of enormous interest in view of implementing a
decentralized cooperative robotic system to transport objects the locations and sizes
of which are unknown. Let us try to answer each of these questions with available
data and personal observations.
7.2.1

SOLITARY TRANSPORT VERSUS GROUP TRANSPORT

In Pheidologeton diversus, single worker ants usually carry burdens (grasping them
between their mandibles, lifting them from the ground and holding them ahead
as they walk forward) rather than drag them [240]. By contrast, in cooperative
transport, one or both forelegs are placed on the burden to aid in lifting it, mandibles
are open and usually lay against the burden without grasping it. The movement
patterns of group-transporting ants corresponding to their positions around the
perimeter of a burden with reference to the direction of transport are also different
than those of ants engaged in solitary transport: workers at the forward margin
walk backward, pulling the burden, while those along the trailing margin walk
forward, apparently pushing the burden; ants along the sides of the burden shuffle
their legs sideways and slant their bodies in the direction of transport [240].
By contrast, Sudd [302, 304] observes that individual Pheidole crassinoda, Myrmica rubra, and Myrmica lugubris ants appear to exhibit the same behavioral patterns in solitary and group transport: in group transport, all three species use the
same method as when they work alone, including realignment and repositioning.

256

Swarm Intelligence

This, however, does not exclude cooperative behavior: group transport in these
species is particularly interesting because the same individual behavior is functional either in isolation or in group, and may even lead to increasing returns (up
to a maximum group size: see section 7.2.2) despite the lack of direct response of
individuals to the presence of their nestmates.
In general, whether ants behave similarly or differently when engaged in solitary and group transport, group transport is more efficient than solitary transport
for large prey. Ants can dismantle a large food item into small enough pieces to
be carried by individual ant workers. Moffett [240] observed that a large piece
of cereal, which would have required 498 solitary Pheidologeton diversus transporters if broken down into small enough pieces, could be transported collectively
by only 14 ants. More generally, he observed that the weight carried by ant increases with group size: the total weight carried by a group of N workers increases
as W oc ]V2-044, which means that the weight carried by each ant increases on
average as TV1-044. Franks [128] made similar observations on Eciton burchelli: let
Wj be the dry weight of transported items and Wa the total dry weight of the
group of transporting ants, the relationship between both is Wt oc W^377, which,
assuming that Wj is proportional to N, implies that the dry weight carried by ant
increases as jV°'377. Franks [128] also observed that items were always retrieved at
a standard speed, relatively independent of group size: he hypothesized that the
increased efficiency of group transport with group size results from the group's ability to overcome the rotational forces necessary to balance a food item. Along the
same lines, we already mentioned Moffett's [240] experiment in which he showed
that group-transporting ants could carry more than 10 times more weight than did
solitary transporters at a speed only divided by 2. Figure 7.2 shows the velocity
of transport as a function of the number of Pheidologeton diversus carriers: the
velocity decreases only for large group sizes. Figure 7.3 shows transport efficiency
per ant, measured by the product of burden weight by transport velocity divided
by the number of carriers, as a function of the number of carriers: this quantity
increases with group size up to a maximum for groups of 8 to 10 ants, and then
declines [240].
7.2.2

FROM SOLITARY TO GROUP TRANSPORT

All reports of how the decision is made to switch from solitary to group transport
describe variants of the same phenomenon. A single ant first tries to carry the
item, and then, if the item resists motion, to drag it (although dragging is rare in
Pheidologeton diversus). Resistance to transport seems to determine whether the
item should be carried or dragged [93, 94, 302, 304]. The ant spends a few seconds
testing the resistance of the item to dragging before realigning the orientation of
its body without releasing the item: modifying the direction of the applied force
may be sufficient to actually move the item. In case realignment is not sufficient,
the ant releases the item and finds another position to grasp the item. If several
repositioning attempts are unsuccessful, the ant eventually recruits nestmates. Re-

Chapter 7

257

FIGURE 7.2 Velocity of transport as a function of the number of carriers (Phe.idologe.ton
diversus). Average over n observations for each number of carrier ants: sample size n = 50
for one ant, n = 25 for two ants, n = 47 for three ants, n — 42 for four ants, n = 38 for
five ants, n = 16 for six ants, n = 20 for seven ants, n = 12 for eight to ten ants, and
n = 10 for eleven ants and more. After Moffett [240]. Reprinted by permission © National
Geographic Research.

FIGURE 7.3 Transport efficiency (burden weight times velocity/number of carriers) as a
function of the number of carriers (Pheidologeton diversus). Average over n observations
for each number of carrier ants; same sample sizes n as in Figure 7.2. After Moffett [240].
Reprinted by permission © National Geographic Research.

258

Swarm Intelligence

cruitment per se is examined in the next section. Sudd [304] reports that the time
spent attempting to move the item decreases with the item's weight: for example,
an ant may spend up to 4 minutes for items less than 100 mg, but only up to 1
minute for items more than 300 mg. Detrain and Deneubourg [93, 94] have shown
that in Pheidole pallidula, it is indeed resistance to traction, and not directly prey
size, that triggers recruitment of nestmates, including majors, to cut the prey: they
studied recruitment through individual trail laying for prey of different sizes (fruit
flies versus cockroaches), or of the same size but with different levels of retrievability
(free fruit flies versus fruit flies covered by a net). A slow recruitment to free fruit
flies was observed, in connection to weak individual trail laying; in contrast, strong
recruitment and intense individual trail laying were observed when large prey or
small but irretrievable prey were offered. It is therefore the ability or inability of
an individual or a group that governs recruitment.
7.2.3

RECRUITMENT OF NESTMATES

Holldobler et al. [172] studied recruitment in the context of cooperative prey retrieval in two Novomessor species: Novomessor albisetosus and Novomessor cockerelli. They showed that recruitment for collective transport falls within two categories: short-range recruitment (SRR) and long-range recruitment (LRR). In SRR,
a scout releases a poison gland secretion in the air immediately after discovering
a large prey item; nestmates already in the vicinity are attracted from up to 2 m.
If SRR does not attract enough nestmates, a scout lays a chemical trail with a
poison gland secretion from the prey to the nest: nestmates are stimulated by the
pheromone alone (no direct stimulation necessary) to leave the nest and follow the
trail toward the prey. Figure 7.4 shows the number of ants (Novomessor albisetosus) following an "artificial" poison gland pheromone trail as a function of time.
30-cm-long trails, drawn on a piece of cardboard with the secretion of one gland of
a worker, were introduced into the test arena after periods of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 minutes elapsed. The number of ants following the trail was counted during the minute
after introduction. Means and error bars correspond to 10 trials for each time value
(1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 min). The rather short-lived poison gland secretion releases no
persistent trail-following behavior but rather an outrush of a group of workers that
move in a phalanx-like formation along the trail. Figure 7.5 illustrates a sequence
of SRR and LRR: a freshly killed grasshopper was pinned to the ground 6 m from
the nest of a Novomessor cockerelli colony; soon after the first worker discovered
the prey, other workers were attracted (SRR); when the first scouts returned to the
nest laying a trail (vertical bars), the number of nestmates at the site increased
significantly (LRR).
Holldobler [173] reports short-range, and more rarely long-range (rectal glandbased), recruitment in Oecophylla smaragdina in the context of prey retrieval, during which secretions from the terminal sternal gland and alarm pheromones from
the mandibular glands interact. This short-term recruitment attracts nestmates
located in the vicinity, which quickly converge toward the intruder or prey item,

Chapter 7

259

FIGURE 7.4 Number of ants (Novomessor albisetosus) following an "artificial" poison
gland pheromone trail as a function of time. Average and std are 10 trials. After Holldobler
et al. [175]. Reprinted by permission © Springer- Verlag.

FIGURE 7.5 Short-range and long-range recruitment in Novomessor cockerelli. After
Holldobler et al. [175]. Reprinted by permission © Springer-Verlag.

which is retrieved into the nest when dead. In a series of experiments with 20
freshly killed cockroaches placed at randomly selected locations in a colony's territory, the prey were discovered within several minutes (average: 8.05 min); ants in
the vicinity were attracted by short-range recruitment signals; 5 to 8 ants grasped
the prey item and held it on the spot for several minutes (average: 11.6 min) before jointly retrieving it to the nest. This last phase involved 5.3 ants on average.
In Oecophylla longinoda, even when the prey were pinned to the ground and the
ants were unable to retrieve them, long-range recruitment was not used [172]. By

260

Swarm Intelligence

contrast, long-range recruitment was observed in Oecophylla smaragdina when the
cockroaches were pinned to the substrate and several workers had attempted without success to remove the prey: recruiting ants moved back to the nearest leaf nest
(although there was only one queen, as is usual in this species, the nest of the considered colony was composed of 19 separate leaf nests, which is also common in this
species) where they recruit nestmates which soon moved out of the leaf nest toward
the prey. From 25 to 59 could be recruited, whereas between 9 and 19 ants were
involved in actually retrieving the prey to the nest once the prey were eventually
retrieved. This indicates that the ants do not estimate the size or weight of the
prey but rather adapt their group sizes to the difficulty encountered in first moving
the prey. Holldobler [173] reports that the recruited ants were gathering around
the prey, seeking to get access, and sometimes grasped nestmates that were already
working at the prey, thereby forming a pulling chain, a common behavior in weaver
ants (see, for example, Figure 1.2(a)). The prey were usually first transported to
the leaf nest from which helpers had been recruited.
7.2.4

COORDINATION IN COLLECTIVE TRANSPORT

Coordination in collective transport seems to occur through the item being transported: a movement of one ant engaged in group transport is likely to modify the
stimuli perceived by the other group members, possibly producing, in turn, orientational or positional changes in these ants. This is an example of a mechanism
that we have encountered in virtually every chapter of this book: stigmergy [158].
The ubiquity of this concept in swarm intelligence underlines its importance. Here,
stigmergy is a promising step toward a robotic implementation, because it suggests
that a group of robots can cooperate in group transport without direct communication among robots; moreover, robots do not have to change their behaviors
depending on whether or not other robots are engaged in the task of carrying (or
dragging, or pulling, or pushing) the item. The coordination mechanism used by
ants in cooperative transport is not well understood, and has never really been
modeled. The swarm of robots described in section 7.3 is just such a model, which
shows that the biology of social insects and swarm-based robotics can both benefit
from each other.
7.2.5 NUMBER OF ANTS ENGAGED IN GROUP TRANSPORT
Apparently, the number of ants engaged in transporting an item is an increasing
function of the item's weight, which indicates that group size is adapted to the
item's characteristics. For example, Figure 7.6 shows the number of Pheidologeton
diversus carriers as a function of burden weight. Inverting the relationship described
in section 7.2.1, we obtain N oc WOA89. The fit is remarkable, suggesting that the
adaptation of group size is accurate. Using the same notations as in section 7.2.1,
Franks [128] finds that Wa oc iyP-726 for Eciton burchelli. However, as mentioned
in section 7.2.3, Holldobler's [173] observations suggest that the ants adapt group

Chapter 7

261

FIGURE 7.6 Number of carriers (Pheidologeton diversus) as a function of burden weight.
Average over n observations for each number of carrier ants; same sample sizes n as in
Figure 7.2. After Moffett [240]. Reprinted by permission © National Geographic Research.

size to the difficulty encountered in first moving the prey: decisions rely on how
difficult it is to carry the prey, and not simply on weight. A prey item that resists
(either actively or passively) stimulates the ant(s) to recruit other ants. Success in
carrying a prey item in one direction is followed by another attempt in the same
direction. Finally, recruitment ceases as soon as a group of ants can carry the prey
in a well-defined direction: in that way, group size is adapted to prey size.
7.2.6

DEADLOCK AND STAGNATION RECOVERY

Sometimes, the item's motion can no longer progress either because forces are
applied by ants in opposite directions and cancel one another, or because the group
has encountered an obstacle or any significant heterogeneity on the substrate. We
have already mentioned that a single ant, who first discovers a food item, tries to
transport it alone: the ant first tries to carry it, then to drag it; an unsuccessful
ant tries another direction and/or another position and then, if still unsuccessful,
gives up the prey temporarily to recruit nestmates. The same phenomenon occurs
when ants are engaged in group transport: if, for any reason, the item is stuck, ants
exhibit realigning and repositioning behaviors [302, 304]. The frequency of spatial
rearrangements, which may result from the ants' response to the reactive forces
communicated through the item being transported [304], increases with time, and so
does the rate of transport. As is the case for solitary transporters, realignments tend
to occur before, and are much frequent than, repositionings: only when realignment
is not sufficient do ants try to find other slots around the prey.
Along the same lines, Moffett [240] reports that ants (Pheidologeton diversus)
gather around food items at the site of their discovery, gnawing on them and pulling

262

Swarm Intelligence

Formica polyctena carrying Tenebrio molitor 'slarvea

FIGURE 7.7 Distance over which a larva of Tenebrio molitor has been transported
by Formica polyctena ants as a function of time. Eight experiments are shown.
Deneubourg [319], reprinted by permission.

them; during the first ten minutes or so, the item is moved about slowly in shifting
directions, before ants "sort out" their actions and actual transport can begin.
During these ten minutes, a lot of spatial rearrangements take place.
Personal observations of weaver ants Oecophylla longinoda confirm the existence
of such spatial rearrangements in this species too.
Deneubourg [319] studied cooperative transport of Tenebrio molitor's larvae (a
worm) in the ant Formica polyctena, and found that after a period of unsuccessful attempts to transport the larvae individually or in group, transport suddenly
becomes successful, one possible reason being that the forces applied by the various individuals engaged in cooperative transport become aligned. Figure 7.7 shows
the distance over which a larva has been transported as a function of the time
elapsed since the larva was discovered. Distance is positive when progress has been
made toward the nest and negative otherwise. It can be clearly seen that a "phase
transition" occurs at some point (which, however, cannot be predicted: it varies
from experiment to experiment), when group transport suddenly becomes successful. After that transition, transport proceeds smoothly until the larva reaches the
nest.

Chapter 7

263

7.3

COOPERATIVE TRANSPORT BY A SWARM OF ROBOTS

7.3.1

INTRODUCTION

From the previous section, it seems that the study of group transport in ants may be
useful to guide roboticists in the design of noncommunicating, decentralized groups
of robots for cooperative transport. Cooperative box-pushing has indeed become
one of the benchmark study tasks in swarm-based robotics [10, 57, 106, 113, 206,
207, 209, 250, 277, 280, 296, 297, 322], together with clustering, foraging, and group
marching (see Cao et al. [61, 62]; Kube and Zhang [209]).
In particular, Kube and Zhang [206, 207, 209]; Kube [208]) have been the most
consistent in their ant-based approach to the problem of cooperative transport
(moreover, other approaches, with the exception of Stilwell and Bay's [296, 297]
have relied on either global planning or a combination of local and global planning
with centralized conflict resolution). They have first introduced a simulation model
that they have implemented in a group of five homogeneous robots [206]; they
have then improved their basic model to include stagnation recovery [207]; finally,
introducing a method (which is briefly described in the next subsection) called
"task modeling," where multirobot tasks are described as series of steps, each step
possibly consisting of substeps, they have designed a group of 11 homogeneous
robots implementing cooperative box-pushing with stagnation recovery [209].
This impressive series of works has demonstrated that a nontrivial task requiring the "coordinated" efforts of several robots could be realized without direct
communication among individuals exhibiting identical characteristics. The collective behavior of their system appears to be very similar to that of real ants. Although convergence toward the goal may be slower and more indirect than with
more complex robots, this system has the desirable features of being cheap, robust,
and flexible. This section is dedicated to a description of this work.
7.3.2

BASIC MODEL AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION

Kube and Zhang [206] have designed a group of five robots that coordinate their
actions to carry, or push, an object that one single agent is unable to carry because it
is too heavy. Carrying the item requires the coordinated efforts of at least two robots
that push in the same direction. This cooperation is implemented without any
direct communication among the agents. More precisely, the task to be performed
is defined as follows: the objective, that is shared by the whole group, is to localize
a lit box within a given arena, and to push this item toward an edge of the arena.
Kube and Zhang [206] first performed simulations of a group of robots with a
view to implementing them. In what follows, we mix the description of the simulated
robots with that of the real robots, while stressing important differences. The robots
are designed following a subsumption architecture [44, 45]; (see also section 4.6.2).
A behavior maps sensor inputs to actuators outputs: it realizes a certain stimulusresponse relationship. The box-pushing task makes use of:

264

Swarm Intelligence

1. Three sensors—a goal sensor, an obstacle sensor, and a robot sensor. Obstacles
are sensed using left and right infrared sensors. The goal (the box) is detected
by left and right photocells with adjustable thresholds.
2. One actuator—a steering actuator. Steering the robot is achieved by differentially powering the left and right wheel motors. Only one motor is working at
any one time. For example, to turn right, the left motor is turned on with the
right motor turned off.
3. Five behaviors:
(a) A GOAL behavior, that directs the robot toward the box. When active, it
turns the robot by a fixed angle toward the goal.
(b) An AVOID behavior, dedicated to handling collisions. When this behavior
becomes active, the robot turns by a fixed angle in the opposite direction of
the potential collision.
(c) A FOLLOW behavior, that allows a robot to follow another one.
(d) A SLOW behavior, which adjusts motor speed to avoid rear-end collisions.
(e) A FIND behavior, which is activated during exploration, until the goal has
been detected. The FIND behavior is created by adjusting the photocells'
thresholds.
In the simulated robots, each behavior receives inputs from sensors it is connected to at each time step, computes a response and sends the corresponding
command not directly to the appropriate actuators but to a behavior arbitration
module. Each behavior is given a priority. The simplest possible choice for the behavior arbitration module is a fixed, prewired module, the function of which does
not vary with time. Even in this case, numerous variants are possible, such as the
inclusion of a memory "behavior," which integrates past stimuli and sends a "response proposal" to the arbitration module according to these past stimuli. The
subsumption approach usually resorts to a hierarchy of behaviors with fixed priorities (without learning): at any time, actuators are therefore commanded by the
current active prioritary behavior. This approach requires that the designer know
all possible configurations of the system so as to determine priorities, a task that
can rapidly become intractable as the number of atomic behaviors increases. The
subsumption-based behavior arbitration module used by Kube and Zhang [206] is
sketched in Figure 7.8. The lowest-priority is the default FIND behavior, the output
of which can be suppressed if any other behavior is or is becoming active. The next
lowest-priority behavior is FOLLOW. When a robot follows another robot, it may
get too close to this or another robot, in which case the SLOW behavior is activated,
which acts to reduce the robot's speed while active. Finally, the GOAL behavior,
which is activated by the photocells, can only be suppressed by the highest-priority
behavior AVOID, which is activated when collision with an obstacle is imminent,
and remains active as long as obstacle-detecting sensors are active.
Kube and Zhang's [206] also used a method based on Adaptive Logic Networks (ALN) to construct a behavior arbitration module. ALNs are simplified neu-

Chapter 7

265

FIGURE 7.8 Schematic representation of the behavior arbitration module. The "obstacle," "goal," and "robot" inputs correspond to sensors that allow the detection of, respectively, an obstacle, the goal or another robot. These inputs are connected to behaviors
which are hierarchically organized: a higher-priority behavior can suppress (S) a lowerpriority behavior. The system's output is eventually connected to the actuators, namely
the two motor wheels. After Kube and Zhang [206]. Reprinted by permission © MIT
Press.

ral networks designed to synthesize functions using a binary tree of logical AND
and OR [4]. Such binary trees are then easily implemented in programmable array logic. During the learning phase, ALNs learn to determine priorities among
behaviors on the basis of input vectors that sample input space. Tools to build the
appropriate behavior arbitration module are however not restricted to ALNs, and
other methods, such as classical artificial neural networks can also be used. The
behavior arbitration module obtained with an ALN was simpler to design, but the
subsumption-based approach proved more efficient in terms of accomplishing the
task.
In order to allow the swarm generated by the FOLLOW behavior to be maintained, parasite signals, such as those resulting from the passage of robots walking
in the opposite direction, must be inhibited: a selective attention process can be
implemented so as to restrict the swarming robots' attentions to robots that belong
to the swarm. This set of behaviors allow a dispersion of the robots around the item
to be pushed as well as the implementation of a unidirectional effort. Indeed, the
FOLLOW and GOAL behaviors generate a coordinated motion, while the AVOID
behavior leads to a dispersion of the robots around the item: as soon as an empty
slot appears at a given location around the box, the AVOID behavior is deactivated,
which permits the GOAL behavior of another neighboring robot to become prioritary and allows the robot to fill the empty slot. Figure 7.9 shows the logical wiring
of the arbitration module in the real robots. Sensor inputs Si and £2 correspond
to the left and right infrared sensors, whereas £3 and 84 correspond to the left and
right photocells; AI and AI represent the left and right wheel motors.
Kube and Zhang's [206] five robots are able to locate the box, to converge toward it and to push it in a number of directions depending on how many robots are
present on each side. The robotic implementation of Kube and Zhang [206] shows

266

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 7.9 Combinatorial logic representation of the robots' behavior arbitration module circuit. Sensor inputs Si and 82 correspond to the left and right infrared sensors,
whereas 83 and £4 correspond to the left and right photocells; A\ and AI represent the
left and right wheel motors. After Kube and Zhang [206]. Reprinted by permission © MIT
Press.

that it is possible for a group of simple robots to perform a task cooperatively without any direct communication (indirect communication occurs through stigmergy),
if they have a common goal and behave according to a "noninterference" principle
(although the actions of an agent may influence another's subsequent actions, again
through stimergy). The group of robots eventually moves the box to the periphery
of the arena, in a direction that depends on the initial configuration. Both execution
time and average success rate increase with group size up to a point (dependent
on the respective sizes of the box, the arena and the robots), where interference
takes over. Some limitations associated to this type of approach have also been
highlighted, such as the stagnation problem (when there is no improvement in task
performance for a long time) or the problem of deadlocks.
7.3.3

STAGNATION RECOVERY: MODEL AND ROBOTIC IMPLEMENTATION

In order to overcome the problem of stagnation, Kube and Zhang [207] have simulated mechanisms inspired by social insects: realignment and repositioning [302,
304]. Each robot exerts a force on the box side at a certain angle, producing a
resultant force and torque applied to the center of the box: if the total resultant
force is greater than a threshold, the box translates in the plane, while if the total
torque exceeds a torque threshold, the box rotates. Stagnation here refers to any
situation where a robot is in contact with the box and the box is not moving. Kube
and Zhang [207] have implemented several recovery strategies; the various stagnation recovery behaviors each have a counter, which is reset each time the robot
moves. If, for example, the box has not been moved during a time greater than the
realignment time-out threshold, the corresponding behavior randomly changes the

Chapter?

267

direction of the applied force. When realignment is not sufficient to move the box,
the repositioning behavior is activated: the robot repositions randomly on the box.
Repositioning has the potential to induce larger changes in the applied force
than realignment. Figure 7.10 shows the percentage of success in a simulated task
with four different strategies as a function of group size: (1) no explicit stagnation
recovery; (2) realignment only; (3) repositioning only; (4) realignment and repositioning. The task consists of moving the box 200 grid units from its initial position
within 2000 simulation steps. It can be seen that stagnation recovery always gives
better results; strategy (2) is best when group size is small while strategy (3) is
significantly worse when the number of robots is small, but better as the number
of robots increases; strategy (4) exhibits intermediate performance, as expected
because realignment is activated before repositioning. Figure 7.11 shows the average number of time steps necessary to complete the task in the successful trials
as a function of group size for the four different strategies. When the number of
robots is smaller than 15, the strategy that involves no stagnation recovery converges more quickly when it is successful, while the mixed strategy (4) is slowest
when group size is small but becomes both the fastest and the most reliable when
group size increases; strategies (2) and (3) exhibit intermediate performance. It
appears therefore that the mixed strategy, which combines realignment and repositioning, implements the best combination of reliability and efficiency, providing
us with a possible explanation of why such a combination is used in the species of
ants described by Sudd [302, 304].
Kube and Zhang [209] have developed a method, called task modeling, where
multirobot tasks are described as series of steps, each step possibly consisting of
substeps, to design a group of 11 homogeneous robots implementing cooperative
box-pushing with stagnation recovery [209]. The actual implementation of the recovery behaviors, here backing off and repositioning, requires the addition of a
touch sensor (a forward facing microswitch that provides on/off contact sensing):
the robot backs away from objects contacted by its touch sensors, while repositioning moves the robot in a backward arc. Moreover, the task is now different from
that of the previous section, since the box has to be pushed toward a goal and
not simply to the periphery of the arena, requiring the addition of a goal sensor (a
forward facing rotating phototransistor that detects the direction of the goal where
the box should be pushed). Bascially, the task of finding a box to be pushed toward
a goal can be divided into three subtasks: (1) find the box, (2) move to the box,
and (3) push the box toward the goal. Subtask (3) is new with respect to previous
section's system: if the box is located between the robot and the goal, then the
robot pushes the box; otherwise, the robot steps back and repositions itself.
Although it is beyond the scope of this book to describe Kube and Zhang's [209]
work in detail, let us mention that their robotic implementation seems to reproduce important features of real ants (Figure 7.12). Their videotaped experiments,
available and worth viewing at http://www.cs.ualberta.ca/ kube/, clearly show the
similarities between their swarm of robots and a group of ants engaged in collective
transport. Despite the antagonistic forces present in ant group transport [240], the

268

Swarm Intelligence

FIGURE 7.10 Percentage of success in a box-pushing task as a function of group size
for four different stagnation recovery strategies: (1) no explicit stagnation recovery; (2)
realignment only; (3) repositioning only; (4) realignment and repositioning. Percentage
over 25 trials for each strategy. After Kube and Zhang [207]. Reprinted by permission ©
IEEE.

FIGURE 7.11 Average number of time steps necessary to complete the task in the successful trials as a function of group size for the four different stagnation recovery strategies:
(1) no explicit stagnation recovery; (2) realignment only; (3) repositioning only; (4) realignment and repositioning. After Kube and Zhang [207]. Reprinted by permission ©
IEEE.

Chapter 7

269

FIGURE 7.12 Picture of a robot (left), and two pictures showing a group of robots
pushing a circular lit box toward a lit area [208]. Reprinted by permission.

item is eventually always taken back to the nest (unless it escapes!). In the swarm
of robots, the path taken to the goal is certainly not optimal and often varies from
experiment to experiment, and progress to the goal is not continuous. "There are
even temporary setbacks as the box is moved incorrectly. At times, the robots can
lose contact with the box, be blocked by other robots, or be forced to relocate as the
box rotates ([209], p. 109). Using a centralized controller, one would likely obtain
a better and more consistent performance. But the solution found by the swarm
of robots is a feasible solution to the problem given the limited abilities of the
individual robots. Let us reemphasize at this point that swarm-based robotics—a
booming field indeed—despite being currently limited to solving ridiculously simple
problems in toy worlds, must be considered in the perspective of miniaturization
and low cost.

7.4

POINTS TO REMEMBER

In several species of ants, workers cooperate to retrieve large prey. Usually, one ant
finds a prey item, tries to move it, and, when unsuccessful for some time, recruits
nestmates through direct contact or chemical marking. When a group of ants tries
to move large prey, the ants change position and alignment until the prey can be
moved toward the nest. A robotic implementation of this phenomenon has been
described. Although the robotic system may not appear to be very efficient, it is
an interesting example of decentralized problem-solving by a group of robots, and
it provides the first formalized model of cooperative transport in ants.

This page intentionally left blank

Epilogue

CHAPTER 8

After seven chapters of swarm-based approaches, where do we stand? First of all,
it is clear that social insects and, more generally, natural systems, can bring much
insight into the design of algorithms and artificial problem-solving systems. In particular, artificial swarm-intelligent systems are expected to exhibit the features that
may have made social insects so successful in the biosphere: flexibility, robustness,
decentralized control, and self-organization. The examples that have been described
throughout this book provide illustrations of these features, either explicitly or implicitly. The swarm-based approach, therefore, looks promising, in face of a world
that continually becomes more complex, dynamic, and overloaded with information
than ever.
There remain some issues, however, as to the application of swarm intelligence
to solving problems.
1. First, it would be very useful to define methodologies to "program" a swarm or
multiagent system so that it performs a given task. There is a similarity here
with the problem of training neural networks [167]: how can one tune interaction weights so that the network performs a given task, such as classification,
recognition, etc. The fact that (potentially mobile) agents in a swarm can take
actions asynchronously and at any spatial location generally makes the problem
extremely hard. In order to solve this "inverse" problem and find the appropriate
individual algorithm that generates the desired collective pattern, one can either
271

272

Swarm Intelligence

systematically explore the behaviors of billions of different swarms, or search
this huge space of possible swarms with some kind of cost function, assuming
a reasonable continuity of the mapping from individual algorithms to collective
productions. This latter solution can be based, for example, on artificial evolutionary techniques such as genetic algorithms [152, 171] if individual behavior is
adequately coded and if a cost function can be defined.
2. Second, and perhaps even more fundamental than the issue of programming the
system, is that of defining it: How complex should individual agents be? Should
they be all identical? Should they have the ability to learn? Should they be able to
make logical inferences? Should they be purely reactive? How local should their
knowledge of the environment be? Should they communicate directly? What
information, if any, should they exchange? If they communicate indirectly, what
should be the nature of that communication? And so forth. There is certainly
no systematic way of answering these questions, which are problem specific. A
reasonable approach consists of starting to solve a problem with the simplest
possible agents and of making them progressively more complex if needed.
3. Last, swarm-intelligent systems face two major problems common to all adaptive
problem-solving systems:
(a) Their lack of absolute reliability. In particular, it is difficult to predict how
such a system will behave when confronted with unexpected events, and the
variance in the performance of an adaptive algorithm can be high, which
means that the risk is high. This is one of the reasons why, for example,
adaptive algorithms are trusted to a limited extent in the context of finance,
where decisions are eventually most often made by human beings.
(b) The lack of standard benchmarks that would allow the evaluation of their
performance.
While point 3 (a) can be "solved" by extensively exploring the behavior of a
given adaptive system (for lack of formal proof of the system's behavior), point 3(b)
requires the creation of a set of problems suited to the evaluation of adaptive
algorithms in general, and swarm-intelligent systems in particular. A crucial feature
of such algorithms is that they often work as poor-to-average heuristics in static
problems (except in specific cases) and fully express their capabilities only in the
context of dynamically changing problems. Designing benchmarks that take account
of time is an interesting line of research, as it raises important questions about
the very nature of adaptivity: What should one expect from an adaptive system?
What are the natural time scales of a system's behavior, and how should they
relate to the time scale of the problem's variations? How can one evaluate the
performance of the system? etc. A classification of all possible types of "relevant"
dynamics is also required: there are many potential ways of being dynamic, and
many ways of being nonstationary, but it may be possible to show the existence of
large classes of dynamics and nonstationarities that would have similar properties
in terms of how difficult it is to solve the corresponding dynamic problem. Although

This page intentionally left blank

This page intentionally left blank

Bibliography

[1] Aarts, E. H. L., and J. H. M. Korst. Simulated Annealing and Boltzmann
Machines. New York, NY: Wiley & Sons, 1988.
[2] Adamatzky, A., and O. Holland. "Electricity, Chemicals, Ants, and Agents:
A Spectrum of Swarm Based Techniques." Presented at ANTS '98—From
Ant Colonies to Artificial Ants: First International Workshop on Ant Colony
Optimization. IRIDA, Universite Libre de Bruxelles^October 15-16, 1998.
[3] Appleby, S., and S. Steward. "Mobile Software Agents for Control in Telecommunications Networks." British Telecom Technol. J. 12 (1994): 104-113.
[4] Armstrong, W., A. Dwelly, J. Liang, D. Lin, and S. Reynolds. "Learning and
Generalization in Adaptive Logic Networks, In Artificial Neural Networks."
In Proceedings 1991 International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks,
edited by T. Kohonen, K. Makisara, O. Simula, and J. Kangas. New York:
Elsevier Science, 1991.
[5] Aron, S., J.-L. Deneubourg, S. Goss, and J. M. Pasteels. "Functional
Self-Organisation Illustrated by Inter-Nest Traffic in the Argentine Ant
Iridomyrmex humilis." In Biological Motion, edited by W. Alt and G. Hoffman, 533-547. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1990.
[6] Baluja, S., and R. Caruana. "Removing the Genetics From the Standard Genetic Algorithm." In Proceedings Twelfth International Conference on Machine Learning, ML-95, edited by A. Prieditis, and S. Russell, 38-46. Palo
Alto, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1995.

275

276

Swarm Intelligence

[7] Barker, G., and M. Crimson. "The Physics of Muesli." New Scientist 126
(1990): 37-40.
[8] Barto, A. G., R. S. Button, and C. W. Anderson. "Neuronlike Adaptive Elements that Can Solve Difficult Learning Control Problems." IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 13 (1983): 834-846.
[9] Battiti, R., and G. Tecchiolli. "The Reactive Tabu Search." ORSA J. Computing 6 (1994): 126-140.
[10] Bay, J. S. "Design of the Army-Ant Cooperative Lifting Robot." IEEE
Robotics and Automation Mag. 2 (1995): 36-43.
[11] Beckers, R., J.-L. Deneubourg, and S. Goss. "Trails and U-Turns in the Selection of a Path by the Ant Lasius niger." J. Theor. Biol. 159 (1992): 397-415.
[12] Beckers, R., O. E. Holland, and J.-L. Deneubourg. "From Local Actions to
Global Tasks: Stigmergy and Collective Robotics." In Artificial Life IV, edited
by R. Brooks and P. Maes, 181-189. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994.
[13] Beni, G. "The Concept of Cellular Robotic System." 'In Proceedings 1988
IEEE Int. Symp. on Intelligent Control, 57-62. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE
Computer Society Press, 1988.
[14] Beni, G., and J. Wang. "Swarm Intelligence." In Proceedings Seventh Annual
Meeting of the Robotics Society of Japan, 425-428. Tokyo: RSJ Press, 1989.
[15] Beni, G., and J. Wang. "Theoretical Problems for the Realization of
Distributed Robotic Systems." In Proceedings 1991 IEEE International Conference on Robotic and Automation, 1914-1920. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE
Computer Society Press, 1991.
[16] Beni, G., and S. Hackwood. "Stationary Waves in Cyclic Swarms." In Proceedings 1992 IEEE Int. Symp. on Intelligent Control, 234-242. Los Alamitos,
CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1992.
[17] Bennett, C. H. "Logical Depth and Physical Complexity." In The Universal
Turing Machine: A Half-Century Survey, edited by R. Haken. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1988.
[18] Bentley, P. J., and J. P. Wakefield. "Conceptual Evolutionary Design by Genetic Algorithms." Eng. Design & Automation J. 3 (1997): 119-131.
[19] Benzecri, J. P. L'Analyse des Donnees. II. L'Analyse des Correspondances.
Paris: Dunod, 1973.
[20] Bersini, H., C. Oury, and M. Dorigo. "Hybridization of Genetic Algorithms."
Technical Report IRIDIA/95-22. Belgium: Universite Libre de Bruxelles,
1995.
[21] Bersini, H., M. Dorigo, S. Langerman, G. Seront, and L. M. Gambardella.
"Results of the First International Contest on Evolutionary Optimization."
In Proceedings 1996 IEEE International Conference on Evolutionary Computation, 611-615. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1996.
[22] Bertsekas D. Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control. Bellmont, MA:
Athena Scientific, 1995.
[23] Bertsekas, D., and R. Gallager. Data Networks. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1992.

Bibliography

277

[24] Bilchev, G., and I. C. Parmee. "The Ant Colony Metaphor for Searching
Continuous Design Spaces." In Proc. of AISB Workshop on Evolutionary
Computing Lecture Notes in Computer Science 993, edited by T. C. Fogarty,
25-39. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1995.
[25] Boender, C. G. E., A. H. G. Rinnooy Kan, L. Strougie, and G. T. Timmer. "A
Stochastic Method for Global Optimization." Math. Prog. 22 (1982): 125-140.
[26] Bonabeau, E., G. Theraulaz, E. Arpin, and E. Sardet. "The Building Behavior
of Lattice Swarms." In Artificial Life IV, edited by R. Brooks, and P. Maes,
307-312. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994.
[27] Bonabeau, E. "Marginally Stable Swarms are Flexible and Efficient." J. Phys.
I France 6 (1996): 309-320.
[28] Bonabeau, E., and F. Cogne. "Oscillation-Enhanced Adaptability in the
Vicinity of a Bifurcation: The Example of Foraging in Ants." In Proceedings Fourth International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior:
From Animals to Animals 4-, edited by P. Maes, M. Mataric, J.-A. Meyer, J.
Pollack, and S. Wilson, 537-544. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.
[29] Bonabeau, E., G. Theraulaz, and J.-L. Deneubourg. "Quantitative Study of
the Fixed Threshold Model for the Regulation of Division of Labour in Insect
Societies." Proceedings Roy. Soc. London B 263 (1996): 1565-1569.
[30] Bonabeau, E. "From Classical Models of Morphogenesis to Agent-Based Models of Pattern Formation." Artificial Life 3 (1997): 191-209.
[31] Bonabeau, E., G. Theraulaz, J.-L. Deneubourg, S. Aron, and S, Camazine.
"Self-Organization in Social Insects." Trends in Ecol. Evol 12 (1997): 188193.
[32] Bonabeau, E., A. Sobkowski, G. Theraulaz, and J.-L. Deneubourg. "Adaptive
Task Allocation Inspired by a Model of Division of Labor in Social Insects." In
Bio-Computation and Emergent Computing, edited by D. Lundh, B. Olsson,
and A. Narayanan, 36-45. Singapore: World Scientific, 1997.
[33] Bonabeau, E., F. Henaux, S. Guerin, D. Snyers, P. Kuntz, and G. Theraulaz, G. . "Routing in Telecommunications Networks with Smart Ant-Like
Agents. In Proceedings Intelligent Agents for Telecommunications Applications, IATA'98. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[34] Bonabeau, E., G. Theraulaz, and J.-L. Deneubourg. "Fixed Response Thresholds and the Regulation of Division of Labour in Insect Societies. Bull. Math.
Biol 60 (1998): 753-807.
[35] Bonabeau, E., G. Theraulaz, J.-L. Deneubourg, N. R. Franks, O. Rafelsberger,
J.-L. Joly, and S. Blanco. "A Model for the Emergence of Pillars, Walls and
Royal Chambers in Termite Nests." Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London B 353
(1998): 1561-1576.
[36] Bonabeau, E., S. Guerin, D. Snyers, P. Kuntz, G. Theraulaz, and F. Cogne.
"Complex Three-Dimensional Architectures Grown by Simple Agents: An
Exploration with a Genetic Algorithm." Evol. Comp. (1998): submitted.
[37] Bounds, D. G. "New Optimization Methods from Physics and Biology." Nature 329 (1987): 215-219.

278

Swarm Intelligence

[38] Bowden, N., A. Terfort, J. Carbeck, and G. M. Whitesides. "Self-Assembly
of Mesoscale Objects Into Ordered Two-Dimensional Arrays." Science 276
(1997): 233-235.
[39] Boyan, J. A., and M. L. Littman. "Packet Routing in Dynamically Changing
Networks: A Reinforcement Learning Approach." In Proceedings Sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS-6, 671-678. San
Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1994.
[40] Branke, J., M. Middendorf, and F. Schneider. "Improved Heuristics and a Genetic Algorithm for Finding Short Supersequences." 'OR-Spektrum 20 (1998):
39-46.
[41] Breed, M. D., J. H. Fewell, A. J. Moore, and K. R. Williams. "Graded Recruitment in a Ponerine Ant." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 20 (1987): 407-411.
[42] Breed, M. D., G. E. Robinson, and R. E. Page. "Division of Labor During
Honey Bee Colony Defense." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 27 (1990): 395-401.
[43] Brian, M. V. Social Insects: Ecology and Behavioural Biology. Chapman &
Hall, 1983.
[44] Brooks, R. A. "A Robust Layered Control System For A Mobile Robot." J.
of Robotics and Automation 2 (1986): 14-23.
[45] Brooks, R. A. "New Approaches to Robotics." Science 253 (1991): 12271232.
[46] Broughton, T., A. Tan, and P. S. Coates. "The Use of Genetic Programming in
Exploring 3D Design Worlds." In Proceedings of CAAD Futures, edited by R.
Junge. Miinchen: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997. (Related paper available
at http://www.uel.ac.uk/faculties/arch/latest-draft/chapterl2.html.)
[47] Bruckstein, A. M. "Why the Ant Trails Look So Straight and Nice." The
Mathematical Intelligencer 15:2 (1993): 59-62.
[48] Bruinsma, O. H. "An Analysis of Building Behaviour of the Termite Macrotermes subhyalinus (Rambur)." Thesis, The Netherlands: Landbouwhoge
School, Wageningen, 1979.
[49] Bullnheimer, B., R. F. Hartl, and C. Strauss. "A New Rank Based Version of
the Ant System: A Computational Study." Working paper #1, SFB Adaptive
Information Systems and Modelling in Economics and Management Science,
Vienna, 1997.
[50] Bullnheimer, B., R. F. Hartl, and C. Strauss. "An Improved Ant System
Algorithm for the Vehicle Routing Problem." POM Working Paper No. 10/97,
University of Vienna, 1997.
[51] Burkard, R. E., S. Karish, and F. Rendl. "QAPLIB—A Quadratic Assignment
Problem Library." Eur. J. Oper. Res. 55 (1991): 115-119.
[52] Burton, J. L., and N. R. Franks. "The Foraging Ecology of the Army Ant
Eciton rapax: An Ergonomic Enigma?" Ecol. Entomol. 10 (1985): 131-141.
[53] Butrimenko, A. V. "On the Search for Optimal Routes in Changing Graphs."
Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Tekhn. Kibern. 6 (1964).

Bibliography

279

[54] Calabi, P. "Behavioral Flexibility in Hymenoptera: A Re-Examination of the
Concept of Caste." In Advances in Myrmecology, edited by J. C. Trager, 237258. Leiden: Brill Press, 1988.
[55] Calderone, N. W., and R. E. Page. "Genotypic Variability in Age Polyethism
and Task Specialization in the Honey Bee Apis mellifera (Hymenoptera: Apidae)." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 22 (1988): 17-25.
[56] Calderone, N. W., and R. E. Page. "Temporal Polyethism and Behavioural
Canalization in the Honey Bee, Apis mellifera." Anim. Behav. 51 (1996):
631-643.
[57] Caloud, P., W. Choi, J.-C. Latombe, C. Le Pape, and M. Yim. "Indoor Automation With Many Mobile Robots." In Proceedings 1990 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 67-72. Los Alamitos,
CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1990.
[58] Camazine, S. "Self-Organizing Pattern-Formation on the Combs of Honey
Bee Colonies." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 28 (1991): 61-76.
[59] Camazine, S., and J. Sneyd. "A Model of Collective Nectar Source Selection
by Honey Bees: Self-Organization Through Simple Rules." J. Theor. Biol.
149 (1991): 547-571.
[60] Camazine, S., J.-L. Deneubourg, N. R. Franks, J. Sneyd, G. Theraulaz,
and E. Bonabeau. Self-Organized Biological Superstructures. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1998.
[61] Cao, Y. U., A. S. Fukunaga, and A. B. Kahng. "Cooperative Mobilerobotics:
Antecedents and Directions." In Proceedings 1995 IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 226-234. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE
Computer Society Press, 1995.
[62] Cao, Y. U., A. S. Fukunaga, and A. B. Kahng. "Cooperative Mobile Robotics:
Antecedents and Directions." Autonomous Robots 4 (1997): 7-27.
[63] Ceusters, R. " Etude du degre de Couverture du ciel par la Vegetation audessus des nids de Formica polyctena Foerst." Biol. Ecol. Medit. VII (3)
(1980): 187-188.
[64] Ceusters, R. "Simulation du nid Naturel des Fourmis par des nids Artificiels
Places sur un Gradient de Temperature." Actes Coll. Insect. Soc. 3 (1986):
235-241.
[65] Chauvin, R. "Sur le transport collectif des proies par Formica polyctena."
Insectes Sociaux 25 (1968): 193-200.
[66] Chauvin, R. "Les lois de 1'ergonomie chez les fourmis au cours du transport
d'objets." C. R. Acad. Sc. Pans D 273 (1971): 1862-1865.
[67] Chen, K. "A Simple Learning Algorithm for the Traveling Salesman Problem." Phys. Rev. E 55 (1997): 7809.
[68] Cherix, D. "Note Preliminaire sur la Structure, la Phenologie et le Regime
Alimentaire d'une Super-colonie de Formica lugubris Zett." Insectes Sociaux
27 (1980): 226-236.

280

Swarm Intelligence

[69] Chirikjian, G. S. "Kinematics of a Metamorphic Robotic System." In Proceedings 1994 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
449-455. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1994.
[70] Chirikjian, G. S., A. Pamecha, and I. Ebert-Uphoff. "Evaluating Efficiency of
Self-Rreconfiguration in a Class of Modular Robots." J. Robotic Systems 13
(1996): 317-338.
[71] Choi S. P. M., and D.-Y. Yeung. "Predictive Q-Routing: A Memory-Based
Reinforcement Learning Approach to Adaptive Traffic Control." Proceedings
8th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS-8, 945-910.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.
[72] Chretien, L. "Organisation Spatiale du Materiel Provenant de 1'excavation du
nid chez Messor Barbarus et des Cadavres d'ouvrieres chez Lasius niger (Hymenopterae: Formicidae)." Ph.D. dissertation, Universite Libre de Bruxelles,
1996.
[73] Clearwater, S. H., and B. A. Huberman. "Thermal Markets for Controlling
Building Environments." Energy Eng. 91 (1994): 26-56.
[74] Clearwater, S. H. Market-Based Control: A Paradigm for Distributed Resource
Allocation. Singapore: World Scientific, 1995.
[75] Coates, P. S., N. Healy, C. Lamb, and W. L. Voon. "The Use of Ccellular
Automata to Explore Bottom Up Architectonic Rules." Paper presented at
Eurographics UK Chapter, 14th Annual Conference, 26-28 March 1996, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London, 1996. (Paper
available at http://www.uel.ac.uk/faculties/arch/paper-bits/paper.html.)
[76] Colorni, A., M. Dorigo, and V. Maniezzo. "Distributed Optimization by Ant
Colonies." In Proceedings First Europ. Conference on Artificial Life, edited
by F. Varela and P. Bourgine, 134-142. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.
[77] Colorni, A., M. Dorigo, and V. Maniezzo. "An Investigation of Some Properties of An Ant Algorithm." In Proceedings 1992 Parallel Problem Solving
from Nature Conference, edited by R. Manner and B. Manderick, 509-520.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1992.
[78] Colorni, A., M. Dorigo, V. Maniezzo, and M. Trubian. "Ant System for JobShop Scheduling." JORBEL—Belgian Journal of Operations Research, Statistics and Computer Science 34 (1994): 39-53.
[79] Cook, S., and C. Rackoff. "Space Lower Bounds for Maze Threadability on
Restricted Machines." SI AM J. Comput. 9 (1980): 636-652.
[80] Costa, D., A. Hertz, and O. Dubuis. "Embedding of a Sequential Algorithm
Within an Evolutionary Algorithm for Coloring Problems in Graphs." J. of
Heuristics 1 (1995): 105-128.
[81] Costa, D., and A. Hertz. "Ants Can Colour Graphs." J. Op. Res. Soc. 48
(1997): 295-305.
[82] Darchen, R. "Les Techniques de la Construction chez Apis mellinca." Ph.D.
dissertation, Universite de Paris, 1959.

Bibliography

281

[83] Deneubourg, J.-L. "Application de 1'ordre par Fluctuations a la Description
de Certaines etapes de la Construction du nid chez les Termites." Insect. Soc.
24 (1977): 117-130.
[84] Deneubourg, J.-L., S. Goss, J. M. Pasteels, D. Fresneau, and J.-P. Lachaud.
"Self-Organization Mechanisms in Ant Societies (II): Learning in Foraging
and Division of Labour." Experientia Suppl. 54 (1987): 177-196.
[85] Deneubourg, J.-L., and S. Goss. "Collective Patterns and Decision Making."
Ethol. Ecol & Evol. I (1989): 295-311.
[86] Deneubourg, J.-L., S. Goss, N. R. Franks, and J. M. Pasteels. "The Blind
Leading the Blind: Modelling Chemically Mediated Army Ant Raid Patterns." J. Insect Behav. 2 (1989): 719-725.
[87] Deneubourg, J.-L., S. Aron, S. Goss, and J.-M. Pasteels. "The Self-Organizing
Exploratory Pattern of the Argentine Ant." J. Insect Behavior 3 (1990): 159168.
[88] Deneubourg, J.-L., S. Goss, N. Franks, A. Sendova-Franks, C. Detrain, and L.
Chretien. "The Dynamics of Collective Sorting: Robot-Like Ant and Ant-Like
Robot." In Proceedings First Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior:
From Animals to Animats, edited by J. A. Meyer and S. W. Wilson, 356-365.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.
[89] Deneubourg, J.-L., G. Theraulaz, and R. Beckers. "Swarm-Made Architectures." In Proceedings First European Conference on Artificial Life: Toward
a Practice of Autonomous Systems, edited by F. J. Varela and P. Bourgine,
123-133. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
[90] Detrain, C., J. M. Pasteels, and J.-L. Deneubourg. "Polyethisme dans le trace
et le suivi de la piste chez Pheidole pallidula (Formicidae)." Actes Coll. Ins.
Soc. 4 (1988): 87-94.
[91] Detrain, C., and J. M. Pasteels. "Caste Differences in Behavioral Thresholds
as a Basis for Polyethism During Food Recruitment in the Ant Pheidole pallidula (Nyl.) (Hymenoptera: Myrmicinae)." J. Ins. Behav. 4 (1991): 157-176.
[92] Detrain, C., and J. M. Pasteels. "Caste Polyethism and Collective Defense
in the Ant Pheidole pallidula: The Outcome of Quantitative Differences in
Recruitment." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 29 (1992): 405-412.
[93] Detrain, C., J.-L. Deneubourg. "Origine de la Diversite des Reponses Collectives des Fourmis lors de la recolte de proies." Actes Coll. Ins. Soc. 10 (1996):
57-65.
[94] Detrain, C., J.-L. Deneubourg. "Scavenging by Pheidole pallidula: A Key for
Understanding Decision-Making Systems in Ants." Anim. Behav. 53 (1997):
537-547.
[95] Deveza, R., D. Thiel, A. Russell, and A. Mackay-Sim. "Odor Sensing for
Robot Guidance." Int. J. Robotics Res. 13 (1994): 232-239.
[96] Di Caro, G., and M. Dorigo. "Mobile Agents for Adaptive Routing." In Proceedings 31st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS31), 74-83. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1998.

282

Swarm Intelligence

[97] Di Caro, G., and M. Dorigo. "AntNet: Distributed Stigmergetic Control for
Communications Networks." J. Art. Int. Res. 9 (1998): 317-365.
[98] Di Caro, G., and M. Dorigo. "Extending AntNet for Best Effort Quality-ofService Routing." Unpublished presentation at the First Int. Workshop on
Ant Colony Optimization: From Ant Colonies to Artificial Ants, ANTS'98,
October 15-16, 1998, Brussels, Belgium.
[99] Di Caro, G., and M. Dorigo. "Ant Colonies for Adaptive Routing in PacketSwitched Communications Networks." In Proceedings of PPSN V—Fifth International Conference on Parallel Problem Solving From Nature, 673-682.
Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[100] Di Caro, G., and M. Dorigo. "An Adaptive Multi-Agent Routing Algorithm
Inspired by Ants Behavior." In Proceedings of PART98—Fifth Annual Australasian Conference on Parallel and Real-Time. Systems, edited by K. A.
Hawick and H. A. James, 261-272. Singapore: Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[101] Di Caro, G., and M. Dorigo. "Two Ant Colony Algorithms for Best-Effort
Routing in Datagram Networks." In Proceedings of the 10th IASTED International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing and Systems
(PDCS'98), edited by Y. Pan, S. G. Akl, and K. li, 541-546. Anaheim, CA:
IASTED/ACTA Press, 1998.
[102] Di Caro, G., and M. Dorigo. "Adaptive Learning of Routing Tables in Communication Networks." In Proceedings of the Italian Workshop on Machine
Learning (IWML-97), Torino, December 9-10, 1997.
[103] Di Caro, G., and M. Dorigo. "AntNet: A Mobile Agents Approach to Adaptive Routing." Technical Report IRIDIA/97-12, Universite Libre de Bruxelles,
Belgium, 1997.
[104] Di Caro, G., and M. Dorigo. "A Study of Distributed Stigmergetic Control for
Packet-Switched Communitcations Networks." Technical Report IRIDIA/9720, Universite Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, 1997.
[105] Di Caro, G., and M. Dorigo. "Distributed Reinforcement Agents for Adaptive Routing in Communication Networks." Third European Workshop on
Reinforcement Learning (EWRL-3), Rennes, France, October 13-14, 1997.
[106] Donald, B., J. Jennings, and D. Rus. "Analyzing Teams of Cooperating Mobile Robots." In Proceedings 1994 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, 1896-1903. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society
Press, 1994.
[107] Dorigo, M., V. Maniezzo, and A. Colorni. "Positive Feedback as a Search
Strategy." Tech. Rep. No. 91-016, Politecnico di Milano, Italy, 1991.
[108] Dorigo, M. "Ottimizzazione, Apprendimento Automatico, ed Algoritmi
Basati su Metafora Naturale." Ph.D. Dissertation, Politecnico di Milano,
Italy, 1992.
[109] Dorigo, M., V. Maniezzo, and A. Colorni. "The Ant System: Optimization
by a Colony of Cooperating Agents." IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B 26
(1996): 29-41.

Bibliography

283

[110] Dorigo, M., and L. M. Gambardella. "A Study of Some Properties of Ant-Q."
In Proceedings Fourth International Conference on Parallel Problem Solving
From Nature, PPSN IV, 656-665. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1996.
[Ill] Dorigo, M., and L. M. Gambardella. "Ant Colony System: A Cooperative
Learning Approach to the Traveling Salesman Problem." IEEE Trans. Evol.
Comp. 1 (1997): 53-66.
[112] Dorigo, M., and L. M. Gambardella. "Ant Colonies for the Traveling Salesman
Problem." BioSystems 43 (1997): 73-81.
[113] Doty, K. L., and R. E. van Aken. "Swarm Robot Materials Handling Paradigm
for a Manufacturing Workcell." In Proceedings 1993 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 778-782. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1993.
[114] Downing, H. A., and R. L. Jeanne. "Nest Construction by the Paperwasp
Polistes: A Test of Stigmergy Theory." Anim. Behav. 36 (1988): 1729-1739.
[115] Downing, H. A., and R. L. Jeanne. "The Regulation of Complex Building
Behavior in the Paperwasp Polistes fuscatus." Anim. Behav. 39 (1990): 105124.
[116] Dukas, R., and P. K. Visscher. "Lifetime Learning by Foraging Honey Bees."
Anim. Behav. 48 (1994): 1007-1012.
[117] Durbin, R., and D. Willshaw. "An Analogue Approach to the Travelling Salesman Problem Using an Elastic Net Method." Nature 326 (1987): 689-691.
[118] Eggenberger, P. "Evolving Morphologies of Simulated 3D Organisms Based
on Differential Gene Expression." In Proceedings Fourth European Conference
on Artificial Life, edited by P. Husbands and I. Harvey, 206-213. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1997.
[119] Eilon, S., C. D. T. Watson-Gandy, and N. Christofides. "Distribution Management: Mathematical Modeling and Practical Analysis." Oper. Resh. Quart.
20 (1969): 37-53.
[120] Escudero, L. F. "An Inexact Algorithm for the Sequential Ordering Problem."
Eur. J. Op. Res. 37 (1988): 232-253.
[121] Farmer, J. D., N. H. Packard, and A. S. Perelson. "The Immune System,
Adaptation, and Machine Learning." Physica D 22 (1986): 187-204.
[122] Feynman, R. P. Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!Toronto: Bantam Books,
1985.
[123] Fleurent, C., and J. Ferland. "Genetic Hybrids for the Quadratic Assignment
Problem." DIM ACS Series in Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science
16 (1994): 173-187.
[124] Fleurent, C., and J. Ferland. "Genetic and Hybrid Algorithms for Graph
Coloring." Ann. Oper. Res. 63 (1996): 437-461.
[125] Fogel, D. B. "Applying Eevolutionary Programming to Selected Traveling
Salesman Problems." Cybern Syst: Int. J. 24 (1993): 27-36.
[126] Forrest, S. "Genetic Algorithms: Principles of Natural Selection Applied to
Computation." Science 261 (1993): 872-878.

284

Swarm Intelligence

[127] Foulser, D. E., M. Li, and Q. Yang. "Theory and Agorithms for Plan Merging." Artificial Intelligence 57 (1992): 143-181.
[128] Franks, N. R. "Teams in Social Insects: Group Retrieval of Prey by Army
Ants (Eciton burchelli, Hymenoptera: Formicidae)." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol.
18 (1986): 425-429.
[129] Franks, N. R., N. Gomez, S. Goss, and J.-L. Deneubourg. "The Blind Leading
the Blind in Army Ant Raid Patterns: Testing A Model of Self-Organization
(Hymenoptera: Formicidae)." J. Insect Behav. 4 (1991): 583-607.
[130] Franks, N. R., and A. B. Sendova-Franks. "Brood Sorting by Ants: Distributing the Workload Over The Work Surface." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 30 (1992):
109-123.
[131] Franks, N. R., A. Wilby, V. W. Silverman, and C. Tofts. "Self-Organizing Nest
Construction in Ants: Sophisticated Building by Blind Buldozing." Anim.
Behav. 44 (1992): 357-375.
[132] Franks, N. R., and J.-L. Deneubourg. "Self-Organizing Nest Construction in
Ants: Individual Worker Behaviour and the Nest's Dynamics." Anim. Behav.
54 (1997): 779-796.
[133] Freisleben, B., and P. Merz. "New Genetic Local Search Operators for the
Traveling Salesman Problem." In Proceedings 4th International Conference
Parallel Problem Solving from Nature, PPSN IV, edited by H.-M. Voigt, W.
Ebeling, I. Rechenberg, and H.-S. Schwefel, 890-899. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
1996.
[134] Freisleben, B., and P. Merz. "Genetic Local Search Algorithm for Solving
Symmetric and Asymmetric Traveling Salesman Problems." In Proceedings
IEEE Int. Conf. Evolutionary Computation, 616-621. IEEE-EC96, 1996. Operators for the Traveling Salesman Problem."
[135] Frumhoff, P. C., and J. Baker. "A Genetic Component to Division of Labour
Within Hhoney Bee Colonies." Nature 333 (1988): 358-361.
[136] Fukuda, T., S. Nakaggawa, Y. Kawauchi, and M. Buss. "Structure Decision Method for Self-Organizing Robots Based on Cell Structure—CEBOT."
In Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
695-700. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1989.
[137] Funes, P., and J. Pollack. "Computer Evolution of Buildable Objects." In
Proceedings Fourth European Conference on Artificial Life, edited by P. Husbands and I. Harvey, 358-367. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
[138] Gambardella, L. M., and M. Dorigo. "Ant-Q: A Reinforcement Learning Approach to the Traveling Salesman Pproblem." In Proceedings Twelfth International Conference on Machine Learning, ML-95, 252-260. Palo Alto, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann, 1995.
[139] Gambardella, L. M., and M. Dorigo. "HAS-SOP: Hybrid Ant System for
the Sequential Ordering Problem." Technical Report IDSIA 11-97, IDSIA,
Lugano, Switzerland, 1997. To appear in INFORMS J. Comp., 2000.

Bibliography

285

[140] Gambardella, L. M., E. D. Taillard, and M. Dorigo. "Ant Colonies for the
QAP." Technical Report IDSIA 4-97, IDSIA, Lugano, Switzerland, 1997. Published in J. Oper. Resh. Soc. 50(2) (1999): 167-176.
[141] Garbers, J., H. J. Promel, and A. Steger. "Finding Clusters in VLSI Circuits."
In Proceedings 1990 IEEE International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, 520-523. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1990.
[142] Garey, M. R., D. S. Johnson, and L. Stockmeyer. "Some Simplified NPComplete Graph Problems." Theor. Comp. Sci. 1 (1976): 237-267.
[143] Garey, M. R., D. S. Johnson, and R. Sethi. "The Complexity of Flowshop
and Jobshop Scheduling." Math. Oper. Res. 1 (1976): 117-129.
[144] Garey M. R., R. L. Graham, and D. S. Johnson. "The Complexity of Computing Steiner Minimal Trees." SIAM J. Appl. Math. 32 (1977): 835-859.
[145] Garey, M. R., and D. S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to
the Theory of NP'-Completeness. San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman, 1979.
[146] Garey, M. R., and D. S. Johnson. "Crossing Number is NP-Complete." SIAM
J. Alg. Disc. Meth. 4 (1983): 312-316.
[147] Gaussier, P., and S. Zrehen. "Avoiding the World Model Trap: An Acting
Robot Does Not Need to be Smart." Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing 11 (1994): 279-286.
[148] Gaussier, P., and S. Zrehen. "A Constructivist Approach for Autonomous
Agents." In Artificial Life and Virtual Reality, edited by N. Magnenat Thalmann and D. Thalmann, 97-113. New York, NY: Wiley & Sons, 1994.
[149] Gilmore, P. "Optimal and Suboptimal Algorithms for the Quadratic Assignment Problem." J. SIAM 10 (1962): 305-313.
[150] Glover, F. "Tabu Search. Part I." ORSA J. Computing 1 (1989): 190-206.
[151] Glover, F. "Tabu Search. Part II." ORSA J. Computing 2 (1990): 4-32.
[152] Goldberg, D. E. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine
Learning. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[153] Gordon, D. M "The Organization of Work in Social Insect Colonies." Nature
380 (1996): 121-124.
[154] Goss, S., S. Aron, J.-L. Deneubourg, and J. M. Pasteels. "Self-Organized
Shortcuts in the Argentine Ant." Naturwissenchaften 76 (1989): 579-581.
[155] Gotwald, W. H. "Death on the March." Rotunda Fall/Winter (1984/1985):
37-41.
[156] Graham, R. L., E. L. Lawler, J. K. Lenstra, and A. H. G. Rinnooy Kan. "Optimization and Approximation in Deterministic Sequencing and Scheduling:
A Survey." Ann. Disc. Math. 5 (1979): 287-326.
[157] Grasse, P.-P. "La Reconstruction du nid et les Coordinations InterIndividuelles chez Bellicositerm.es Natalensis et Cubitermes sp. La theorie
de la Stigmergie: Essai d'interpretation du Comportement des Termites Constructeurs." Insect. Soc. 6 (1959): 41-80.
[158] Grasse, P.-P. "Termitologia, Tome II." Fondation des Societes. Construction.
Paris: Masson, 1984.

286

Swarm Intelligence

[159] Guerin, S. "Optimisation Multi-Agents en Environnement Dynamique: Application au Routage dans les Reseaux de Telecommunications". DEA Dissertation, University of Rennes I, France, 1997.
[160] Gutowitz, H. "Complexity-Seeking Ants." (1993): Unpublished report.
[161] Hackwood, S., and G. Beni. "Self-Organizing Sensors by Deterministic Annealing." In Proceedings 1991 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robot and Systems, IROS'91, 1177-1183. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE
Computer Society Press, 1991.
[162] Hackwood, S., and G. Beni. "Self-Organization of Sensors for Swarm Intelligence." In Proceedings IEEE 1992 International1 Conference on Robotics
and Automation, 819-829. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press,
1992.
[163],Hagen, L., and A. B. Kahng. "New Spectral Methods for Ratio Cut Partitioning and Clustering." IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design 11 (1992):
1074-1085.
[164] Haken, H. Synergetics. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1983.
[165] Hansell, M. H. Animal Architecture and Building Behavior. London: Longman, 1984.
[166] Heinrich, B. "The Regulation of Temperature in the Honey Bee Swarm." Sci.
Am. 244 (1981): 146-160.
[167] Hertz. J., A. Krogh, and R. G. Palmer. Introduction to the Theory of Neural
Computation. Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Lect.
Notes Vol. I Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley, 1991.
[168] Hertz, A., E. Taillard, and D. de Werra. "A Tutorial on Tabu Search." (1997):
Unpublished.
[169] Heusse, M., S. Guerin, D. Snyers, and P. Kuntz. "Adaptive Agent-Driven
Routing and Load Balancing in Communication Networks." Technical Report
RR-98001-IASC, ENST Bretagne, Brest, France, 1998.
[170] Holden, C. "On the Scent of a Data Trail." Science 278 (1997): 1407.
[171] Holland, J. H. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. Ann Arbor, MI:
The University of Michigan Press, 1975.
[172] Holldobler, B., and E. O. Wilson. "The Multiple Recruitment Systems of the
African Weaver ant Oecophylla longinoda (Latreille)." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol.
3 (1978): 19-60.
[173] Holldobler, B. "Territorial Behavior in the Green Tree Ant (Oecophylla
smaragdina)." Biotropica 15 (1983): 241-250.
[174] Holldobler, B., and E. O. Wilson. The Ants. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
[175] Holldobler, B., R. C. Stanton, and H. Markl. "Recruitment and FoodRetrieving Behavior in Novomessor (Formicidae: Hymenoptera). I. Chemical
Signals." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 4 (1978): 163-181.
[176] Hosokawa. K., I. Shimoyama, and H. Miura. "Dynamics of Self-Assembling
Systems. Analogy with Chemical Kinetics." Artificial Life 1 (1995): 413-427.

Bibliography

287

[177] Hosokawa, K., I. Shimoyama, and H. Miura. "Two-Dimensional Micro-SelfAssembly Using the Surface Tension of Water." Sensors and Actuators A 57
(1996): 117-125.
[178] Hosokawa, K., I. Shimoyama, and H. Miura. "Self-Assembling Microstructures." In Artificial Life V, edited by C. G. Langton and K. Shimohara,
362-369. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
[179] Hosokawa, K., T. Tsujimori, T. Pujii, H. Kaetsu, H. Asama, Y. Kuroda, and
I. Endo. "Self-Organizing Collective Robots with Morphogenesis in a Vertical Plane." In Proceedings 1998 IEEE International Conference Robotics and
Automation, 2858-2863. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press,
1998.
[180] Hosokawa, K., T. Tsujimori, T. Fujii, H. Kaetsu, H. Asama, Y. Kuroda, and
I. Endo. "Mechanisms for Self-Organizing Robots Which Reconfigure in a
Vertical Plane." In Proceedings Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems 3,
DARS'98, edited by T. Lueth, R. Dillmann, P. Dario, and H. Worn, 111-118.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[181] Huang, Z. Y., and G. E. Robinson. "Honey Bee Colony Integration: WorkerWorker Interactions Mediate Hormonally Regulated Plasticity." Proceedings
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 89 (1992): 11726-11729.
[182] Huberman, B. A., ed. The Ecology of Computation. Amsterdam, NorthHolland: Elsevier, 1988.
[183] Huberman, B. A. "The Performance of Cooperative Processes." Physica D
42 (1990): 38-47.
[184] Huberman, B. A., and T. Hogg. "Distributed Computation as an Economic
System." J. Econom. Perspect. 9 (1995): 141-152.
[185] Huberman, B. A., R. M. Lukose, and T. Hogg. "An Economics Approach to
Hard Computational Problems." Science 275 (1997): 51-54.
[186] Jaisson, P., D. Fresneau, and J.-P. Lachaud. "Individual Traits of Social Behaviour in Ants." In Interindividual Behavioral Variability in Social Insects,
edited by R. L. Jeanne, 1-51. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1988.
[187] Jeanne, R. L. "The Adaptativeness of Social Wasp Nest Architecture." Quart.
Rev. Biol. 50 (1975): 267-287.
[188] Jeanne, R. L. "The Evolution of the Organization of Work in Social Insects."
Monit. Zool. Hal. 20 (1986): 119-133.
[189] Jeanne, R. L. "Regulation of Nest Construction Behaviour in Polybia occidentalis." Anim. Behav. 52 (1996): 473-488.
[190] Johnson, R. A. "Learning, Memory, and Foraging Efficiency in Two Species
of Desert Seed-Harvester Ants." Ecology 72 (1991): 1408-1419.
[191] Johnson, D. S., and L. A. McGeoch. "The Travelling Salesman Problem: A
Case Study in Local Optimization." In Local Search in Combinatorial Optimization, edited by E. H. L. Aarts and J. K. Lenstra. New York, NY: Wiley
& Sons, 1997.
[192] Kamada, T. Visualizing Abstract Objects and Relations. Singapore: World
Scientific, 1989.

288

Swarm Intelligence

[193] Kamada, T., and S. Kawai. "An Algorithm for Drawing General Undirected
Graphs." Inf. Proceedings Lett. 31 (1989): 7-15.
[194] Karsai, I., and Z. Penzes. "Comb Building in Social Wasps: Self-Organization
and Stigmergic Script." J. Theor. Biol. 161 (1993): 505-525.
[195] Kelly, F. P. "Modelling Communication Networks, Present and Future." Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. London A 354 (1995): 437-463.
[196] Kephart, J. O., T. Hogg, and B. A. Huberman. "Dynamics of Computational
Ecosystems." Phys. Rev. A 40 (1989): 404-421.
[197] Khanna A., and J. Zinky. "The Revised ARPANET Routing Metric." In ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 19(4) (1989): 45-56.
[198] Kim, E., Y. Xia, and G. M. Whitesides. "Polymer Microstructures Formed
by Moulding in Capillaries." Nature 376 (1995): 581-584.
[199] Kirkpatrick, S., C. Gelatt, and M. Vecchi. "Optimization by Simulated Annealing." Science 220 (1983): 671-680.
[200] Kokaji, S., S. Murata, H. Kurokawa, and K. Tomita. "Clock Synchronization
Algorithm for a Distributed Autonomous System." J. Rob. Mechatronics 8
(1996): 317-338.
[201] Koopmans, T. C., and M. J. Beckman. "Assignment Problems and the Location of Economic Activities." Econometrica 25 (1957): 53-76.
[202] Koza, J. R. Genetic Programming. On the Programming of Computers by
Means of Natural Selection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
[203] Krieger, M. Personal communication.
[204] Krink, T., and F. Vollrath. "Analysing Spider Web-Building Behaviour
with Rule-Based Simulations, and Genetic Algorithms." J. Theor. Biol. 185
(1997): 321-331.
[205] Kube, C. R., and H. Zhang. "Collective Robotic Intelligence." In Proceedings
Second International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior: From
Animals to Animals 2, 460-468. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
[206] Kube, C. R., and H. Zhang. "Collective Robotics: From Social Insects to
Robots." Adaptive Behavior 2 (1994): 189-218.
[207] Kube, R. C., and H. Zhang. "Stagnation Recovery Behaviors for Collective
Robotics." In Proceedings 1994 IEEE/RSJ/GI International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 1883-1890. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1995.
[208] Kube, C. R. "Collective Robotics: From Local Perception to Global Action."
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Alberta, 1997.
[209] Kube, C. R., H. Zhang. "Task Modelling in Collective Robotics." Auton.
Robots 4 (1997): 53-72.
[210] Kuntz, P., and P. Layzell. "A New Stochastic Approach to Find Clusters in
Vertex Set of Large Graphs with Applications Partitioning in VLSI Technology." Tech. Rep. LIASC, Ecole Nationale Superieure des Telecommunications
de Bretagne, 1995.
[211] Kuntz, P., P. Layzell, and D. Snyers. "A Colony of Ant-Like Agents for Partitioning in VLSI Technology." In Proceedings Fourth European Conference

Bibliography

289

on Artificial Life, edited by P. Husbands and I. Harvey, 417-424. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1997.
[212] Kurose, J. F., and R. Simha. "A Microeconomic Approach to Optimal Resource Allocation in Distributed Computer Systems." IEEE Trans. Computers 38 (1989): 705-717.
[213] Lawler, E. "The Quadratic Assignment Problem." Management Science 9
(1963): 586-599.
[214] Lawler, E. L., J. K. Lenstra, A. H. G. Rinnooy-Kan, and D. B. Shmoys, eds.
The Travelling Salesman Problem. New York, NY: Wiley & Sons, 1985.
[215] Lefebvre, J. Introduction aux Analyses Statistiques Multi-Dimensionnelles.
Paris: Masson, 1980
[216] Leighton, F. T. "A Graph Coloring Algorithm for Large Scheduling Problems." Journal of Research of the National Bureau of Standards 84 (1979):
489-505.
[217] Lenoir, A. "Le Comportement Alimentaire et la Division du Travail chez la
Fourmi Lasius niger." Bull. Biol. France & Belgique 113 (1979): 79-314.
[218] Li Y., P. M. Pardalos, and M. G. C. Resende. "A Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure for the Quadratic Assignment Problem." DIM ACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science 16 (1994):
237-261.
[219] Liggett, R. S. "The Quadratic Assignment Problem: An Experimental Evaluation of Solution Strategies." Management Science 27 (1981): 442-458.
[220] Lin, S. "Computer Solutions of the Traveling Salesman Problem." Bell Syst.
Journal 44 (1965): 2245-2269.
[221] Lin, S., and B. W. Kernighan. "An Effective Heuristic Algorithm for the
Traveling Salesman Problem." Oper. Res. 21 (1973): 498-516.
[222] Lin, F.-T., C.-Y. Kao, and C.-C. Hsu. "Applying the Genetic Approach to
Simulated Annealing in Solving Some NP-Hard Problems." IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. 23 (1993): 1752-1767.
[223] Lindauer, M. "Ein Beitrag zur Frage der Arbeitsteilung im Bienenstaat." Z.
Vgl. Physiol. 34 (1952): 299-345.
[224] Lindenmayer, A., and P. Prusinkiewicz. The Algorithmic Beauty of Plants.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1988.
[225] Lumer, E., and B. Faieta. "Diversity and Adaptation in Populations of Clustering Ants." In Proceedings Third International Conference on Simulation of
Adaptive Behavior: From Animals to Animats 3, 499-508. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1994.
[226] Lumer, E., and B. Faieta. "Exploratory Database Analysis via SelfOrganization." (1995): Unpublished manuscript.
[227] Liischer, M. "Der Lufterneuerung im Nest der Termite Macrotermes natalensis (Hav.)." Insectes Sociaux 3 (1956): 273-276.
[228] Liischer, M. "Air-Conditioned Termite Nests." Sci. Am. 205 (1961): 138-145.

290

Swarm Intelligence

Ma, Q., P. Steenkiste, and H. Zhang. "Routing High-Bandwidth Traffic in
Max-Min Fair Share Networks." ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
Review 26 (1996): 206-217.
[230] Maeterlinck, M. The Life of the White Ant. London: George Allen and Unwin,
1927.
[231] Maniezzo, V. "Exact and Approximate Nondeterministic Tree-Search Procedures for the Quadratic Assignment Problem." Research Report CSR 98-1,
Corso di Laurea in Scienze dell'Informazione, Universita di Bologna, Sede di
Cesena, Italy, 1998.
[232] Maniezzo, V., and A. Colorni. "The Ant System Applied to the Quadratic
Assignment Problem." IEEE Trans. Knowledge and Data Engineering 11(5)
(1998): 769-778.
[233] Maniezzo, V., A. Colorni, and M. Dorigo. "The Ant System applied to the
Quadratic Assignment Problem." Tech. Rep. IRIDIA/94-28, Universite Libre
de Bruxelles, Belgium, 1994.
[234] Markl, H. and B. Holldobler. "Recruitment and Food-Behavior in Novomessor
(Formicidae, Hymenoptera). II. Vibration Signals." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 4
(1978): 183-216.
[235] Martinoli, A., A. J. Ijspeert, and F. Mondada. "Understanding Collective
Aggregation Mechanisms: From Probabilistic Modelling to Experiments with
Real Robots." Robotics and Autonomous Systems 29 (1999): 51-63.
[236] Martinoli, A., E. Franzi, and O. Matthey. "Towards a Reliable Set-Up For
Bio-Inspired Collective Experiments With Real Robots." In Proceedings Fifth
Int. Symp. on Experimental Robotics, ISER 97, edited by A. Casals, and A.
T. de Almeida, 597-608. Lecture Notes in Control and Information Sciences.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1997.
[237] Melhuish, C., O. Holland, and S. Hoddell. "Collective Sorting and Segregation
in Robots with Minimal Sensing." (1998): Unpublished preprint.
[238] Meyer, J.-A. "Sur les lois Regissant 1'Accomplissement d'une Tache Collective Complexe Chez Formica polyctena." Compte Rendus de I'Academic des
Sciences Paris D 270 (1970): 2111-2114.
[239] Michel, R., and M. Middendorf. "An Island Model Based Ant System with
Lookahead for the Shortest Supersequence Problem." In Proc.of PPSNV—
Fifth Int. Conf. on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature, 692-701. SpringerVerlag, 1998.
[240] Moffett, M. W. "Cooperative Food Transport By an Asiatic Ant." National
Geog. Res. 4 (1988): 386-394.
[241] Mondada, F., E. Franzi, and P. lenne. "Mobile Robot Miniaturization: A Tool
for Investigation in Control Algorithms." Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Experimental Robotics ISER-93 (1993): 501-513.
[242] Morley, R. "Painting Trucks at General Motors: The Effectiveness of a
Complexity-Based Approach." In Embracing Complexity: Exploring the Application of Complex Adaptive Systems to Business, 53-58. Cambridge, MA:
The Ernst & Young Center for Business Innovation, 1996.

Bibliography

291

[243] Morley, R., and G. Ekberg. "Cases in Chaos: Complexity-Based Approaches
to Manufacturing." In Embracing Complexity: A Colloquium on the Application of Complex Adaptive Systems to Business, 97-702. Cambridge, MA: The
Ernst & Young Center for Business Innovation, 1998.
[244] Moy J. "Link-State Routing." In Routing in Communications Networks,
edited by M. E. Steenstrup, 137-157. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1995.
[245] Murata, S., H. Kurokawa, and S. Kokaji. "Self-Assembling Machines." In Proceedings 1994 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
441-448. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1994.
[246] Murciano, A., J. del R. Millan, and J. Zamora. "Specialization in Multi-Agent
Systems Through Learning." Biol Cybern. 76 (1997): 375-382.
[247] Murray, J. D. Mathematical Biology. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag, 1989.
[248] Nicolis, G., and I. Prigogine. Self-Organization in Non-Equilibrium Systems.
New York, NY: Wiley & Sons, 1977.
[249] Nijhout, H. F., and S. M. Paulsen. "Developmental Models, and Polygenic
Characters." Am. Nat. 149 (1997): 394-405.
[250] Noreils, F. R. "An Architecture for Cooperative and Autonomous Mobile
Robots." In Proceedings 1992 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, 2703-2710. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press,
[251] Oprisan, S. A., V. Holban, and B. Moldoveanu. "Functional Self-Organization
Performing Wide-Sense Stochastic Processes." Phys. Lett. A 216 (1996): SOSSOS.
[252] Oster, G. F. "Modeling Social Insect Populations. I. Ergonomics of Foraging
and Population Growth in Bumblebees." Am. Nat. 110 (1976): 215-245.
[253] Oster, G., and E. O. Wilson. Caste and Ecology in the Social Insects. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1978.
[254] Paessens, H. "The Savings Algorithm for the Vehicle Routing Problem." European Journal of Operational Research 34 (1988): 336-344.
[255] Page, R. E., and G. E. Robinson. "The Genetics of Division of Labour in
Honey Bee Colonies." Adv. Ins. Physiol. 23 (1991): 117-169.
[256] Page, R. E. "The Evolution of Insect Societies." Endeavour 21 (1997): 114120.
[257] Pamecha, A., C.-J. Chiang, D. Stein, and G. S. Chirikjian. "Design and Implementation of Metamorphic Robots." In Proceedings 1996 ASME Design
Engineering Technical Conference and Computers and Engineering Conference, 1-10. New York, NY: ASME Press, 1996.
[258] Pamecha, A., I. Ebert-Uphoff, and G. S. Chirikjian. "Useful Metrics for Modular Robot Motion Planning." IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 13 (1997): 531-545.
[259] Pasteels, J. M., J.-L. Deneubourg, and S. Goss. "Self-Organization Mechanisms in Ant Societies (I): Trail Recruitment to Newly Discovered Food
Sources." Experientia Suppl. 54 (1987): 155-175.
[260] Penrose, L. S. "Self-Reproducing Machines." Sci. Am. 200 (1959): 105-114.

292

Swarm Intelligence

[261] Plowright, R. C., and C. M. S. Plowright. "Elitism in Social Insects: A Positive
Feedback Model." In Interindividual Behavioral Variability in Social Insects,
edited by R. L. Jeanne, 419-431. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1988.
[262] Potvin, J.-Y. "The Traveling Salesman Problem: A Neural Network Perspective." ORSA J. Comp. 5 (1993): 328-347.
[263] Pratt, S. C. "Recruitment and Other Communication Behavior in the Ponerine Ant Ectatomma ruidum. Ethology 81 (1989): 313-331.
[264] Prescott, T. J., and C. Ibbotson. "A Robot Trace Maker: Modeling the Fossil
Evidence of Early Investebrate Behavior." Artificial Life 3(4) (1997): 289306.
[265] Rabin, M. O. "The Choice Coordination Problem." Ada Informatica 17
(1982): 121-134.
[266] Raiha, K.-J., and E. Ukkonen. "The Shortest Common Supersequence Problem over Binary Alphabet is NP-Complete." Theoret. Comp. Sci. 16 (1981):
187-198.
[267] Reinelt, G. The Traveling Salesman: Computational Solutions for TSP Applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1994.
[268] Resnick, M. Turtles, Termites, and Traffic Jams. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1994.
[269] Rettenmeyer, C. W. "Behavioral Studies of Army Ants." Univ. Kans. Sci.
Bull. 44 (1963): 281-465.
[270] Robinson, G. E. "Modulation of Alarm Pheromone Perception in the Honey
Bee: Evidence for Division of Labour Based on Hormonally Regulated Response Thresholds." J. Comp. Physiol. A 160 (1987): 613-619.
[271] Robinson, G. E., and R. E. Page. "Genetic Determination of Guarding and
Undertaking in Honey Bee Colonies." Nature 333 (1988): 356-358.
[272] Robinson, G. E. "Regulation of Vision of Labor in Insect Societies." Annu.
Rev. Entomol. 37 (1992): 637-665.
[273] Robinson, G. E., R. E. Page, and Z.-Y. Huang. "Temporal Polyethism in
Social Insects is a Developmental Process." Anim. Behav. 48 (1994): 467469.
[274] Robson, S. K., and J. F. A. Traniello. "Resource Assesment, Recruitment Behavior, and Organization of Cooperative Prey Retrieval in the Ant Formica
schaufussi (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)." J. Insect Behav. 11 (1998): 1-22.
[275] Robson, S. K., and J. F. A. Traniello. "Key individuals and the organisation
of labor in ants." In Information Processing in the Social Insects, edited by C.
Detrain, J.-L. Deneubourg, and J. M. Pasteels. Basil & Stuttgart, Germany:
Birkhauser, in press.
[276] Rosenman, M. A. "A Growth Model for Form Generation Using a Hierarchical
Evolutionary Approach" Microcomp. in Civ. Engineer. 11 (1996): 161-172.
[277] Rus, D., B. Donald, and J. Jennings. "Moving Furniture with Teams of Autonomous Robots." In Proceedings IEEE/RSJIROS, 235-242. Los Alamitos,
CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1995.

Bibliography

293

[278] Russell, R. A. "Mobile Robot Guidance Using a Short-Liived Heat Trail."
Robotica 11 (1993): 427-431.
[279] Sahni, S., and T. Gonzales. "P-Complete Approximation Problems." J. ACM
23 (1976): 555-565.
[280] Sasaki, J., J. Ota, E. Yoshida, D. Kurabayashi, and T. Arai. "Cooperative
Grasping of a Large Object by Multiple Mobile Robots." In Proceedings 1995
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 1205-1210. Los
Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1995.
[281] Schatz, B. "Modalites de la Recherche et de la Recolte Alimentaire chez la
Fourmi Ectatomma ruidum Roger: Flexibilites Individuelle et Collective."
Ph.D. dissertation, Universite Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 1997.
[282] Schneirla, T. C. "Army Ants." In Army Ants: A Study in Social Organization,
edited by H. R. Topoff. San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman, 1971.
[283] Schoonderwoerd, R., O. Holland, J. Bruten, and L. Rothkrantz. "Ant-Based
Load Balancing in Telecommunications Networks." Adapt. Behav. 5 (1996):
169-207.
[284] Scriabin, M., and R. C. Vergin. "Comparison of Computer Algorithms and
Visual-Based Methods for Plant Layout." Management Science 22 (1975):
172-181.
[285] Seeley, T. D. "Adaptive Significance of the Age Polyethism Schedule in Honey
Bee Colonies." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 11 (1982): 287-293.
[286] Seeley, T. D. "The Tremble Dance of the Honey Bee: Message and Meanings."
Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 31 (1992): 375-383.
[287] Seeley, T. D., S. Camazine, and J. Sneyd. "Collective Decision-Making in
Honey Bees: How Colonies Choose Among Hectar Sources." Behav. Ecol.
Sociobiol. 28 (1991): 277-290.
[288] Sendova-Franks, A. B., and N. R. Franks. "Social Resilience in Individual
Worker Ants and Its Role in Division of Labour." Proceedings Roy. Soc. London B 256 (1994): 305-309.
[289] Sims, K. "Artificial Evolution for Computer Graphics." Comp. Graph. 25
(1991): 319-328.
[290] Sims, K. "Evolving 3D Morphology and Behavior by Ccompetition." In Artificial Life IV, edited by R. Brooks and P. Maes, 28-39. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1994.
[291] Steenstrup, M. Routing in Communications Networks. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1995.
[292] Stefanyuk, V. L. "On Mutual Assistance in the Collective of Radiostations."
Information Transmission Problems 7 (1971): 103-107.
[293] Steinberg, M. S. "On The Mechanism of Tissue Reconstruction by Dissociated Cells. III. Free Energy Relationships and the Reorganization of Fused,
Heteronomic Tissue Fragments." Proceedings Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 48 (1962):
1769-1776.
[294] Steinberg, M. S. "Reconstruction of Tissues by Dissociated Cells." Science
141 (1963): 401-408.

294

Swarm Intelligence

[295] Steinberg, M. S., and T. J. Poole. "Strategies for Specifying Form and Pattern:
Adhesion-Guided Multicellular Assembly." Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 295
(1981): 451-460.
[296] Stilwell, D. J., and J. S. Bay. "Toward the Development of a Material Transport System Using Swarms of Ant-Like Robots." In Proceedings 1993 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 766-771. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1993.
[297] Stilwell, D. J., and J. S. Bay. "Optimal Control for Cooperating Mobile
Robots Bearing a Common Load." In Proceedings 1994 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer
Society Press, 1994.
[298] Stiitzle, T., and H. Hoos. "The MAX-MIN Ant System and Local Search for
the Traveling Salesman Problem." In Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Evolutionary Computation, ICEC'97, 309-314. Los Alamitos, CA:
IEEE Computer Society Press, 1997.
[299] Stiitzle, T., and H. Hoos. "Improvements on the Ant System: Introducing
MAX-MIN Ant System." In Proceedings International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks and Genetic Algorithms. Vienna: Springer-Verlag, 1997.
[300] Stiitzle, T., and H. Hoos. "MAX-MIN Ant System and Local Search for Combinatorial Optimization Problems." In Proceedings Second International Conference on Metaheuristics, MIC'97. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 1998.
[301] Subramanian, D.,P. Druschel, and J. Chen. "Ants and Reinforcement Learning: A Case Study in Routing in Dynamic Networks." In Proceedings 1997
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-97, 832-838.
Palo Alto, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1997.
[302] Sudd, J. H. "The Transport of Prey by an Ant Pheidole crassinoda." Behaviour 16 (1960): 295-308.
[303] Sudd, J. H. "How Insects Work in Groups." Discovery 24 (1963): 15-19.
[304] Sudd, J. H. "The Transport of Prey by Ant." Behaviour 25 (1965): 234-271.
[305] Sugawara, K., and M. Sano. "Cooperative Acceleration of Task Performance:
Foraging Behavior of Interacting Multi-Robot Systems." Physica D 100
(1997): 343-354.
[306] Taillard, E. "Robust Taboo Search for the Quadratic Assignment Problem."
Parallel Computing 17 (1991): 443-455.
[307] Tamassia, R., G. Battista, and C. Battini. "Automatic Graph Drawing and
Readability of Diagrams." IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 18 (1988): 61-79.
[308] Theraulaz G., S. Goss, J. Gervet, and J.-L. Deneubourg. "Task Differentiation
in Polistes Wasp Colonies: A Model for Self-Organizing Groups of Robots."
In Proceedings First International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior: From Animals to Animats, edited by J.-A. Meyer and S. W. Wilson,
346-355. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.
[309] Theraulaz, G., J. Gervet, and S. Semenoff-Tian-Chansky. "Social Regulation
of Foraging Activities in Polistes dominulus Christ: A Systemic Approach to
Behavioural Organization." Behaviour 116 (1992): 292-320.

Bibliography

295

[310] Theraulaz, G., and E. Bonabeau. "Coordination in Distributed Building."
Science 269 (1995): 686-688.
[311] Theraulaz, G., and E. Bonabeau. "Modelling the Collective Building of Complex Architectures in Social Insects with Lattice Swarms." J. Theor. Biol.
177 (1995): 381-400.
[312] Theraulaz, G., E. Bonabeau, and J.-L. Deneubourg. "Threshold Reinforcement and The Regulation of Division of Labour in Insect Societies." Proceedings Roy. Soc. London B 265 (1998): 327-335.
[313] Todd, S., and W. Latham. Evolutionary Art and Computers. New York, NY:
Academic Press, 1992.
[314] Tofts, C., and N. R. Franks. "Doing the Right Thing: Ants, Honey Bees and
Naked Mole-Rats." Trends Ecol. Evol. 7 (1992): 346-349.
[315] Tomita, K., S. Murata, E. Yoshida, H. Kurokawa, and S. Kokaji. "Reconfiguration Method for a Distributed Mechanical System." In Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems 2 (DARS), edited by H. Asama, T. Fukuda,
T.,Arai, and I. Endo. Tokyo: Springer-Verlag, 1996.
[316] Traniello, J. F. A. "Social Organization and Foraging Success in Lasius
neoniger (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): Behavioral and Ecological Aspects of
Recruitment Communication." Oecologia 59 (1983): 94-100.
[317] Traniello, J. F. A., and S. N. Beshers. "Maximization of Foraging Efficiency
and Resource Defense By Group Retrieval in the Ant Formica schaufussi."
Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 29 (1991): 283-289.
[318] Tsetlin, M. L. Automaton Theory and Modelling of Biological Systems. New
York, NY: Academic Press, 1973.
[319] Van Damme, T., and J.-L. Deneubourg. "Cooperative Transport in Formica
polyctena," Submitted.
[320] Van der Blom, J. "Individual Differentiation in Behaviour of Honey Bee Workers (Apis mellifera L.)." Insect. Soc. 40 (1993): 345-361.
[321] Waldspurger, C. A., T. Hogg, B. A. Huberman, and J. O. Kephart. "Spawn:
A Distributed Computational Economy." IEEE Trans. Softw. Engineer. 18
(1992): 103-117.
[322] Wang, Z.-D., E. Nakano, and T. Matsukawa. "Cooperating Multiple BehaviorBased Robots for Object Manipulation." In IEEE/RSJ 1994 International
Conference on Intelligent Robot and Systems, IROS'94, 1524-1531. Los
Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1994.
[323] Watkins, C. J. C. H. "Learning with Delayed Rewards." Ph.D. dissertation,
Psychology Department, Univ. of Cambridge, UK, 1989.
[324] Wenzel, J. W. "Evolution of Nest Architecture." In Social Biology of Wasps,
edited by K. G. Ross and R. W. Matthews, 480-521. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1991.
[325] White, T., B. Pagurek, and F. Oppacher. "Connection Management Using
Adaptive Mobile Agents." In Proc. Int. Con}, on Parallel Distributed Processing Techniques and Applications (PDPTA '98), 802-809. CSREA Press,
1998.

296

Swarm Intelligence

[326] Whitesides, G. M., J. P. Mathias, and C. T. Seto. "Molecular Self-Assembly
and Nanochemistry: A Chemical Strategy for The Synthesis of Nanostructures." Science 254 (1991): 1312-1319.
[327] Whitley, D., T. Starkweather, and D. Fuquay. "Scheduling Problems and
Travelling Salesman: The Genetic Edge Recombination Operator." In Proceedings Third International Conference on Genetic Algorithms, 133-140.
Palo Alto, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1989.
[328] Wilson, E. O. The Insect Societies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1971.
[329] Wilson, E. O. Sociobiology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1975.
[330] Wilson, E. O. "The Relation Between Caste Ratios and Division of Labour in
the Ant Genus Pheidole (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)." Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol.
16 (1984): 89-98.
[331] Withers, G. S., S. E. Fahrbach, and G. E. Robinson. "Selective Neuroanatomical Plasticity and Division of Labour in the Honey Bee." Nature 364 (1993):
238-240.
[332] Wodrich, M. "Ant Colony Optimization." B.Sc. Thesis, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Cape Town, South Africa,
1996.
[333] Wojtusiak, J., E. J. Godzinska, and A. Dejean. "Capture and Retrieval of Very
Large Prey By Workers of the African Weaver Ant Oecophylla longinoda."
Tropical Zool. 8 (1995): 309-318.
[334] Yim, M. "A Reconfigurable Robot with Many Modes of Locomotion." In
Proceedings 1993 JSME International Conference on Advanced Mechatronics,
283-288. Tokyo: JSME Press, 1993.
[335] Yim, M. "New Locomotion Gaits." In Proceedings 1994 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, 1508-1524. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE
Computer Society Press,
[336] Yoshida, E., S. Murata, K. Tomita, H. Kurokawa, and S. Kokaji. "Distributed Formation Control for a Modular Mechanical System." In Proceedings IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robot and Systems,
IROS'97. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1997.
[337] Yoshida, E., S. Murata, K. Tomita, H. Kurokawa, and S. Kokaji. "Experiment
of Self-Repairing Modular Machine." Proceedings Distributed Autonomous
Robotic Systems 3, DARS'98, edited by T. Lueth, R. Dillmann, P. Dario,
and H. Worn, 119-128. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1998.

Index

2-opt procedure, 77
3-opt procedure, 53

algorithms (continued)
Ant Colony Optimization (AGO), 25,
39-76

ABC
see Ant-Based Control
Acantholepsis custodiens, 184
AGO algorithms
see Ant Colony Optimization (AGO)
algorithms
ACS
see Ant Colony System
ACS-3-opt step, 53
ACS-TSP algorithm
pseudo-code, 51
Actor-Critic systems, 97
adaptation
in group transport, 260
to environment, 37
adaptive algorithms, 272
Adaptive Logic Networks (ALN), 264, 265
algorithms
ABC, 81-87
adaptive, 272

Ant Colony System (ACS), 46-55
Ant System (AS), 41-46
AntNet, 26, 94-105
AS-QAP, 57-61, 66-67
AS-TSP, 41-46, 69
Bellman-Ford (BF), 100
circuit-switched networks, 94-103
construction, 212-216
coordinated, 214-218
Elastic Net (EN), 50
evolutionary, 206, 235, 251
hierarchical, 162, 163
Hybrid Ant System, 60-66, 74-75
Kuntz, Layzell, and Snyers (KLS), 164,
170, 201
Lumer Faieta (LF), 156-159, 161-164,
166-167, 199
nonparametric, 183
partitioning, 163
predictive Q-routing, 100

297

298

Index

algorithms (continued)
<2-routing, 100
routing, 80, 93, 105
self-organizing maps (SOM), 50
self-assembling, 251
sorting, 149
swarm-based, 55, 100
see also Genetic Algorithms
Ant Colony Optimization (AGO) algo, rithm, 25, 39-106
applications to combinatorial problems,
67, 76
applied to continuous optimization problems, 78-80
comparison to evolutionary computation, 78
comparison to neural networks, 76-77
constraint satisfaction, 68
positive feedback in, 41
pseudo-code, 80
Ant Colony Routing algorithms, 81-105
Ant Colony System (ACS), 46-55
comparison to MM AS, 56
Ant Colony System (ACS) algorithm
3-opt in, 50, 53
3-opt simulations, 53
candidate list in, 50
local search with, 50
local update in, 49
modification of, 55
nonconvergence property, 54
pheromone trail update rule in, 49
transition rule in, 47
traveling salesman problem (TSP) and,
47-56
traveling salesman problem (TSP) comparisons, 52
ant nest construction
colony size and, 193, 195-198
hysteresis in, 195, 198
model of, 195-198
simulation of, 193
templates in, 193-198
Ant System (AS), 41-46
AS-ATP, 57, 59, 72
AS-JSP, 70-72
AS-QAP, 57-61, 66-67, 69

Ant System (contined)
AS-rank, 56
AS-SCS, 75-76
AS-TSP, 41-46, 69
AS-VRP, 73-74
MMAS, 56
nonconvergence property, 46
role of elitist ants, 44
stagnation, 43
ant-based algorithms
see Ant Colony Optimization (AGO)
algorithms
Ant-Based Control (ABC), 81-87
ants' aging in, 83-84
application to packet-switching networks,
91-93
described, 81-86
extensions of, 87-93
high-level description, 86
initialization phase, 86
pseudo-code, 86
reinforcement in. 83, 84
routing tables in, 82
simulations of, 86—87
with noise, 85
with smart ants, 87-90
with uniform ants, 91
see also routing tables
ant-based routing algorithms, 81-105
ANT-RLF
denned, 73
ANTCOL, 72-73
AntNet, 81, 94-105
backward ants in, 95
described, 94-97
experiments described, 99-100
forward ants in, 95
packet routing in, 97
role of reinforcement in, 96-97
trip time estimates in, 94, 96
AntNet algorithm
pseudo-code, 98
ants
Acantholepsis custodiens, 184
Aphaenogaster albisetosus, 254
army, 36-39
backward, 95

299

Index

ants (continued)
cooperative transport in, 254-256
Dorylus, 254
Eciton, 36, 39, 254, 260
Ectatomma ruidum, 118, 129, 254
foraging experiment, 26-29
foraging model, 26-28
Formica, 36, 184. 254, 262
forward, 95
group transport in, 261, 267
Lasius, 29, 116, 150, 254
Leptothorax, 128, 132, 1.50, 178, 193
Linepithema humile, 26, 30, 31
Messor sancta, 150
Myrmica, 184, 254, 255
Novomessor, 254, 258
Oecophylla, 254, 258, 259, 260, 262
Paraponera clavata, 254
Pheidole, 2, 111, 118, 126, 254, 255,
258
Pheidologeton diver sus, 254-256, 260,
261
recruitment in, 254
and Tenebno molitor, 262
transport efficiency in, 256
Aphaenogaster albisetosus, 254
Apis mellifica, 3
architectural design, 245
fitness function in, 250
architectural space
exploration of, 221-223
army ants
foraging patterns of, 36-39
artificial evolution
open-ended, 250
selection criteria, 249
AS
see Ant System (AS)
AS-JSP
characteristics of, 70-72
AS-QAP, 57-61, 66, 69
characteristics of, 69
extensions of, 66-67
min-max rule in, 58
pseudo-code, 59
AS-rank, 56

AS-SCS
characteristics of, 75
AS-SCS-LM algorithm, 76
AS-TSP
characteristics of, 41—46, 69
pseudo-code, 45
AS-VRP
characteristics of, 73
backward ants, 95
basic model (BM) of clustering and sorting, 154, 167
variants of, 154
bees
Apis mellifica, 3
division of labor in, 3
foraging, 9
foraging experiment. 9
behavior
chemotactic, 188
collective, 19, 20, 25, 263
colony-level, 16
complex collective, 6
construction, 233-234
cooperative, 41, 44, 253-255, 262-263
deposition, 187, 189, 192, 193, 197
emergent, 20
foraging, 26
individual, 16, 19, 255
nest building, 205
of robots, 174, 175, 177, 264
AVOID, 264, 265
FIND, 264
FOLLOW, 264, 265
GOAL, 264, 265
hierarchy in, 264, 265
memory, 264
SLOW, 264
stagnation recovery, 266, 267
trail following, 258
behavior arbitration module, 264, 265
behavior cooperative, 44
Bellman-Ford algorithm (BF), 99
bifurcations, 14
examples of, 14
biology
optimality of, 30
British Telecom, 85, 90

300

Index

brood sorting
described, 150

CAP
see Cooperative Symmetric Forward
candidate lists, 50. 53, 77
application of, 50
cellular automata, 245
cement pheromone, 188, 189, 191. 193
Chartergus, 216, 221
chemotactic behavior, 188
model of, 188
circuit-switched networks, 80-81
circuit-switched networks algorithm
described, 94-103
clustering, 154
measuring dynamics of, 154
positive feedback in, 150
spatial entropy and, 154
clustering model
described, 152
cullecti/e robotics, 253
collective transport, 267
coordination in, 260
communication
indirect, 263, 266
enhancement of, 20
Computer-Aided Design (CAD), 165
construction algorithms
coordination in, 214, 216
microrules in, 212
pseudo-code, 212
simulations of, 214-216
continuous optimization problems, 78-80
cooperation
mechanisms of, 6
Cooperative Asymmetric Forward (CAF)
routing, 91-93
cooperative behavior, 44
cooperative box-pushing, 253, 263, 267
cooperative prey retrieval, 253
in ants, 253, 254
cooperative robotic system, 255
cooperative transport, 253, 262, 263
in ants, 253-256
modeling of, 253-254
vs. solitary transport, 254

coordinated algorithms, 214, 226
constraints in, 216
example of, 218
nest architectures, 214
corpse clustering model, 152
robotic implementation of, 153
crossover, 221, 223, 226
data analysis models
parametricity in, 199
data communications networks
routing in, 94-98
deadlocks, 261, 266
decentralization, 19
deposition behavior. 187, 189, 197
influences on, 193
snowball effect in, 192
desirability, heuristic, 42
diffusion-limited aggregation (DLA) model,
213, 214
microrules in, 214
diffusive instability
study of, 189, 190
digital information pheromones (DIP)
described, 106
discrete optimization problems, 78
discrete stigmergy, 205, 207, 208, 212
defined, 208
vs. quantitative stigmergy, 208
distributed clustering, 173
Khepera robot experiment, 177
distribution networks, 39
diversification, 63
division of labor, 2, 6, 109
examples of, 2-4
in ants, 2. 3
in honey bees, 3
in termites, 3, 4
in wasps, 3
plasticity in, 3, 110
task specialization, 2
Dorylus, 254
Eciton burchelli, 36, 39, 254, 260
Eciton hamatum, 36
Eciton rapax, 36
Ectatomma ruidum, 118, 129, 254
Elastic Net algorithm (EN), 50

301

Index

elasticity, 109
elitist ants, 44, 56
engineering
model criteria in, 8
environment, 7, 16
role in communication, 14, 16
Epipona, 3, 218
evolution strategies, 61
evolutionary algorithms, 206, 235, 249
evolutionary computation, 78
Evolutionary Design (ED)
architectural application, 249
computer graphics application, 249
defined, 249
design selection in, 249
fitness function in, 249-250
Evolutionary Programming (EP), 50
feedback
see positive feedback; negative feedback
fitness function, 233, 249
criteria selection, 221-223
defining, 221
evolution of, 233
in Genetic Algorithms (GA), 221
fixed-threshold model, 139
see also response threshold model
fluctuations,
10
foraging
experiment, 9, 26-29
model, 37
strategies, 39
see also prey retrieval
foraging experiment, 9
with ants, 26-29
foraging model, 37
foraging patterns, 36
Monte Carlo simulation, 38
of army ants, 36-39
role of environment in, 36, 37
foraging strategies, 26-39
Formica lugubris, 36, 254
Formica polyctena, 184, 254, 262
Formica schaufussi, 254
forward ants, 94
fracta, 240
description of, 240-243

fracta (continued)
programming, 242
self-repair function, 244
fracta robots, 245
function vs. structure, 233
generating vector, 78
generative mechanism, 249
Genetic Algorithms (GA), 41, 44, 50, 53,
61, 76, 78, 206, 221, 223, 233, 272
crossover in, 221
fitness function in, 221
mutations in. 221
structured patterns, 233
Genetic Programming (GP), 249-250
global search agents (GSAs), 79
graph coloring problem (GCP)
described, 72
graph partitioning, 149, 164, 183, 201
graph partitioning models
parametricity in, 199
graphs
applications of, 165
random, 167, 169
GRASP, 66
group size, 267
group transport, 254, 261, 262
movement patterns in. 255
growth models, 213, 249
HAS-QAP algorithm, 61-66
pseudo-code, 64
HAS-SOP
characteristics of, 74-75
heuristic desirability, 42, 67-70, 72-75
hierarchical algorithms, 162, 163
described, 162
vs. partitioning algorithms, 163
Hybrid Ant System (HAS)
HAS-QAP, 60-66
HAS-SOP, 74-75
individual variability, 110
initialization phase, 84, 96
intelligent system design, 6
intensification, 63
interactions, 14
direct, described, 14

302

Index

interactions (continued)
indirect, 177
described, 14
multiple, 11
job-shop scheduling problem (JSP)
described, 69-70
Khepera robot
described, 177
Kuntz, Layzell, and Snyers (KLS) algorithm, 164, 167, 170
application to geometric graphs, 170172
application to ratio cut problem, 170
as graph-drawing algorithm, 165
graph partitioning, 164
heuristic method, 166
described, 166-167
pseudo-code, 167
random graph tests. 167-170
templates in, 201
larval sorting model, 152
Lasius neoniger, 254
Lasius niger, 29, 116, 150
cemetery organization in, 150
learned desirability, 42
learning, 76, 77, 96, 109, 265
Leptothorax, 128, 132, 178
Leptothorax albipennis, 193
nest construction, 193
Leptothorax unifasciatus
brood sorting by, 150
Linepithema humile, 26. 30, 31
LM heuristic, 75, 76
local search, 50, 54, 61, 62, 66, 77, 78
3-opt described, 50
restricted 3-opt described, 53
local search agents (LSAs), 79
local update, 49
application of, 49
role in Ant Colony System (ACS) algorithm, 49
location-activity couplings, 58, 59
Longest Remaining Processing Time, 70
Lumer Faieta algorithm (LF), 156, 166,
167

Lumer Faieta algorithm (continued)
analysis of, 162-163
behavioral switches in, 159
data analysis example, 163-164
definition of, 161-162
described, 156-157
example of, 157-161
pseudo-code, 157
short-term/nemory in, 158
similarity to hierarchical algorithms,
163
similarity to multidimensional scaling
(MDS) techniques, 163
similarity to partitioning algorithms,
163
simulation of, 161
templates in, 199
variable-speed agents in, 158
Macrotermes, 3, 14
Macrotermes subhyalinus, 184
majority merge (MM) heuristic, 75
mapping, 263
mass recruitment, 29
defined, 26
flexibility of, 29
Max-Min Ant System (MMAS), 55, 66
comparison to ACS, 55
comparison to AS, 55
local search in, 66
MMAS-QAP, 66
memory, 41, 42, 63, 92, 94, 104
short term, 152, 158
Messor sancta
cemetery organization in, 150
metamorphic distributed robotic system
see fracta
metamorphic robotic system, 236
applications, 236
description of, 236-237
programming, 237, 239
reconfiguration in, 239
microrules, 214, 222, 223, 226, 233
defined, 212
selection of, 223-225
min-max coupling rule, 58
defined, 58

Index

MMAS
see Max-Min Ant System
MMAS-QAP
performance of, 66
model
defined, 17
modeling
benefits of, 17
defined. 8
modularity, 221, 223
Monte Carlo simulations, 38
morphogenesis, 9
multidimensional scaling (MDS), 163, 164
multistability, 13
examples of, 13
mutations, 221, 226
Myrrnica lugubris, 255
Myrmica rubra, 184, 254, 255
negative feedback, 10, 41
nest building
complexity of, 206, 207
nest construction
coordination in, 221
in wasps, 209-213
modularity in, 221
parallelism in, 212
self-organization in, 207
stigmergy in, 207, 208
neural networks, 76
noise
in Ant-Based Control (ABC), 84, 86
nonconvergence, 46, 54
Novomessor albisetosus, 258
Novomessor cockerelli, 254, 258
NSFNET, 100
described, 98
NTTnet, 100
described, 98
Oecophylla longinoda, 254, 259, 262
Oecophylla smaragdina, 254, 258, 260
open shortest path first (OSPF), 99
optimality
in biology, 30
optimization algorithms, 17
packet-switching networks, 80-81

303
Parachartergus, 3
parallelism, 214
Paraponera clavata, 254
partitioning algorithms, 163
described, 163
path costs
asymmetric, 91, 92
symmetric, 90, 92, 100
patterns
functional, 206
polygenic, 233
structured, 205, 216, 217, 225, 233
unstructured, 206, 214, 217
permutation, 56
modification of, 61
Pheidole, 2, 111
Pheidole crassinoda, 254, 255
Pheidole megacephala, 126
Pheidole pallidula, 118, 254, 258
cemetery organization in, 150
Pheidologeton diversus, 254-256, 260, 261
pheromonal template, 193
in termites, 190, 191
self-maintained, 190, 192
pheromone, 55, 82
cement, 188, 189, 191, 193
concentration of, 27, 38, 46, 102. 103,
184, 188, 189, 191
decay, 43, 44, 49, 188
defined, 26
evaporation, 26, 30, 38, 79
as negative feedback, 41
see also pheromone decay
evaporation rate, 62, 67, 104
properties of, 30
virtual, 42, 78
see also cement pheromone
pheromone concentration, 27, 38, 46, 102,
103, 184, 188, 189
threshold, 191
pheromone trail, 42
trail matrix, 78
trail update rule, 43, 48, 49, 59, 60, 62
pheromone-trail-based modification, 61
pheromone update, 55
pheromone updating rule, 43, 67, 69, 71,
72, 74-76

304

Index

plasticity, 3, 109
Polistes dominulus, 137, 205, 212
Polybia occidentalis, 3
population-based incremental learning (PBIL),
78
positive feedback, 14, 20, 41, 188-189,
208
described, 9
examples of, 9-10
predictive Q-routing algorithm, 100
prepattern
defined, 184
prey retrieval, 260
adaptation in, 260-261
cooperative, 253-254
probabilistic transition rule, 42, 47, 59,
62, 67, 79

problem solving, 7, 17
problem-solving systems, 6, 271-272
adaptive, 272
decentralized, 6
pseudo-code
ABC, 86
AGO, 68
ACS-3-opt, 53
ACS-TSP, 51
AntNet, 97
AS-QAP, 60
AS-TSP, 45
construction algorithms, 213
HAS-QAP, 64
KLS, 169
Lumer Faieta algorith, 157
zone allocation algorithm, 142
Q-routing algorithm, 99
quadratic assignment problem (QAP), 5657
quadratic placement (QP), 164
quantitative stigmergy
defined, 208
vs. discrete stigmergy, 208
ratio cut partitioning problem, 170
reaction-diffusion model
of termite construction, 188-189, 193
realignment, 255-256, 267
in ants, 256

realignment (continued)
vs. repositioning, 261
reconfiguration
complex, 237
simulated annealing in, 239
recruitment, 9, 258, 261
defined, 26
flexibility in, 28
in ants, 254, 258
long range, 258, 260
mass, 29
defined, 26
short range, 258-259
trail laying in, 258
reinforcement, 9, 96
repositioning, 255-256, 267
in ants, 256
resilience, 109
response threshold model, 132
fixed, 109
with learning, 109
see also fixed-threshold model
response thresholds, 109
defined, 113
robot
sensors, 264
steering, 264
robot behavior
activating, 175
defining, 174
design of, 174, 178
hierarchy in, 175, 177
obstacle avoidance, 175
types of, 175
robotic implementation, 260, 267
of distributed clustering, 173-178
robotic system
cooperative, 255
metamorphic, 236, 249
metamorphic distributed (fracta), 240
three-dimensional metamorphic, 245248
programming, 245
vertically self-assembling, 244-248
applications, 244

Index
robotics
collective, 19-21
success factors, 20
mobile, 20
swarm-based, 19-20, 235, 263, 269
robots
applications for, 21
clustering experiments, 177-178
implemented, 265
movement of, 175
self-assembling, 235
sensors, 175
simulated, 264
routing
defined, 80
dynamic, 81
dynamic vs. quasi static, 81
routing algorithms, 81-105
purpose of, 80
see also AntNet; Ant-Based Control
(ABC)
routing tables, 81-82
construction of, in Ant-Based Control
(ABC), 82
data packets and, 92
in AntNet, 96
updates by backward ants, 95-96
updating in AntNet, 95-96
updating in ABC, 82-83
example, 84
sampling and clustering, 61
self-assembling algorithms, 251
self-assembling models
applications, 234-235
fitness function in, 205
engineering applications, 234
self-assembling systems
examples of, 206
self-assembly
model of, 205, 212, 217
self-organization (SO), 6-7, 14, 19, 39,
207-208
ant raid model, 37
and templates, 183
defined, 9
in social insects, 6
ingredients of, 9-12

305
self-organization (continued)
mechanisms of, 9-12
models of, 6
snowball effect in, 183-184, 192-193
stigmergy in, 193
self-organized phenomena
bifurcations in, 14
key properties of, 12-14
multistability in, 13
spatiotemporal structures in, 12-13
self-organizing maps (SOM), 50
sensors, 267
sequential ordering problem (SOP)
described, 74
sessions
changing conditions in, 103
described, 98
shortest common supersequence problem
(SCS), 75-76
shortest path first (SPF) algorithm, 100
simulated annealing (SA), 50, 60, 63, 239,
248
simulation model, 263
smart ants, 87, 91
defined, 87
snowball effect, 208
in self-organization, 183-184, 192-193
social insect colony
described, 206
social insects
complexity of, 6
defined, 1
examples of, 1-6
flexibility of, 6
individual behavior, 206
modeling of, 7, 17
nest building in, 206
robustness of, 6
self-organization in, 6
solitary transport, 254, 261
movement patterns in, 255
see also cooperative transport
sorting algorithm, 149
sorting model
described, 154
spatiotemporal structures, 12
examples of, 12-13

306

Index

spiderweb construction
behavioral model of, 233-234
stagnation, 20, 43, 63, 266
defined, 20, 266
recovery behaviors, 266-267
recovery strategies, 266-267
stagnation recovery, 261, 263, 266-267
Stelopolybia, 221
stigmergy, 176, 205, 260, 266
continuous, 205
defined, 14, 207
discrete, 205, 207-208, 212
examples of, 16
stimulus
intensity of, 208
structure vs. function, 233
in spiderweb construction, 233
subsumption architecture, 174
swarm intelligence, 271
modeling of, 7
natural, 7
stigmergy in, 260
swarm-based
algorithms, 55, 100
dynamic problems and, 55
approaches, 80
issues, 271-273
robotic systems, 181
robotics, 149, 263, 269
benchmarks for, 149
drawbacks, 20
swarm-intelligent systems, 7
synaptic connections, 76
synaptic strengths, 76-77
modification of, 77
tabu search, 60, 65
task
box-pushing, 263
task allocation, 109-110, 132
task coordination, 14
task modeling, 263, 267
task regulation, 14
task succession, 181
task-related stimuli, 113
tasks, 20
multirobot, 267
performance of, 16

telephone networks
routing in, 81-94
templates, 195, 207
defined, 183
examples of, 184
in ant nest construction, 193-198
in KLS algorithm, 201
in Lumer Faieta algorithm (LF), 199
pheromone prepattern, 191
prepatterns, 184
temporal polyethism, 110, 132
Tenebrio molitor, 262
termite construction
model of, 188-189, 193
termites
construction by, 184, 188-189, 193
Macrotermes, 3-4, 184
pheromonal template in, 190-191
rate of building, 186-187
traffic patterns, 90, 94, 98, 100
characteristics of, 98
described, 98
trail following, 27
trail-following behavior, 258
trail laying, 258
transport
collective, 260
cooperative, 253, 262-263
cooperative vs. solitary, 254
efficiency measures of, 256
group, 254, 261-262
adaptation in, 260
movement patterns in, 255
group size in, 260
group vs. solitary, 254-256
prey resistance to, 256, 258, 260-261
realignment in, 255
realignment vs. repositioning, 261
repositioning in, 255
solitary, 254, 261
movement patterns in, 255
spatial rearrangements in, 261-262
stagnation recovery in, 261, 263
transport model
described, 263

Index
traveling salesman problem (TSP), 25,
41-42, 44
described, 41-42
TSPLIB, 52, 75
vehicle routing problem (VRP), 73-74
virtual pheromones, 41, 42
visibility, 42
wasp nests
comparison of, 221
modeling of, 216
wasps
building behavior, 205
Chartergus, 216, 221
Epipona, 3, 218
nest architectures, 209
nest construction, 208-212
Parachartergus, 3
Polistes dominulus, 137, 205, 212
Polybia occidentalis, 3
Stelopolybia, 221
worker behavior, 254
worker polymorphism, 110

307

