FRAGILE DOMINION

This page intentionally left blank

FRAGILE
DOMINION
Complexity and
the Commons

SIMON A. LEVIN

HELIX BOOKS

PERSEUS PUBLISHING
Cambridge, Massachusetts

Helix Books
fragile Dominion is part of a continuing series of books based on the Stanislaw M. Ulam Lectures
given annually at the Santa Fe Institute in Santa Fe, New Mexico,
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are
claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book and Perseus Publishing was
aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial capital letters.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 00-102404
ISBN: 0-7382-0111-1 (hc)—ISBN:0-7382-0319-X (pb)
Copyright © 1999 Simon A. Levin
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. Printed in the United States of
America.
Perseus Publishing is a member of the Perseus Books Group
Text design by Heather Hutchison
Set in 11-point Galliard
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
First paperback printing, May 2000

Find Helix Books on the World Wide Web at http://www.perseuspublishing.com

To the memory of my parents, and to Carole—
who has been by my side through everything

This page intentionally left blank

CONTENTS

Acknowledgments

ix

1

Biodiversity and Our Lives: A Cautionary Tale

1

2

The Nature of Environment

17

3

Six Fundamental Questions

39

4

Patterns in Nature

57

5

Ecological Assembly

81

6

The Evolution of Biodiversity

117

7

On Form and Function

157

8

The Ontogeny and Evolution of Ecosystems

175

9

Where Do We Go from Here?
Complexity and the Commons

195

Notes

207

Glossary

229

Index

241

vii

This page intentionally left blank

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Writing this book has been a joy from beginning to end, the chance to
let flow ideas that have been developing and rattling around in my
brain for a very long time. Writing the acknowledgments is also a pleasure, but it is in many ways more daunting. How do I thank all of those
people who have supported me, fed and critiqued my ideas, and contributed so much to the development of the themes of this book? As
with any complex adaptive system, my understanding of and perspectives on the world have been shaped by accidents of history that guided
me down certain intellectual pathways. Given the pervasive influence of
chance encounters, I feel incredibly fortunate to have interacted with
such a remarkable and brilliant stream of people. As my wife, Carole,
taught me in our courtship, we are the sum of our contacts with others;
in this book, I indeed feel that I am simply channeling the insights I
have derived from others. I hope that they all will recognize their input
into this book, and will feel that it has been put to good purpose.
My thanks begin with my parents, who encouraged me at every stage
of my development. My father transferred to me early on a deep love
for science and a need to make one's work serve the purposes of humanity. My mother, who lived until I had finished Chapter 6, asked me
every time we spoke how the book was coming, Already ninety-one,
she had little idea what the book was about, but she was sure that it was
a good thing to do. She knew that that was so because she heard it
from my brother, who always seemed to take more pleasure in my accomplishments than in his own considerable ones. He was my constant
adviser as I sought my way in science, and his intellectual values reassert
themselves in all my explorations.
Carole has been my love and support for most of my life. She has remained apparently interested in everything that I do, simultaneously
ix

x

Acknowledgments

encouraging and stimulating without ever giving me blanket approval. She has kept me intellectually honest in my work, while giving
me enough positive feedback to spur me on. I look for her in my
every audience, as she looks for me in hers. Her greatest gifts to me
were our children, Jacob and Rachel, who both have been the joys of
our lives and have enriched us with their choice of spouses—Karen
and Eric. Jacob and Karen's two miracles, Sarah and Ezekiel, continue our good fortune. I have enjoyed my children not only as distractions but also for the scientific exchanges and criticisms they have
offered and the inspiration their own careers have given me.
Amy Bordvik has been fantastic in producing this book. I could
not have done it without her. She gave me feedback and uncomplainingly dealt with each day's changes of direction and new tasks. Her
own sense of style and beauty has helped me often, but mostly I am
grateful for her spectacular dedication and hard work. I know that she
is as glad as I am to see this work done.
Numerous people have provided invaluable feedback, and critical
reading, of various versions of this book. A few deserve special thanks
for the very careful and considered comments on numerous earlier
versions. In addition to Carole and Amy, I appreciate especially the
efforts of four people—Colleen Martin, Ann Kinzig, John Miller, and
Amanda Bichsel Cook, my editor at Perseus. Each has mixed positive
and negative feedback in ways that have kept me going, while improving the text immeasurably. Along the way, many others have
looked critically at particular chapters, and I am especially grateful to
Jacob Levin, Jack Repcheck, Jonathan Dushoff, Peter Grant, Karin
Limburg, and Dan Rubenstein for specific suggestions. Linda Buttel,
Doug Deutschman, Leila Hadj-Chikh, and Lee Worden all helped
with the production of figures, under the leadership of Amy Bordvik.
My students and postdocs and my colleagues and collaborators
have all contributed more to me than I have to them. I cannot distinguish among the former any more than a father can among Ms children, and only with trepidation do I endeavor to identify colleagues
who have had a special influence, in the certainty that in doing so I
will fail to mention others that played important roles. Among my
collaborators, however, I would be remiss if I did not mention the
early influence of my mentors, Monroe H. Martin and George B.
Dantzig; of Bob Whittaker, Dick Root, Bob Paine, Bob May, Lee

Acknowledgments

xi

Segel, Danny Cohen, David Pimentel, and David Block in the 1970s
and 1980s; and of Stu Kauffman, Akira Okubo, Linda Buttel, Rick
Durrett, Don Ludwig, Colin Clark, John Steele, Zack Powell, Hal
Mooney, Steve Pacala, Jane Lubchenco, Paul Ehrlich, and Glenn
Flierl in more recent years. Many of my postdocs and graduate students belong equally on that list, but I do not have the right to leave
any of them out, so apologize to those who know that they deserve
mention. Some of their names may be found in the pages of this
book, and all could have been. The greatest joy of being an academic
is the constant renewal, challenge, and learning that comes from interacting with one's students, at all levels, and I have been blessed
with wonderful ones.
Several institutions have provided not only the place to develop my
ideas in freedom but extraordinary stimulation. Cornell University,
where I was on the faculty for twenty-seven years, and Princeton University deserve their reputations as among the world's greatest universities, and I am deeply indebted to the wonderful colleagues they provided me. More recently, I have been blessed with the opportunity to
grow in the environment of the Santa Fe Institute, an incredibly stimulating assemblage of brilliant individuals of insatiable curiosity, and
the Beijer International Institute of Ecological Economics in Stockholm. Especially influential there have been the director, Karl-Göran
Mäler; my predecessor as chairman of the board, Partha Dasgupta;
and stimulating colleagues such as Kenneth Arrow, Robert Solow,
Paul Ehrlich, and Buzz Holling. I have been fortunate as well to
spend sabbatical or other periods at some of the world's greatest centers of learning—Oxford University, the Weizmann Institute, Stanford University, the University of California at Berkeley, the University of Washington, the University of British Columbia, and the
University of Kyoto; I acknowledge my debt to all of them, as well as
to my alma maters—the Johns Hopkins University and the University
of Maryland.
Finally, I am indebted to various foundations and agencies for their
support of my work over the years, but especially to the Mellon
Foundation and its incomparable talent scout, Bill Robertson; to the
Sloan Foundation, and the innovative ideas of Jesse Ausubel; and to
the Office of Naval Research, through its University Research Initiative Program award to the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.

xii

Acknowledgments

Invaluable support also has come from the National Science Foundation, the Environmental Protection Agency, the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and the Department of Energy.
I am pleased also to thank Richard Durrett, Ephraim Levin, and
Helena Muller-Landau for pointing out things needing correction for
this revised paperback edition.
I met Stan Ulam only once, at the D. H. Lawrence Ranch in New
Mexico many years ago. His wit and insights, however, were apparent
even in the brief interactions we had, and it has been an honor and a
privilege to produce this book as a tribute to him. I never met Charles
Darwin, the father of complexity theory in ecology, but my intellectual debt to Mm will be obvious. Finally, I thank my colleagues at the
Santa Fe Institute, and especially Ellen Goldberg and Erica Jen, for
the opportunity provided me to give the Third Ulam Lectures, from
which this book emerged.
Simon Levin

F R A G I L E DOMINION

This page intentionally left blank

1

BIODIVERSITY AND
OUR LIVES
A Cautionary Tale

Mother Earth is in trouble, at least as a habitat for humanity. Pollution fouls our air and waters, stark evidence of our presence. Ozone
holes gape above the poles. Population continues to expand, while
fisheries crash. New diseases like AIDS and Ebola ravage the unfortunate, while old ones like tuberculosis reassert themselves, overcoming
miracle antibiotics. Clearly, our environment is in need of attention.
So many problems, so many reasons! How do we even begin to
deal with our dilemma? Should we turn all our energies to worrying
about elevated temperatures, the rise of sea level, and the potential
loss of coastal communities? Or do more immediate problems, such
as malnutrition, pollution, and the spread of disease, take precedence?
The thesis of this book is that, to have any hope of dealing with such
a complex combination of threats to our survival, we must study the
Earth as an integrated physical and biological system. By understanding what makes that system work, we will understand how it can fail,
thereby finding a way to prioritize actions and maintain the Earth's
ability to continue to nurture and sustain us.
The central environmental challenge of our time is embodied in the
staggering losses, both recent and projected, of biological diversity at all
levels, from the smallest organisms to charismatic large animals and
towering trees. Largely through the actions of humans, populations of
1

2

FRAGILE DOMINION

animals and plants are declining and disappearing at unprecedented
rates; these losses endanger our way of life and, indeed, our very existence. Biodiversity loss provides immediate evidence of environmental
change, and it also threatens the very structural and functional integrity
of the Earth's systems, and ultimately the survival of humanity.
Undergirding the dynamic Earth—its atmosphere, its physical and
chemical fabric, and its biological essence—is a prototypical complex
adaptive system (CAS), one that we call the biosphere. It has, over ecological and evolutionary time, spawned increasing biological diversity,
but simultaneously it has evolved patterns of arrangement and interaction of its pieces. The result is an integrated network, with characteristic flows of materials, energy, and information that exhibit regularity in dynamics over long periods of time. Understanding the
essential features of the biosphere's internal organization, and what
maintains it, is fundamental to developing a rational and effective
strategy for preserving the environment with quality sufficient to sustain us, our children, and our children's children.

Human Stewardship of a
Changing Environment:
A Historical Perspective and a
Glance at the Future
The second half of the twentieth century has been characterized by a
heightened awareness of environmental change and by the introduction of measures to slow ecological degradation. The institution and
implementation of adequate laws and responses has worked best for
issues such as local and regional pollution, where the signals are clear,
effects are closely related to causes, and the potential for solutions is
therefore greatest. The familiar acronym NIMBY ("not in my back
yard") expresses the principle that people can best be motivated to
take action when the problems and rewards hit closest to home. The
nature of the process of addressing local issues makes for tighter feedback loops, a key element in maintaining resiliency in any system.
Increasingly, however, we are being challenged by a new class of
problems, including global climate change and biodiversity loss, in
which the feedback loops are weaker and less specific. Change is
slower, and signals less clear (hence the delay in recognizing them).

Biodiversity and Our Lives

3

Cause and effect are more weakly linked, involving diffuse couplings
among many elements. The lack of tight correlations makes the incentive for self-regulation weaker and the solutions less obvious. Recovery is delayed and eventually may become impossible because of irreversible shifts that may occur before solutions can be implemented.
A concern for biodiversity is not new. Humans have been fascinated with biological diversity since biblical times, and surely before:
ancient texts display clear appreciation for the most bask ecological
principles. In the Old Testament version of the Creation, primary
producers of energy (plants) enter the picture on day three, within
hours of the appearance of dry land and only after the first rainstorm.
Phytoplankton, the tiny aquatic plants, are never mentioned explicitly,
though in theory they could have come on the scene the day before;
there was already plenty of water. The absence of sunlight would have
created some difficulties, though only until day four; it did not seem
to inhibit the other plants much. The text says simply, "Let the earth
put forth grass, herb yielding seed, and fruit-tree bearing fruit after its
kind, wherein is the seed thereof, upon the earth."1 Thus, not only
were there plants, but there were lots of different kinds. A good day's
work.
Animal life followed two days later; it was bad enough that there
was no sunlight for photosynthesis until day four, so it was reasonable
not to have the plants contend with herbivory as well. But on day five
things really got going: "Let the waters swarm with swarms of living
creatures, and let fowl fly above the earth, in the open firmament of
heaven." Specifically, this led right away to the creation of "the great
sea-monsters, and every living creature that creepeth, wherewith the
waters swarmed, after its kind, and every winged fowl after its kind."
Just before nightfall, they were given instructions on how to reproduce, and by the next day there was a proliferation of biodiversity,
marked by fish, fowl, cattle, and creeping things—all setting the stage
for the arrival of the latecomers, humans.
The beauty of this story is not just that it includes a rudimentary
understanding of a number of ecological principles (albeit an apparent lack of understanding of others), but also that it exhibits a fascination since the earliest writings with the diversity of the biological
world around us. In fact, it recognizes that biodiversity was created
before humans were even introduced as a part of that biodiversity. In
a variety of ways, the biblical tale also addresses ecological function:

4

FRAGILE DOMINION

plants exist for animals to eat, and animals exist, at least in part, to
serve humans. This proposes a view of evolutionary purpose that
would not sit comfortably with most evolutionary biologists today,
but it does clearly recognize the interconnectedness of nature.
In the Great Deluge in the time of Noah, the importance of preserving biodiversity is made clear by the construction and design of
the Ark, the purpose of which was to preserve not only humans but
"every living thing of all flesh," The focus clearly was on animals, and
in particular on sexual species: "And of every living thing of all flesh,
two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive
with thee; they shall be male and female."2 But obviously provisions
were made for plants and asexual animal species as well, many of
which could not have survived the Flood if its geographic dimensions
were as great as suggested.
Human fascination with biodiversity, its causes and consequences,
continues unabated, even as our own activities create perils no less severe than did the Deluge. Natural historians since Linnaeus, and before, have been fascinated with cataloging biodiversity and arranging
it systematically. The search for generative explanations for these patterns culminated in Darwin's evolutionary theories, which provided a
dynamic context for understanding not only existing patterns but also
the emergence of diversity and its maintenance. Darwin's theoretical
structure gave only the outlines of an explanation. Evolutionary theory today still struggles to develop understanding of the origins and
maintenance of biodiversity and of the importance of processes such
as mutation, recombination, and selection. These continually provide
and reinforce new forms of genetic variability, thereby building and
sustaining diversity.
Ecological studies, in the meantime, offer a complementary approach to an appreciation of biodiversity, elucidating the interdependence of species and their links to the physical world; more recently,
recognition has grown ofh the manifold ways in which biodiversity, at
many levels of organization, is essential to human life and to the
maintenance of an environment consistent with human existence.
Nevertheless, the connections between the ecological and evolutionary points of view leave fundamental issues unresolved. The biblical
view of the Earth as an integrated whole resonates with much current
thinking; the suggestion, however, that evolutionary forces have

Biodiversity and Our Lives

5

shaped the pieces to serve the whole, or to serve certain chosen components such as humans, is not consistent with what we know about
evolution. There is a chasm here, by no means restricted to the biblical rendition, between these two differing perspectives on what has
shaped the world's biota, its assemblage of biological organisms. To
bridge this chasm, we need to understand how the complex biosphere has emerged from natural selection and other forces operating
at small scales. We need to relate the macroscopic to the microscopic,
and in particular we must elucidate the fundamental importance of
biodiversity for the sustenance of life as we know and enjoy it, and the
degree to which the evolutionary process operates to maintain that
critical support system.

Disappearing Biodiversity
I have focused on biodiversity loss for two reasons: the seriousness of
the problem, and the consequences for our lives and those of our
children. According to the Nature Conservancy, which has done so
much to preserve our natural heritage, one-third of U.S. plant and
animal species are at risk of extinction, and hundreds of species may
already have disappeared forever. There is no return from extinction,
and the evolutionary history and biological resources embedded in
each species are permanently lost when that species is lost. Globally,
the dilemma is even worse—we are losing species at rates never before
observed. Indeed, the dimensions of the threat go beyond simply loss
of species. Maintaining populations of species in a few isolated outposts may nominally preserve those species, but it conceals the consequences of the disappearance of most populations of those species,
and of the associated loss of diversity.3 It is a bit like preserving a few
specimens of a species in a zoo: technically, the species still exists, but
it is doomed to extinction. That matters not just for the preservation
of those species but also for the reduced services those species provide
to humans.
According to Ian Turner, an expert on the forests of Singapore,
nearly five hundred forest species have already been lost from Singapore.4 Because Singapore is only six hundred meters from the Malay
peninsula, it has virtually no endemics—that is, species found nowhere
else. Thus, few of these local extinctions represent global species

6

ION

losses. Nonetheless, the loss of these organisms from Singapore has
tremendous implications for the biology of Singapore; for example,
nearly one hundred forest bird species have been lost in Singapore,
deprived of their natural habitat. And as more Singapores emerge, the
threats to worldwide distributions of these species increase. Species
extinction is like an epidemic in reverse: loss of local populations contributes to loss of their neighbors, leading to spreading patterns of local and ultimately global extinctions. Thus, species loss is just the tip
of the iceberg, reflecting but masking the far greater and perhaps
more important loss of diversity within species.
Should we care? Surely respect for those who co-inhabit the planet
with us, and for their right to exist, is a natural outgrowth of all of
our religious and ethical teachings. But we also know that change is
part and parcel of the dynamic history of the planet. Species go extinct, and others replace them. That is the way it has always been. The
dinosaurs are no more, and there is not much that we would have
been able to do about their predicament even if we had been there.
What is different now, however, is the magnitude of the problem, the
fact that we may have something to do with present and impending
extinctions, and the reality that we ourselves are possibly among the
endangered species. Our turn for extinction will also come, but we
should avoid speeding its arrival. Our own existence is not independent of that of biodiversity: we rely on a wide range of services that
other species provide, and their demise hastens our own.
In her recent book "Nature's Services, the Stanford ecologist
Gretchen Daily has assembled critical essays by some of the leading
experts on our dependence on natural systems.5 Her book provides
the best summary available of what humanity is given by nature. At
one level, these services are obvious. We cannot eat plastic, and hence
we depend on plants and animals for our very nourishment, as well as
for materials for building shelter and powering our machines. Less
appreciated, perhaps, is the degree to which we depend on natural
products for medicines. Two-fifths of all prescription drugs in the
United States contain active ingredients originally derived from nature,6 and these products represent only a small portion of what
could be discovered.7 Antibiotics, anti-cancer drugs, birth control
pills, and a whole range of products derive from natural plants, which
still hold many secrets for dealing with human disease and frailty. As

Biodiversity and Our Lives

7

we destroy these natural storehouses, we bury forever their potential
to provide remedies to ameliorate the human condition. Just as we
will never hear any of the symphonies or concerto Mozart would have
composed had he not met an untimely death, so too will we never
know what treasures lie in those species prematurely eradicated. What
pain not to hear the gems that Wolfgang surely would have produced;
how much greater the ache to see human suffering that might have
been prevented had the secrets locked up in extinct species not been
lost.
Less obvious than the direct services that ecological systems provide humans in the way of food, fuel, fiber, and pharmaceuticals are
the indirect services we receive through the maintenance of natural
ecosystems. Freshwater ecosystems dilute, detoxify, and sequester poisons that could otherwise cause untold damage to human and other
animal populations. As Sandra Postel and Stephen Carpenter argue in
Nature's Services, waterborne diseases are the major source of mortality among the poor of the world, primarily because those peoples lack
access to safe drinking water.8 Concern for the quality and quantity of
water is paramount on any list of environmental problems that society
must address. Just maintaining water supplies is not sufficient; the
natural communities that live in freshwater must also be sustained to
keep water supplies pure. Aquatic biodiversity is essential to human
health.
Soil loss and degradation represent a global threat not far behind
water on the list of endangered natural resources. The activities of humans have led to huge soil losses in the last half-century, with consequent leakages of water and nutrients, leading to the potential for declining agricultural productivity and increasing desertification.9 In
Indonesia, about one-fifth of the country has been lost to erosion10;
the effects have been particularly devastating on the island of Java,
which in the late 1980s was losing the capacity to satisfy the needs for
rice of more than 10 percent of its population every year.11 As with
water, maintenance of soil as a resource also requires safeguarding its
quality by preserving the natural communities of organisms in the
soil.
Natural systems help secure the very conditions that permit our
survival, moderating weather, stabilizing soil, coastlines, and climate;
influencing our atmosphere; and in general making it possible for hu-

8

FRAGILE DOMINION

mans to exist and persist. They do not maintain those conditions in
order to preserve the world for Homo sapiens; rather, Homo sapiens
exists because those conditions permit it to do so. The subtlety of this
distinction should not disguise the importance of the lesson. That is,
we cannot count on the biosphere to maintain the biota and environment to our specifications; the world is constantly in transition, more
so today than ever before in recorded history. Biodiversity is being
lost at alarming rates, and with it the services that sustain the human
population. Should we care.> We had better care if we care about our
own survival.
But what can we do about the problem? Aldo Leopold, in his elegant plea for rationality in dealing with biodiversity loss, said, "To
keep every cog and wheel is the first precaution of intelligent tinkering."12 But the global ecosystem is not a. machine just out of warranty; rather, it has been out of warranty since Eve met the serpent in
the Garden of Eden. It has survived because of functional redundancies—that is, the existence of multiple species that fill similar ecological roles. This form of diversity, a level up from diversity within
species, provides the biosphere with the potential for alternative ways
to maintain its functioning even in the face of changes. This stability
is termed homeostasis, meaning the maintenance of state. Why the
Earth enjoys those redundancies is a problem worthy of deep examination, and one that admits no easy solution. At this point, we should
simply rejoice that it does benefit from them, and recognize the potential consequences of their loss. To understand the generation,
maintenance, and importance of structure, of heterogeneity, and of
redundancy of function is foundational to the theory of all complex
adaptive systems, from individual organisms to whole economies.
Hence, the incentive is strong for exploring biodiversity within the
context of the analysis of such systems; indeed, this orientation provides the central theme for the rest of this book.

Dissecting Biodiversity
To say that not every cog or wheel or rivet is essential does not imply
that none are. Paul and Anne Ehrlich, eloquent campaigners for common sense in preserving our environment, have provided a potent
and oft-cited metaphor that emphasizes this point:

Biodiversity and Our Lives

9

Ecosystems, like well-made airplanes, tend to have redundant subsystems and other "design" features that permit them to continue functioning after absorbing a certain amount of abuse. A dozen rivets, or a
dozen species, might never be missed. On the other hand, a thirteenth
rivet popped from a wing flap, or the extinction of a key species involved in the cycling of nitrogen, could lead to a serious accident.13

The point is that the cumulative effects of species loss may be devastating even if the loss of individual species is not. This does not imply that every rivet is equally important, or that every species is
equally valuable. Critically placed rivets may play pivotal roles in any
machine, just as critical species may play pivotal roles in the functioning of ecosystems. One of the most dramatic examples is the California sea otter, the lovable creature that is the delight of tourists up and
down the West Coast of the United States. The otter disappeared
over much of its historical range during the nineteenth century, owing to excessive hunting for its pelts. Protected as a marine mammal,
the otter has made a dramatic comeback, and a population of several
thousand exists once again in California, Oregon, and parts of Washington. With the sea otter present, the coastal ecosystem is very different than it was without it. The sea otter feeds heavily on shellfish,
especially sea urchins; when otters are around, the number of urchins
is much lower. The chain of consequences does not stop there. The
urchin feeds on the large kelp that grace the coastal waters; with
fewer urchins feeding on them, kelp populations expand, buffering
the shores from wave activity and increasing the supply of nutrients
available to fish populations. The resurgent otter thus has had both
ecological and economic consequences: in coastal fisheries once
largely dedicated to shellfish, finfish populations now predominate. It
is no surprise that snellfishermen are not big fans of the cuddly otter.
The California sea otter is perhaps the most impressive example of
a keystone species, a term introduced into the ecological literature by
my friend and colleague Robert Paine, one of the leading ecologtsts
of our time. Paine has spent the last thirty-five years studying the
spectacular rocky intertidal communities of the Washington coast,
documenting the mechanisms that sustain the high diversity characteristic of the outer coast. The most famous and far-reaching of his
discoveries was that the multicolored sea star, Pisaster ochraceous,
plays a role in the intertidal similar to that played by the otter else-

10

FRAGILE DOMINION

where; indeed, Paine's work predated studies of the otter's role, and
his insights led James Estes and John Palmisano to evaluate the otter
in the same light, Pisaster feeds preferentially on the large mussel,
Mytilus californiitnus, which is the bully of the intertidal in that it
can outcompete all other species that, like the mussel, attach to the
rock surface. In areas of the intertidal where the starish cannot survive, for example, in the upper zones where the lack of protection
from the hot sun would lead to baked starfish, the mussel completely
dominates the rock surface, eliminating all other species from that
resource except in areas where it cannot survive owing to desiccation
or wave damage. In the presence of the starfish, however, the picture
is very different: the mussel is reduced to manageable population
densities, leaving plenty of room for other species to find temporary
safe haven. The starfish is the original and prototypical keystone
species.
Since Paine's original and seminal work, the notion of keystone
species has remained attractive and led to deeper understanding of
the dynamics and functioning of a wide variety of ecological communities. But the situation is not usually that simple. More generally,
one finds groups of species that perform critical tasks but whose roles
in maintaining the integrity of the ecosystem are to some degree interchangeable. These groups may involve species high in the food
chain—the starfish and the otter are considered top predators in their
systems, feeding at the apex of the pyramid of energy flow, what ecologists call the trophic pyramid. But more generally, such groups involve those less charismatic species that form the foundation of the
networks of energy transfer. These may be plants, which convert the
sun's energy into biomass through photosynthesis, or mkrobial organisms, which transform nutrients into forms that are usable by higher
organisms.
The role of microbes in the nitrogen cycle provides a case in point.
Nitrogen is plentiful in the atmosphere; indeed, gaseous nitrogen
makes up about 80 percent of the atmosphere. But nitrogen in that
form cannot be used by higher organisms, though it is essential to
their survival. Bacteria and cyanobacteria fix nitrogen; that is, they
convert it into other compounds such as ammonium and ammonia,
which can be oxidized for energy or assimilated by some organisms.
Because nitrogen fixation is essential for the maintenance of ecosys-

Biodiversity imd

11

terns, a keystone group comprises the species that perform this role;
they are essential in a way even more basic than are the keystone
predators to the structure and functioning of the systems in which
they exist, Groups of species of microbes similarly mediate the other
critical stages in the nitrogen cycle: nitrification, which oxidizes ammonia to produce nitrates that plants can easily assimilate, and denitrificnttion, which reconverts nitrate into nitrogen gases. Thus, the
concept of a keystone group, or a functional jjroup, is a natural extension of Paine's ideas. To understand the structure of an ecological
community is to understand what the keystone functional groups are,
and how they relate to one another,
The problem of identifying functional groups, however, is not so
easy. What are the crucial structural components in ecosystems, and
how much functional redundancy exists within them? If one species
of nitrogen fixers were to disappear, would the loss be noticed? How
many rivet species could be spared? A functional group is like a bigger
version of a species. Within a functional group, there is also diversity,
defined largely by the number of different species that make it up;
within a species, there is diversity, defined largely by the number of
different genetic types that make it up. When a species loses diversity,
it is more susceptible to population crashes, and possible extinction,
because it does not have the flexibility to respond to changing environmental conditions. It is the diversity or heterogeneity within a
population, its genetic variability, that is the raw material for evolutionary change. The same may be said of a functional group, but the
players are different. When a functional group loses diversity, it is
more susceptible to collapse because it does not have the genetic diversity that provides the flexibility to respond to changing environmental conditions. Were the functional group that fixes nitrogen to
collapse, so too would life as we know it; any major perturbation of
the nitrogen cycle, in fact, would initiate catastrophic changes. Yet we
know little about how to evaluate the diversity within the group of nitrogen fixers, or about what maintains it. Is there excess buffering capacity, maintained either by our good luck or somehow by natural selection.* Or has this functional group evolved to the edge of disaster,
where any major perturbation would have immediate consequences?
The pity is that we do not yet know how to answer this question; it is
a classic challenge in the theory of self-organizing systems.

12

FRAGILE DOMINION
Complex Adaptive Systems

Self-organizing systems have been the fascination of scientists from a
diversity of disciplines because the concept of self-organization provides a unifying principle that allows us to provide order to an otherwise overwhelming array of diverse phenomena and structures. By
self-organization I mean simply that not all the details, or "instructions," are specified in the development of a complex system. The
specifics are in the often simple rules that govern how the system
changes in response to past and present conditions, rather than in
some goal-seeking behavior. The distinctions between these may
seem subtle, and formal definitions are elusive and often debated. In
general, however, self-organization characterizes the development of
complex adaptive systems, in which multiple outcomes typically are
possible depending on accidents of history.
, Complex adaptive systems include a wide variety of examples that
are familiar to us all. The nervous system of a young child learning to
cope with her environment is an example of a complex adaptive system, since she builds on her experiences and changes her behavior according to some scheme of local rewards. Patterns of behavior and
conceptual frameworks, termed schemata, emerge and help to facilitate future learning experiences, but the immediate modifications of
behavior come from local feedback.14 Indeed, not just the nervous
system but arf entire developing organism is a complex adaptive system, taking form from an initially featureless fertilized egg, without
benefit of a blueprint.
To varying degrees, corporations, whole economies, ecosystems,
and the biosphere represent other examples of complex adaptive systems.15 The essential features of a CAS are
Diversity and individuality of components1^: This feature also
implies that there are mechanisms, such as mutation or genetic recombination, that continually refresh diversity.
Localized interactions amonjj the components: In natural systems, these interactions include processes such as competition
for food, predation, and sexual reproduction.
An autonomous process (such as natural selection) that uses the
outcomes of those local interactions to select a subset of those
components for replication or enhancement.

Biodiversity a>nA Our Lives

13

I explore each of these features in greater detail in this book, but it
should already be clear that the biota of the Earth Bt this description
to a tee. Indeed, natural selection, by feeding on and enhancing the
diversity and individuality of the organisms that inhabit the globe, is
the prototypical "autonomous process,"
By viewing the Earth as a complex adaptive system, we are not just
giving it a fancy new name. Identifying it with other systems that have
the same organizing principles enables us to import knowledge that
has been learned from research into those systems. And by treating all
complex adaptive systems as a family of related entities, we can abstract essential features and explore through simplified models the
properties that all such systems have. This is a very powerful technique, no different in philosophy from the use of models within a single discipline.
What are some of the characteristic aspects of complex adaptive
systems? Most fundamental is the heterogeneity of the components,
which provides the variability on which selection can act. Typically,
through nonlinear interactions among those components, they become organized hierarchically into structural arrangements that determine and are reinforced by the flows and interactions among the
parts. These four aspects—heterogeneity, nonlinearity, hierarchical
organization, and flows—are key elements of complex adaptive systems.
In his stimulating book Hidden Order, John Holland discusses
these properties, and their implications for how we study nature.17
Because heterogeneity, or diversity, is the most basic feature, it is the
unifying theme for this book. How should we measure and understand the importance of ecological diversity, specifically biodiversity?
How is it distributed? What maintains it? What are the consequences
of losing it? To address these questions, we need to organize the vast
mass of data into categories, as Carl Linnaeus did for species, trying
to lay bare the intrinsic hierarchical organization through the perspective of our own filters. Through this process, called aggregation,
we classify distinct elements into categories, suppressing differences
among them in order to emphasize their commonalities and to make
clear their differences from elements in other categories.18 The biological species is such a unit, a collection of distinct entities whose
similarities of form and function encourage us to treat them as variations on the same theme. In the same way, a functional group can be

14

FRAGILE DOMINION

viewed as such a category for the functioning of an ecosystem. Different species within a functional group have different properties, but
they also fill similar roles within an ecosystem. For purposes of understanding an ecosystem, we may group them together in the same way
that biologists group distinct organisms into a population, or distinct
populations into a species. These functional groups, aggregates of individual agents, Holland calls meta-agents.
The other key aspects of complex adaptive systems, in Holland's
lexicon, are also well illustrated in ecosystems. Nonlinearity refers to
the fact that effect and cause are disproportionate, so that small
changes in critical variables, such as the numbers of nitrogen ixers,
can lead to disproportionate, perhaps irreversible, changes in system
properties. Changes in environmental conditions or exploitation patterns can trigger qualitative and largely irreversible changes, such as
desertification, in ecosystems. Not surprisingly, ecosystems show the
same diversity of patterns and behaviors, and the same dependence
on historical accidents, as is seen in other complex adaptive systems,
Brian Arthur has emphasized the importance of similar accidents in
economic systems, a phenomenon that economists refer to as putb dependency.19 The market success of introduced products, and indeed of
political and economic philosophies, depends on their being introduced at just the right time, and under just the right circumstances.
Path dependency implies, among other things, that the time and circumstances for particular ideas may never come, except perhaps in
one of the infinity of parallel fictional universes in which all possible
realizations of the world's evolution are played out.
There is no unique way to describe an ecosystem, any more than
there is a unique way to describe an economy or a nation. Metaagents are aggregates of agents and of smaller meta-agents, and
themselves may be bundled into even larger mega-meta-agents. Any
system is a mess of overlapping hierarchies of aggregations, limited in
any particular description only for the convenience of the observer.
For any such simplification of a system's overwhelming complexity,
however, there will be flows among meta-agents, as well as flows
within. In ecosystems, flow (Holland's final basic property of complex adaptive systems) refers to the flow of nutrients, the flow of water, the flow of toxicants, the flow of energy, the flow of individuals,
and the flow of information.

Biodiversity &n& Our Lives

15

It may well be that natural systems are not so very fragile; they are,
after all, complex adaptive systems that will probably change and become new systems in the face of environmental stresses. What is fragile, however, is the maintenance of the services on which humans depend. There is no reason to expect systems to be robust in protecting
those services—recall that they permit our survival but do not exist by
virtue of permitting it, and so we need to ask how fragile nature's services are, not just how fragile nature is. These questions are perhaps
the fundamental ones in the ecological sciences today, and they will
occupy our attention for the remainder of this book.
To manage the Earth's systems and ensure our survival, we have to
harness the natural forces that organize the biosphere rather than
fruitlessly try to resist them. The biosphere is a complex adaptive system whose essential structure has emerged in large part from adaptive
changes that were mediated at local levels rather than at the level of
the whole system. Humanity's program must therefore be to understand those changes, the forces that have shaped them, and their consequences at the larger level, and then to put that knowledge to work
in determining where the pressure points are for effecting changes
that will preserve critical ecosystem services. This also provides my
agenda for this book. In the following chapters, I develop the notion
of the biosphere as a complex adaptive system and explore its emergent nature, returning in the final chapter to the lessons that may be
learned for managing our environment.

This page intentionally left blank

2

THE NATURE OF
ENVIRONMENT

Humans, and indeed most life as we know it, can survive only under a
narrow range of environmental conditions, a range that fortunately
exists rather stably on Earth. But is the word fortunately appropriately
applied here? Is the juxtaposition of life and exactly the environment
needed for its survival a bizarre coincidence? The result of grand design? Or is it the outcome of a coevolutionary process that has shaped
life forms and environment to fit one another?
This chapter explores these issues, building from the premise that
the biosphere is a self-organizing system in which global patterns
emerge from evolutionary innovations that arise and spread locally. In
this view, selection acts most rapidly and most forcefully at small
scales, where feedback loops are tight, and much more weakly and
slowly at broader scales, where feedbacks are diffuse. This applies especially to the evolution of human behaviors; what often passes for altruistic or group-oriented actions can generally be traced to hidden
benefits that reward the altruist, or its genes, on fairly short time
scales. Therein lies a lesson for environmental management: people
behave most responsibly when they can most clearly see a payoff. This
may seem a cynical and pessimistic view of human nature, but I believe it is also a realistic perspective that can help us better achieve
sound environmental policies. We must provide incentives that directly or indirectly encourage individuals and corporations to be
17

18

FRAGILE DOMINION

global citizens. An evolutionary perspective thus is essential not only
for understanding our world but also for learning how to manage it.

Adaptation and Design
The essence of evolution, and more generally of complex adaptive
systems, is that chance and choice, given enough time, make a powerful combination for change. This was Darwin's revolutionary thesis
that turned popular thinking about the purpose and necessity of our
world on its head. There were no guiding principles from high above.
Chance generated variation; choke winnowed that variation. I do
not use the term "choice" in the sense of a sentient being making rational decisions but rather in the sense of its synonym, "selection."
Darwin termed this process natural selection to distinguish it from
the artificial selection of the breeders. But the same process is at
work across a huge range of systems, from organisms learning to cope
with their surroundings, to the hierarchical development of corporations, societies, and cultures, to the very formation and evolution of
the galaxies. These are not examples of grand design but rather of the
unfolding of the consequences of chance and choice: the continual
generation and exploration of randomly generated innovations, and
the reinforcement of some at the expense of others.
This is not to say that design is unimportant. Today has been a
good day to stay home and start writing a book. Despite the chill outside, I feel quite comfortable sitting at my word processor. It is 68 degrees Fahrenheit in my house, at least at the site of the thermometer.
It has been 68 degrees all day, and it will stay 68 degrees until my
wife or I decides it should be otherwise. The somewhat antiquated
thermostat in the dining room still works effectively in providing the
feedback and control mechanism that regulates the house's internal
temperature; it has been designed to do so and will continue to do so
until it breaks down.
I feel comfortable not Just because of the ambient temperature but
also because I have no fever. It is 98.6 degrees in my body, and it will
stay at that level until my own internal thermostat breaks down. The
even more antiquated thermostat that controls my body's temperature still works effectively in regulating it, deviating only slightly
when I am ill. It has not been designed to do so in the same sense

The Nature of Environment

19

that an engineer has designed the household thermostat; rather, my
internal thermostat has evolved under the influence of natural selection because it proved to be better than alternative mechanisms for
maintaining the fitness of its organism. It was not necessarily better
than all conceivable mechanisms, simply better than those that were
reasonably similar to what has evolved.
Natural selection is a local mechanism that relies on the constant
generation of slight modifications of existing patterns and then
chooses among them based on what works best in getting genes into
the next generation's gene pool. It tinkers. And its work is never
done, since the physical and biological environment is continually
changing. Though it has no global perspective, selection works remarkably well in finding solutions to the never-ending problems confronted in what Lawrence Slobodkin has termed an "existentialist"
game against nature.1 Extending SlobodMn's imagery, playing the
evolutionary game is like playing a pinball machine in the local diner;
the payoff for evolutionary success is simply being allowed to continue playing the game.
It was the great biologist Francois Jacob, in a wonderful and instructive essay in Science magazine, who introduced the notion of tinkering as an analogy to how evolution works.2 Evolution docs not
proceed by grand design but acts simply by modifying past forms to
produce small improvements. Engineers, of course, also tinker. They
are not limited, however, to tinkering, and new ideas can lead to
breakthroughs that may be very different in concept than their predecessors. Still, engineering innovations may also proliferate slowly,
constrained by history, custom, and simply the time and cost that it
takes to spread and displace established technologies. The abacus remains the favored tool of calculation in many cultures. Even among
my own university colleagues, it is striking how wedded to pencil and
pen and typewriter we of the senior generation were; we long resisted
turning our lives over to the computers that seem to have been
grafted onto our children at birth. (I am now, however, an unregenerate word-processing proselyte.) Thus, the distinctions between
what engineers do and what natural selection does may not be as crisp
as they at first appear. Engineering innovation does involve a fair
amount of tinkering, although in principle there are no limitations on
genuinely novel solutions.

20

FRAGILE DOMINION
Mutation, Recombination, and Sex

The difference between evolution by natural selection and change by
grand design hence may be more one of degree than of absolute difference. The fundamental source of novelty in evolution is mutation,
and the basic process involves a mutational change of a single gene.
This would appear to make evolution a very conservative process, because organisms that disagree in a single gene out of many millions
might not be expected to function very differently. Indeed, single
gene mutations usually produce variants that are not too different
from the existing organisms, but there are exceptions. Some are familiar to us because of their harmful consequences: genes that cause
genetic defects like cystic flbrosis, for example. Such very harmful
mutations, however, are not drivers of major evolutionary change:
because of the disadvantage they impose on their hosts, they are
quickly eliminated or kept at low frequencies as recessives.
Single gene mutations, however, can also confer a selective advantage on an organism and may, under some circumstances, rapidly
spread. A mutation in a pathogen, for example, although it may be
harmful to the host organism, can proliferate by helping the
pathogen overcome host defenses. Bacterial resistance to an antibiotic may be coded in a single gene, and a strongly selective environment (the use of the antibiotic) finds and rewards such genes as soon
as they make their appearance. We do not need to be reminded of
how quickly diseases such as tuberculosis have developed resistance
to our treatments because we have overused antibiotics. Although it
may also occur in nature under rather weak selective regimes, bacterial resistance more generally evolves in acute selective environments—usually orchestrated by humans—where the intensive use of
antibiotics to treat infections draws sharp life-and-death distinctions.
Under such conditions, a single gene that conveys any advantage is
strongly favored. The appearance and spread of traits controlled by
single genes also occurs in other highly selective environments; examples include plants* evolved tolerance to heavy metals and resistance to pathogens (in particular where plant breeders have helped
the process along by selectively breeding for resistance) and the reciprocal adaptations by which pathogens overcome those single gene
defenses.

The "Nature of Environment

21

More generally, traits of ecological importance are likely to involve
the interaction of more than one gene. Beneficial mutations that involve several genes are, of course, much less likely to arise, but evolution has had plenty of time, long enough for such coincidences to
happen. As I discuss below, the evolution of multigene traits can be
facilitated in sexual organisms. Through the magic of sex, possibly
harmful mutations that would be immediately eliminated in asexual
organisms may be united to produce genetic combinations that convey a distinct advantage to their bearers.
When a favorable mutation arises in an asexual organism such as a
bacterium, there may be no stopping it. As the bacterium divides and
makes copies of itself, it spreads its new idea rapidly. Sexual organisms, on the other hand, must find consenting partners before their
genes can be reproduced. Even then, there is the likelihood that the
innovation will be recessive; that is, it will have no effect on the fitness
of individuals who receive the gene only from one parent. The dynamics of such recessive traits, when they are rare, are largely random;
as such, there is a substantial chance that they will be lost in the sexual
lottery (by which offspring inherit genes from their parents) and
never reach the levels needed for establishment in the population.
Sex is not entirely a bad idea, however, as already suggested above.
Bacteria use a form of sex to transfer genes from one mating type to
another by conjugating and exchanging pieces of DNA, called plasmids, that are separate from the bacterial chromosomes. Thus, plasmids
are spread like infectious agents, though they typically carry benefits
for their bacterial hosts rather than harming them. Antibiotic resistance, for example, usually is carried on plasmids and hence can be
spread much more rapidly through a population than if it were on
chromosomes. The reason is that the essentially infectious transmission—more commonly called horizontal transfer—from individual to
unrelated individual obviously speeds the rates of spread. And this is
not an accident. Imagine that a mutation conveying antibiotic resistance arose in one organism on a plasmid, and in another on a chromosome. The mutation on the plasmid proliferates more readily because it is not restricted to the daughter cells, or even to a single host
species. Consequently, it is much more likely that when we observe
antibiotic resistance, it is to be found on a plasmid. Hence, this form
of sex is good not only for the plasmids but also for the bacteria, be-

22

FRAGILE DOMINION

cause it speeds their ability to adapt rapidly. Of course, bacterial sex is
not such a good thing for the host organisms, but that is none of
their business.
The case of plasmid transfer of traits illustrates that, when favorable
mutations arise, selection also can operate to facilitate their transmission and make the process of spread faster. More generally, this demonstrates that evolution does not take place just within given rule systems;
evolution itself may act to modify the rules of the game, changing the
board on which the evolutionary contest is played. The coevolutim of
organisms and environment, and the development of the rules of action and interaction, represent the essence of the challenge in understanding the structure and functioning of ecological systems.
More conventional sexual practices, such as those between consenting animals, also carry potential beneits. Sex leads to recombination, that is, to the shuffling and reassortment of gene combinations,
thereby generating the variety on which selection may then operate.
Furthermore, as suggested earlier, it provides a way to combine and
recombine innovations that alone would be harmful to the organisms
that carry them. Mutations that can potentially work together to improve the fitness of an organism may arise independently in different
organisms; because the genes require each other to be effective, they
convey no advantage to their bearers when they arise independently
and may even be disadvantageous. But sex can bring together these
two new genes in a single individual, the offspring of the mating, and
allow the joint benefits to be expressed.
A closely related example is the gene that conveys resistance to
malaria and hence has been favored by natural selection in populations where malaria exposure is high. The difficulty is that, in double
doses (which occur when the same gene is inherited from both parents), this gene causes blood protein hemoglobin malformation, leading to anemia due to sickling of cells or other causes. On the other
hand, the alternative form of this gene (the type that is common in
malaria-free areas) provides protection against anemia, but no protection against malaria. The most it individuals are those who receive
one form of the gene from the father and the other from the mother.
Again, sex makes possible the mixing of characteristics that are beneficial only in combination.
The evolution of sexual reproduction itself thus provides another
example of how the rules of the game, which reflect higher-order

The Nature of Environment

23

processes than simply selection for a particular trait, are themselves
modified through the cumulative selection pressures on many traits.
In the same way, the combined weight of multiple small-scale
processes can accumulate to help shape other patterns of interaction,
and hence the structure and function of ecosystems, from small scales
to the biosphere. Natural selection, together with other drivers of
evolutionary change such as mutation, recombination, environmental
factors, and simply chance events, provides the central organizing
principle for understanding how the biosphere came to be, and how
it continues to change. No teleological principles are at work at the
level of the whole system, or even at the local level. The biosphere is a
complex adaptive system in which the never-ending generation of local variation creates an environment of continual exploration, selection, and replacement.
One may be tempted to think of this process as local repair, but
that would be misleading. There is no guarantee that local changes
will be good for the system as a whole, nor should they be necessarily.
Mutation and recombination, for example, regularly spin off new
strains of the influenza virus (or old strains ready to make comebacks). Natural selection does not take into account that the spread
of these strains will cause global suffering; nor does it attempt to examine whether such suffering will be good or bad for the biosphere.
The concept has no meaning for the evolutionary process. Novel
strains have an advantage over resident ones in having a larger number of susceptible hosts to exploit, and this provides them a selective
advantage that may lead to their spread. The same forces are at work
in the spread of any new or emerging disease and shape the global
epidemiologkal environment. What is obvious in the case of emerging or reemerging diseases is equally true for the spread of any novelties. Local advantage is necessary and sufficient for that spread; global
feedbacks, though they occur, are much weaker and act over much
longer time scales.

Evolution and the Biosphere
The previous section provides what at first glance seems a somewhat
chaotic view of biospheric evolution. Local accidents—vagaries of history that are frozen and resist displacement—become woven into die
tapestry. Is the world really so disordered, or are there regularities

24

FRAGILE DOMINION

and stabilizing feedbacks that emerge!1 No observer of the physical
and biological Earth can fail to be impressed with its regularities and
with the fact that it functions as a system. Indeed, to some the system
is so buffered against change that they liken it to a superorganism,
which has governed the evolution of its parts in order to ensure its
own survival. This philosophy is embodied in a concept known as
Gaia,
Gaia is a hypothesis first put forward by the geologist James Lovelock and developed further by Lovelock with the biologist Lynn Margulis in the early 1970s to explain the maintenance of stability in the
properties of the biosphere, especially in those properties that are essential to sustaining human life.3 Gaia, the thesis of two brilliant scientists wrestling with some real scientific puzzles, has, however, become transformed into a virtual cult religion because of its
implications that we all have a common destiny, united in the interests of great Mother Earth. The philosopher David Abram writes;
When we consider the biosphere not as a machine, but as an animate,
self-sustaining entity, then it becomes apparent that everything we see,
everything we hear, every experience of smelling and tasting and
touching is informing our bodies regarding the internal state of this
other, vaster physiology—the biosphere itself.4

This is a long way from the original ideas of Lovelock, whose principal claim was simply that there were feedbacks from the biota that
served to regulate the atmosphere.5 That claim is quite consistent
with prevailing ecological theory,6 and indeed it is the basis of concerns about such phenomena as the disappearance of tropical rain
forests. A stronger form of the Gaian claim, however, is that the biota
and the atmosphere have coevolved such that the biota regulates the
atmosphere to just the conditions needed for its survival.
At the simplest level, there must be an element of truth to this
claim, although what is termed evolution means very different things
for the biota and for the physical world.7 However, the corollary that
some would draw, that the Earth has self-correcting mechanisms that
will compensate for any insults to it, is patently false and dangerous,
for it encourages a reckless attitude toward the environment.8 Nor is
such a view to be found in the writings of Lovelock or Margulis,

The Nature of Environment

25

whose principal argument has been simply that the study of the Earth
must rely as much on biology as on the physical sciences. The latter
point is unassailable; it is only the egregious exaggerations and distortions that have led to strong resistance to the concept in much of the
scientific community. At its core, the claim that "the Gaia hypothesis
forces us to consider the cumulative, that is, global, effects o f . . . local phenomena" resonates with much that I have written in this chapter.9 There are, unquestionably, feedback loops—and in particular
homeostatic mechanisms—that maintain the Earth's environment
within fairly narrow bounds. The question is, how did those homeostatic mechanisms ariseJ And has the biota itself had anything to do
with the development of those mechanisms or is it simply the beneficiary?
The truth lies somewhere in between the extreme views. Innovation and evolution, as already described, occur first at local levels and
spread from there. As new genetic types proliferate, they influence
their environments, though that influence becomes more diffuse as
the spatial or organizational scale increases. As influences become
propagated up from the smallest scale to larger scales, feedbacks are
generated down from the large scale to the small scale; these feedbacks may either constrain or accelerate local changes.
Understanding the integrated evolution of a whole system, any system, requires explication of the interplay among changes at a spectrum of scales, from the smallest to the largest. This is the essence of
the study of all complex adaptive systems, and the relevance of this interplay to biospheric evolution is indeed what this book is all about.

The Importance of Scale
Evolution is the basic force governing biotic change over geologic
time scales, via natural selection and related mechanisms. Central to
the concept of adaptation by natural selection is variation; in the biosphere, much of that variation is expressed spatially and temporally.
Variation presents itself to us everywhere we look. For example, comfortable as I am indoors and at my word processor (I am, indeed,
making the transition from pen and pencil and never much liked the
typewriter), I would be less comfortable were I to venture outside.
But things will get better. It is 8 degrees Fahrenheit outside my

H

FRAGILE DOMINION

kitchen window, at 8:00 A.M. on a cold January day in Princeton. It
will be at least ten degrees warmer later today and is expected to
warm considerably by later this week. By summer the temperature
will be 95 degrees on many days; it is already 95 degrees in Bangkok,
and even hotter in other places. Minneapolis, on the other hand, is
eighteen degrees colder than Princeton, and it is surely not the coldest spot on the Earth. Obviously, whatever homeostatic mechanisms
might operate on the temperature of the globe do not exercise very
tight control at the local level. Global mean temperatures average
about 60 degrees Fahrenheit over the year, though there is considerable geographic variation (and a general decline with increasing altitude). The variation is so great that the notion of global mean temperature has very little significance for most of us, and the fact that it
varies relatively little over the year simply reflects the fact that when
some places are hot, others are cold. For purposes of most human activities, we focus more on regions and climates, which average over
many of the highest-frequency space and time fluctuations. That is,
regions and regional climates show less variation than do smaller areas
and daily temperatures, although they are more variable than globally
averaged phenomena would be.
The central point is that variation is typically greater at small scales
than it is at large scales. This is true not only for broadening spatial
scales but for other ways of lumping as well. For example, stock market averages, such as the Dow Jones Index, may fluctuate more than
we would like, but individual stocks show much greater variation. Indeed, therein lies the key to hedging one's bets in an even moderately
conservative investment scheme. The same applies to ecological organization: fluctuations in the presence of key functional groups, for example, since they average over the fluctuations of individual species,
are less than those for most of those species. Maintaining biodiversity,
from the human perspective, is analogous to employing a conservative investment strategy: it increases the chance that we will not lose
our entire portfolio.
Temporal averaging similarly leads to more stable dynamics, filtering out what is often called high-frequency noise. We are all aware of
predictions that, at the global level, mean temperatures seem to be
rising at the rate of as much as a few degrees per century. We perhaps
could be forgiven for wondering why we should be concerned with

The Nature of Environment

27

such a slight change when we are used to larger changes over the
course of only a few hours. Here, filtering cuts both ways. Typically,
high-frequency oscillations are averaged out by organisms, which can
survive brief periods of unfavorable weather or other conditions. All
plants must manage the fluctuations of daily cycles, shutting down
photosynthesis overnight. This degree of fluctuation has been part of
the evolutionary background for the work of natural selection. Looking at longer time scales, we know that early-blooming trees can survive unseasonably late frosts. If those frosts occur every year, however, the cumulative effect can begin to take its toll, and the tree may
die. Thus, a secular change in mean temperature can have a great effect on the survival of species because it presents challenges that are
outside their evolutionary experiences and it happens too rapidly to
allow them to adapt. Thus, there are indeed problems that would be
associated with temperature changes of only a few degrees, even if
uniformly applied to the globe. Sea levels would rise, threatening
coastal communities. Agricultural regimes would shift, creating economic burdens. And forest composition would change, albeit less catastrophically because forests are more diverse.
As serious as the consequences of such climatic shifts might be, scientists have fer deeper concerns. A global average increase of a few
degrees reflects much more dramatic increases in some locations and
little change in others. Furthermore, a yearly increase of a few degrees
averages over periods of time when it may be much hotter and others
when it may be colder. A much higher frequency of storms could be
associated with this heightened variation over space and time, and it is
such changes that will have the most dramatic effects on our lives.
Environmental variation over time is nothing new. In the coldest of
winters, we still hold to the expectation that spring and summer will
come again. Wiltshire folklore reminds us;
There is no debt so surely met
As wet to dry and dry to wet10

Many people have believed that, over the long run, good years and
bad years come in cycles. The biblical Joseph built a career on successful climate prediction, interpreting Pharaoh's dreams to anticipate
a cycle of plenty and famine. There are certainly ups and downs in the

28

FRAGILE DOMINION

weather, but we are just beginning to understand the dynamics of
multiyear cycles. Could Joseph have been the first real expert on El
Nino, long before it got its name?

Homeostasis and Gaia
The fact that temperature fluctuates but nonetheless stays within
bounds suggests some degree of regulation. Every schoolchild knows
that temperature fluctuations are to some extent driven by the Earth's
annual revolutions about the sun and influenced by its daily rotation
about its axis and the tilt of that axis. These gyrations affect solar and
terrestrial radiation and control the net energy balance. That is quite
a different concept, however, from the kind of homeostatic feedback
that controls body temperature or household temperature. The concept of Gaia recognizes the role that biological systems play in affecting the physical environment and suggests that these have coevolved
over time to form a complex, self-regulating system.
The view advanced by Lovelock and Margulis11—that the biosphere has control systems that maintain the Earth in homeostasis—is
a view with which most scientists would agree, within limits. Yet even
if such atmospheric and climatic homeostasis exists, it has not occurred through a Darwinian process operating at the level of whole
systems. Any homeostasis that exists in the Earth's climatic regime is,
as we have already seen, most inexact and diffuse. Unlike the thermostat in my house, it has not been designed for control; nor has it
evolved for control because of the fitness it confers on the global system. Natural selection operates by choosing among a number of different alternatives, rewarding those lines of descent with the highest
fitness, and obliterating the weak and less fit. But, as Ehrlich writes,
"our Earth's evolutionary past is not littered with the remains of billions of other planets where life did not manage to coevolve successfully with its physical environment."12
Evolutionary principles do apply to the short-term changes in the
biota, more so perhaps than many would admit. Richard Lewontin,
the Harvard geneticist, draws a distinction between evolution via natural selection and transformational evolution, such as describes the
evolution of the universe as a whole.13 Transformational evolution
describes a unique event, the development through time of a single

The Nature of Environment

29

entity. The term could be applied to the assembly of a car at a factory
by auto workers, or to a system that is self-organizing through the
adaptive evolution of its parts. In the latter case, which is characteristic of any complex adaptive system, transformational evolution takes
place at a macroscopic level because of adaptation—essentially natural
selection—at a lower level. Surely the emergence of these system
properties may feed back to influence selection at lower levels, and it
can be argued that systems that have lasted for long periods of time
are systems in which these feedbacks have not been destructive,
Putting aside the issue of what "long periods of time" means, I still
conclude that the existence of atmospheric conditions favorable to
life is to a large extent a happenstance—indeed, one that is inseparable from something cosmologists call the antbropic principle.

The Anthropie Principle and Gaia
The anthropic principle is rooted in the observation that the conditions for life are likely to be present for a long time in only a small
number of worlds. But given that such conditions do exist, life may
evolve in those places. Where life is, life is. If life brings with it the
ability to perceive and to question, then those who perceive and question will happen to be doing that in those few places that permit their
existence. Small wonder, then, that what we the observers and questioners see around us, to our bewilderment, seems to defy rational explanation other than through divine creation or Gaian coevolution.
But there is no paradox here; the presence of the conditions for life
exactly where we find ourselves is almost a tautology. As Paul Davies
says;
If the existence of life depends on certain natural conditions being fulfilled, then we would not expect to observe a universe very different
from the one we inhabit; put simply, the world we live in is the world
we can Eve in. This is not an explanation of the natural features around
us, only the observation that intelligent creatures could not be here to
speculate about it if things were very different,1*

Stronger, and more controversial, forms of the anthropic principle
do suggest a form of system-level natural selection. Imagine, for ex-

30

FRAGILE DOMINION

ample, that Gaian feedbacks, by providing stability, operate in such a
way that the conditions favoring the existence of life happen also to
be those that favor the spawning of new daughter universes with the
same properties; natural selection then could operate at the level of
universes. This idea is intriguing but is really only pure speculation. It
sheds little if any light on how the feedbacks between the biota and
the physical environment might have coevolved to provide stability,
and it has no empirical support.

The Emergence of Homeostasis
The principle of homeostatic feedback control is a common one in
the design of machines or guidance systems. The cruise control system on a modern automobile acts as a governor, maintaining speed at
a desired level; an airplane's guidance system can make adjustments to
keep the craft on course; a fuse rnelts when overloaded in order to
protect an electric circuit. AH of these are features that have been engineered to respond to the state of a system and to help maintain
some desired behavior. The study of such control processes, whether
in electronic, mechanical, or biological systems, comes under the general heading of cybernetics.
Biological systems rely on a dazzling array of cybernetic or homeostatic mechanisms. These are not the work of a master designer, however; rather, as suggested by Francois Jacob, they are the result of tinkering. Natural selection builds on past innovations, adopting those
mutations that provide improved fitness. In this way, an endless process
of change replaces one solution with another, each somewhat better
suited to the ever-changing environment than were its immediate predecessors. Such evolutionary sequences are played out over and over
again across space and time, each realization taking its own unique
form. There is no purpose or design to this process. It is idiosyncratic
and profoundly influenced by history. Where an engineer's design is involved, the very best solutions can dominate, and most devices meant
for a particular purpose share similar design features. (An exception
that I have never quite understood seems to be flush toilets, which take
all shapes and forms in different nations. Perhaps this is because no particular design seems to work especially well, but it probably is also the
result of an idiosyncratic process largely guided by historical accident.)

The Nature of Environment

31

For the solutions that have been shaped by natural selection, the
influence of history and local variation clearly enhances variety. Thus,
the solutions to biological control problems appear in stunning diversity and provide an almost inexhaustible library of spectacular complexity. Homeostatk controls have evolved for a multiplicity of physiological processes, each critical to the survival of the organism.
Postural feedback control allows an individual to walk. We have all
marveled, for example, while watching a young child learn to detect
loss of balance and to translate that information more and more efficiently into instructions to muscle systems that prevent her from
felling down. And the vertebrate immune system is a masterpiece of
feedback control, sending scouts to patrol for invaders into the body
and then instituting processes to control and eliminate those invaders.
For the biosphere—that is, for the whole Earth, including its biological parts—homeostasis is at best an observation of stability under
historical patterns of variation and a hope for similar stability in the
future, when conditions may be quite different. Unfortunately, it is
not a blueprint for survival. There are certainly radiant heat feedbacks
in the climate system, for example, and these are controlled to a large
extent by how the atmosphere operates to maintain energy balance at
levels that allow life as we know it to exist. During nearly the irst half
of the history of the planet, the Earth was almost completely covered
by water,15 and today water covers more than 60 percent of the
Earth's surface.16 All that water was necessary for the development
and early evolution of life, and water remains necessary for maintaining favorable conditions today. Was this a fortunate accident,* The
Gaia hypothesis argues that it cannot be, and that the biota must have
played a role in maintaining exactly the conditions that it needed. But
how could this have happened? There are no principles of natural selection operating at the scale of the whole globe,17 and it remains unproved that evolution proceeding at the level of individual organisms
and groups of organisms could give rise to the evolution of characteristics that preserve and protect the global enterprise. Would that
things were that simple, and that we could relax in the conviction that
humans pursuing their own selfish interests were perforce operating
in the greater good of humanity. That, unfortunately, is not so. Natural selection operates at the level of what is good for the individual

32

FRAGILE DOMINION

rather than what is good for the group—much less the whole Earth—
and it is noteworthy that Darwin himself, as well as those who continue to study evolutionary processes, puzzled about why altruism exists at all, rather than about why it is not more widespread.
Such hopeful hypotheses are unnecessary, however, at least for understanding how the physical properties of the Earth came to be just
what we need for survival; the anthropic principle provides a ready
explanation. Indeed, the^conditions that favor life are very unlikely,
on any given planet, but it is not unlikely that one or a few of the
multitudes of heavenly bodies would possess exactly the right conditions—indeed, exactly the necessary feedback mechanisms to maintain the conditions that would allow a stable favorable climate for
more than four billion years. Under such conditions, life would be expected to arise and evolve, and the products of that evolution would
be around to observe it and wonder about it. To state, "How fortunate that exactly the conditions that favor my existence happen to
have arisen on Earth, where I am," is like saying, "Of all the people
who have ever lived, how unlikely that I turned out to be me." In
each case, the statement reflects a biased observation rather than a
random selection from a universe of possibilities. Neither question
could have been asked were the conditions for existence not satisfied.
This paradox does not mean that there has not been some form of coevolution; clearly, there has been. It simply means that such coevolution is not essential to explain what seems like our highly unlikely
good fortune. It also does not mean that humans do not influence
the global environment; they clearly do—and indeed have made substantial strides in screwing it up.
Lovelock and Watson recognized the challenge of demonstrating
how natural selection might operate to guide the coevolution of organisms and environment.18 Their ingenious model, DaisywoM, explores evolution by natural selection among two types of daisies:
white daisies, which are cooler than the local environment, and black
ones, which warm it. The local warming enhances growth and reproduction, favoring the spread of black daisies. Eventually, the black
daisies take over, maintaining temperature at stable levels.
Daisyworld illustrates two principles that are central to this book:
the emergence of macroscopic patterns from local selection, and the
importance of the biota in mediating climatic conditions. Even in its

The Na-ture of Environment

33

more sophisticated later versions, however, Daisyworld is at best a
caricature of how selection might operate to enhance homeostasis.19

Evolution Above the Species Level
Despite the uncertainties about Gaian coevolution, it remains obvious that evolutionary processes, including selection, have been important in shaping our environment. This applies not only to the
natural environment but to our social systems, our economic systems, and our cultures. The physical environment has provided a
context in which evolution can take place, but the emergence and
evolution of life has been a self-organizing process that ultimately
must feed back to influence the total environment at multiple scales.
From the myopic selection of properties that benefit individuals,
populations of similar organisms arise. From the interactions of
these populations with other populations, species emerge. From the
interactions of species, mutualisms such as pollination provide feedbacks that affect the further evolution of the partners. Individuals
and populations compete for resources and often find ways to share
them to permit coexistence. Coexistence is not a given, however; the
exclusion of inferior competitors, at least in some habitats, is common. Finally, exploitative relationships such as predation and parasitism establish conduits for energy to flow from the sun through
many layers of users. Through the complex interplay of all of these
mechanisms, ecological communities take shape as loosely defined
assemblages of role players, not as superorganisms with a common
purpose and destiny.
Is this story so different from how human societies grow and are
maintained? Humans think first about themselves, and about maximizing their benefits through their actions. This extends quite naturally to our children, but that is the product of natural selection working to increase the representation of our genes in future generations.
Cousins and more distant relatives benefit from our largesse, but to
an extent that decreases as the closeness of our relationship decreases.
Of course, our tendency to help our relatives, in order to promote
our common genes, leads to a tendency to favor those who look like
us, since they are more likely to carry similar genes; thus, it also leads
to racism and tribal conflict.

34

FRAGILE DOMINION

Nonetheless, altruism does arise in human societies, typically to benefit kin or as reinforcement for the establishment of temporary coalitions. Called reciprocal altruism by behaviorists, this is not really altruism, of course; it is enlightened self-interest: both participants in a
coalition recognize that there is more to gain from a partnership than
from competition. Individuals and coalitions compete for resources
with other individuals and coalitions and find ways to share them to
permit coexistence. Exploitative relationships develop, allowing resources to flow from workers to venture capitalists and other investors
through a complex web of interactions. Human communities and societies take shape, self-organizing from selfish interactions initiated at the
level of individuals, within sets of rules that are imposed by the laws of
individual societies. Indeed, the laws themselves coevolve with societies, complicating and enriching the analysis further. To understand
how societies work, one must understand how individual behaviors
evolve and coevolve to allow the development and maintenance of societies, and the degree to which this sets up structures that resist
change that might be in the common good. To improve societies—and
to preserve the fragile biota that allows human societies to thrive—we
must understand the strength of the selfish impulse, the importance of
the individual's actions in governing his or her behavior.
How do we get from A to B when B is better for everyone, or for
almost everyone, but when no individual acting alone can initiate
change without incurring personal costs sufficient to inhibit enlightened behavior? Not an easy question; if it were, we could eliminate
wars and reduce crime in the streets. The famous g&me theory example, Prisoner's Dilemma, makes the problem clear. In the game of
Prisoner's Dilemma, two prisoners are interrogated separately about
their parts in a crime. Knowing that their best strategy is to hold to
their common alibi, which will prevent their incarceration and let
them off with light fines, each is nonetheless tempted to turn state's
evidence and get off scot-free, allowing the accomplice to pay for the
crime with a very harsh penalty; this is a strategy that works only
when there is just one rat. When both relent, however, and spill the
beans, both end up with long prison terms. They would have been far
better off to cooperate, but cooperation is a difficult strategy to maintain in this case without mutual reinforcement. Separating the prisoners has reduced the potential for that reinforcement, the stability that

The Nature of Environment

35

comes with mutually assured destruction, and has led to common defection.
A second example, introduced to me by my postdoctoral associate
Gregg Hartvigsen, is perhaps even more instructive. Using a game invented by the economic theorist Martin Shubik, Gregg offers his students the opportunity to bid on a dollar; high bid wins, but the two
highest bidders must pay. The auction soon reaches a stage where the
actual payoff is irrelevant. A bidder who has offered $.95 may be
tempted to go to $1.05 if someone else has bid $1, even though the
prize is not worth $1.05, because the $.95 must be paid anyway. Otherwise, if the auction were allowed to end, the top bidder would pay
$1 to gain $1, walking away with nothing, while the second-highest
bidder would be out $.95. In fact, the student is bidding only $.10
more than is already obligated, in the hope that that bid will capture
the prize. But once the $1.05 bid is in, the $1 bidder will have the
same incentive to escalate, and prices can continue to spiral upward.
The problem with this game is that there is no stopping it, and the
bidding can go to several dollars or more. The auction soon reaches a
stage where the actual payoff is irrelevant compared to the price that
must be paid. Again, cooperation would have been the best strategy,
but by the rules of the game, cooperation is not permitted. If the
game is played repeatedly, individuals may develop strategies that
mimic cooperation, just as repeated playing of Prisoner^ Dilemma
may lead to forms of cooperation. Gregg typically does not perform
the experiment of playing the game multiple times, however, because
the students would quickly catch on to the fact that he does not make
them pay up.

The Evolution of Altruism
The simple game-theory examples of the last section carry profound
implications for the evolutionary theater. The evolution of altruistic
behaviors can be understood only in terms of payoffs to individuals,
or to the genes that control behaviors; that is, altruism evolves most
easily when selfishness is greatest. The simplest such payoff scheme is
reciprocal altruism, or mutual back-scratching: short-term altruistic
behaviors are held together by expectations of similar payoffs on rapid
time scales. Scholars read each other's papers and review each other's

36

FRAGILE DOMINION

grant proposals because they want their own papers read and grant
proposals reviewed. These are simple cases of coalitions: individuals
binding together, with common rules of membership, in order to ensure some mutual level of reciprocal altruism. Communities and cultures arise, laws and customs emerge. Yet the more local the laws, the
more likely people are to feel committed to the spirit as well as to the
letter, because the more likely they are to see benefits to themselves,
The United Nations has not really engaged the loyalties of any peoples because its possible benefits would need to be shared with so
many: paradoxically, this observation explains why such global bodies
struggle to survive and succeed, except in the science fiction context
of interstellar travel and galactic wars. In such fantasies, the nations of
the world, faced with the common threat of invasion by aliens, band
together and international coalitions thrive, at least in some of the
most optimistic scenarios of "star wars." What once was global has
become local, and the positive feedback loops become tightened. Altruism seems to exist because of a conflict between factors at different
scales: the suppression of local differences to combat some greater
threat. It would be nice to know that altruism could arise without the
common enemy, but it is hard to think of examples where that is
clearly true. Even in the simple .examples that arise in the plant and
microbial worlds, the coalitions that masquerade as mutualisms
achieve, through their interaction, some competitive advantage over
plants and microbes that do not form coalitions.
Coalitions may be held together in various ways. Neighborhood
action groups provide examples in which geography alone does the
trick, and cities and nations are elaborations of this theme. Labor
unions and credit unions are examples where common interest provides the glue, and the common purpose. Genetics provides perhaps
the strongest link, often reinforcing geographical or other factors,
since related individuals are more likely to live close to one another
than are unrelated individuals. The most obvious example is the level
of sacrifice parents make for their children, who carry their genes forward into the next generation. Reciprocity is not complete here: children usually venerate their parents but in general are less willing to
sacrifice on their behalf. The evolutionary explanation is that parents,
even if not past childbearing, are still likely to be less productive in
the future than their children will be, especially given that they al-

The Nature of Environment

3?

ready have produced their own children. Both the children and the
parents have a common interest in the children's productivity, which
is usually just fine with the children and naturally contributes to a belief that the world revolves around them. As they age and become
parents themselves, they fall back on altruistic behaviors in the service
of their genes, along with admonitions of the importance of honoring
one's parents.
Parents and children are not the only ones to exchange altruism;
any genetic bond can reinforce such behavior, although the degree of
altruism depends on the closeness of the relationship. Brothers and
sisters share as many genes with each other as they do with their parents. Altruism among siblings is strong, but a bit less so than a parent
exhibits for a child. Siblings are younger than parents and would be
risking more by altruistic behavior. Cousins also share genes and so
tend to look out for one another, but the bond is obviously weaker
than among siblings; and so on. One of the most intriguing examples
of apparent altruism is provided by the Hymenoptera (bees, wasps,
and ants). In these species, males have no fathers; that is, they are the
results of unfertilized eggs. These children with single parents thus
are haploid: they carry only the single gene copies that they receive
from their mothers. Hence, when they consort with females to produce daughters, all of those daughters receive the same genetic
dowries from their father, rather than the random sample that males
of difloid species such as humans give to their children. The result is
that sisters are very closely related, differing only in about half the
genes that they inherit from their mothers; in other words, sisters differ from one another in only about one-quarter of their genes. (Actually, they differ in less than that, since in many cases both genes that
the mother has to choose from are the same anyway. But that is another story.) With such highly shared genetic endowments, females of
these species have much to gain from the reproductive success of
their sisters. This has encouraged the evolution of very strong forms
of altruism, including forgoing reproduction entirely in order to help
raise the sister's offspring.
It is clear that tight links and short reward feedback loops encourage the development of altruistic behaviors; more generally, the
neighborhood of interaction one has affects all sorts of ecological relationships, and hence their evolution. It is also clear that, in some

38

FRAGILE DOMINION

cases at least, the potential or realized benefits of coalitions and other
forms of altruism can encourage the formation of such assemblages,
and the development of religions and systems of laws and customs
that reinforce these linkages. The study of cultural evolution—of how
cultures form and are propagated or extinguished—has therefore become an important complement to the study of more genetically
based evolutionary theory.20
More generally, as systems develop, networks of interaction develop for a variety of reasons, some simply having to do with chance
and geography, others having to do with choice and calculation.
Plants interact with a restricted set of plants that happen to exist in
their immediate neighborhood; fish and children interact with others
in their school; diplomats and politicians interact with others of their
ilk. Such interactions build networks, and such networks inluence
events. But how do those events feed back to affect those patterns of
interaction? The answer, of course, depends on the circumstances.
Self-organization may be a process driven largely from the bottom
up, so that the patterns that we see at broader levels simply emerge
from actions best understood at lower levels, or it may be a process
that is strongly driven from the top down, in which individual behaviors and patterns of interaction reflect payoffs that are more diffuse
and more grandly applied. For biological systems, examples of both
can be found. Most of the rest of this book explores case studies in
natural systems, and lessons derived from them, in an effort to gain
understanding of the degree to which the patterns we see are ones we
had to see, and the degree to which they are simply the results of accidents of history. The final chapter draws on these examples, and
from the corresponding insights about human behavior, to explore
strategies for preserving our environment.

3

SIX FUNDAMENTAL
QUESTIONS

The first two chapters have posed a set of challenges, from which
emerge six fundamental questions. This chapter is a summary of
those questions, and a passageway to their examination. As such, it is
a point of reference for the rest of the book, and a connector between
its two parts. In the traditional Passover Seder, a pivotal set of questions truncates the dialogue, interrupts plans for the repast, and sets
the stage for the rest of the night. The questions in this chapter are
meant to serve a similar function, though the analogy is offered with
humility.
The Passover questions are all subthemes on the single central
question: "Why is this night different from all other nights?" Similarly, the questions to be addressed here all derive from a single question: "Why is this organism different from all other organisms?"
More particularly, as ecologists and evolutionists are wont to ask,
why are there so many different kinds of organisms, and why are
there not more? Do ecological systems function better in some sense
with more species? And if they do, would that have anything to do
with how many there are, or do species simply keep evolving to exploit every conceivable niche until there are no more to be found?
These are the issues that, in one form or another, energize almost all
fundamental studies in ecology and evolutionary biology and from
which arise the set of fundamental questions that will structure our
intellectual journey.
3?

40

FRAGILE DOMINION

I present here the six questions, revisit them in more detail later in
the chapter, and then return to address each in turn in the subsequent
chapters. Each one has a chapter all its own, except the first two,
which are dealt with as a pair because they are so tightly linked. The
flow of the questions follows what, for me, is a natural succession.
Science begins from observation and interpretation, then seeks explanations and mechanisms. The theoretical framework that emerges
provides a device for exploring the implications, and in particular for
anticipating the future. Hence, it seems logical to ask:
What patterns exist in nature?
Are these patterns uniquely determined by the local environment, or has history played an important role?
How do ecosystems assemble themselves?
How does evolution shape these ecological assemblages?
What is the relationship between an ecosystem's structure and
how it functions?
Does evolution increase the resiliency of an ecosystem?
I begin by examining and classifying existing patterns in nature
(Chapter 4). This sort of systematic exploration provides a framework
for assessing the degree to which these patterns are predetermined by
physical features of the Earth and the degree to which they are selforganized. In Chapter 5, I explore the process of self-organization.,
and how ecological communities become assembled, by sampling the
world's vast biota. Chapter 6 takes the broader and longer view, examining the evolutionary determinants of global biodiversity and the
interplay between the ecological and evolutionary scales.
Ecological systems all self-organize to some degree, within the
constraints that the nonbiological (abiotic) world imposes. That selforganization results not only in the assembly of a unique collection of
species but also in an arrangement of those species into an integrated
system that cycles nutrients, processes energy, and provides some degree of environmental stability for the residents. Understanding what
makes a set of species a system is like understanding what makes a collection of superstars a team: one part complements another so that
the whole is more than the sum of its parts. Chapter 7 asks how the
dynamics of an ecosystem depend on its components, and in particu-

Six Fundamental Questions

41

lar on the components' relationship to one another. In so doing, it
also addresses the issue of what happens to an ecosystem if some
species are lost, or if there are any changes in its internal organization.
This is perhaps the central question in the current biodiversity crisis,
because it points to the need for finding ways to measure and value
biodiversity that reflect its importance to humanity.
Chapter 8 puts this discussion into an evolutionary context by asking whether evolutionary forces have indeed worked to increase the
homeostatic properties of ecosystems, or whether systems naturally
move to more and more fragile states. In particular, this can help us
understand whether evolution is likely to buffer ecosystems against
the new insults humans are imposing on them, or whether evolutionary trends make maturing ecosystems ever more susceptible to disturbance. Obviously, this question has deep implications for how we
must manage natural systems. If ecosystems have lots of extra rivets,
perhaps we can be more cavalier in our attitudes toward them, but if
instead we view them as having the potential for collapse, we must
take a more cautious approach.
The agenda has now been set, and it is a full one. Before beginning
the search for answers to these challenges, however, I will endeavor to
justify in a bit more detail why these questions capture the essential issues.

Question 1: What Patterns Exist in Nature?
The facts are always a useful place to begin. The American humorist
Kin Hubbard said, "Nobuddy kin talk as interestin' as th'feller that's
not hampered by facts or information." It is certainly my predilection
to focus on abstraction and inductive reasoning. Obviously, some balance is in order, however; it is essential to ground theories to the
greatest extent possible in facts, and then to evaluate the facts within
the framework that theory provides. Thus, before speculating on
what patterns we should see in nature, it seems a good idea to ask
what patterns we do see in nature. More specifically, the question is,
What patterns exist in the distribution and organization of biodiversity?
Science is, first and foremost, a way of knowing about the natural
world. Hence, it takes its roots in observations about nature rather

42

FRAGILE DOMINION

than in axiom systems. But science also requires generalization and
seeks to interpret countless infinities of unique phenomena in terms
of the smallest possible number of fundamental forces and explanations. It is not enough to report that an apple fell from a tree and that
a book fell from a shelf; science seeks to recognize these facts as different manifestations of the same bask process, arising primarily from
the same force: gravity. That such insights can also help to explain
why the moon stays in orbit around the Earth, or the Earth around
the sun, profoundly increases the power of this scientific insight to explain the world around us.
Thus, the key to scientific inquiry is to take apparently disparate
events and find ways of arranging and explaining them within parsimonious structures of data and theory. The delineation of broad patterns in the distribution of species became the focus of study by ecologists and evolutionists even before such professions had those
names. The simple description of a wide variety of systems, while useful, would not by itself advance the science a great deal. However,
through careful analyses, scientists have managed to arrange data into
categories, aggregating agents into meta-agents and then relating
those entities to one another and to physical factors in order to provide a systematic framework for organizing information.
The periodic table of the elements has made it possible for
chemists to develop a comprehensive science, grounded in physical
principles; the Linnaean classification of species did the same for the
study of nature. In a similar way, the systematic organization of the
distribution of organisms with respect to physical variables such as
soil and climate is the essential first step in the development of a science of ecological organization. It is easy to find characteristic patterns of temperature and rainfall for any region of the globe in reference books. Along with a decent atlas, one can then make pretty
good guesses about where, for example, to find tundra and where to
find rain forests. This provides a first cut at classification, allowing
the subdivision of the globe into life zones. It is only a first cut,
though. Bain forests will not occur where they can't, but they will
not always occur where they can, perhaps because they have never
been given the opportunity to try. That is, limitations to dispersal
may prevent potential colonists from ever reaching habitats where
they could do very well indeed.

Six Fundamental Questions

43

Ecological studies, over the last half-century especially, have deepened our understanding of the relationships of species to environments: where deserts will occur, what the most productive regions of
the oceans are, and so forth. Factors such as temperature and humidity delineate the types of plants, the types of animals, and hence the
types of communities and ecosystems that can exist. Similarly, physica
factors determine the patterns of productivity in the oceans, and thus
the distributions of marine communities. Within those limitations,
there is considerable scope for variability, but a careful examination of
what is known provides a framework for asking more speculative
questions.
Chapter 4 explores what is known about how plants and animals
are distributed over the globe, and why things are where they are.
This is more than a travel guide: it leads naturally to asking why, say
marsupials are primarily an Australian specialty and not more widespread. Or why Australia and New Zealand are not more similar in
their biotic composition. Or why San Salvador and Bombay, which
have quite similar ranges of temperature and humidity and similar
oceanic exposure, have very different collections of plants and animals. One answer to all of these questions is that these areas have had
unique histories and are surrounded by other areas that have had
their own unique histories. Space, chance, and history hold the key.
And that is why Chapter 4 must also address . . .

Question 2: Are These Patterns Uniquely
Determined by Local Environment, or
Has History Played a Role?
More precisely, this question should be: To what degree are patterns
determined by local physical conditions, such as soil and climate on
land, or salinity and flow patterns in the ocean, and to what degree
are they self-organized? It is here that nonlinearity comes into play.
Natural systems are highly nonlinear, and what we observe in any environment is in part the result of accidents of history and of the influence of emigrants from neighboring ecosystems. Evolution is a tinkerer, in Jacob's analogy; moreover, what we currently see in nature,
at any level of detail, is (as Stephen Jay Gould has elegantly discussed)

44

FRAGILE DOMINION

not what we would see were the tape run a second time; that is, if the
evolutionary process were restarted from its primitive conditions.1
Nature's cast does not consist of optimally adapted organisms,
uniquely determined by local environmental conditions.
This simple but fundamental point frustrates efforts to predict how
forests or grasslands, for example, will respond to global climatic
change; we can't just read the answers off a map or a chart because
space, chance, and history matter too much. As we shall see, broad
features of vegetation may be predictable, but the exact composition
is not, even given every possible detail about temperature, moisture,
topography, and soil conditions. It matters little whether our perspective is an ecological one or an evolutionary one; both involve differences of degree rather than of kind.
Explanations for how patterns are generated and maintained vary
depending on the scale imposed by the commentator, and a fuM picture requires integrating and matching explanations across scales.
Quite typically, factors extrinsic to the system of study hold sway at
certain scales,' while intrinsic factors govern patterns at others. That is,
patterns at certain scales are largely imposed, while those at other
scales represent self-organization. Animal schools and herds provide
wonderful examples. Environmental conditions determine where animals of a particular type can occur at all and thereby impose broad
distributional patterns; within a range, however, animals control their
own grouping patterns through their responses to one another, as
well as to environmental cues such as the distribution of food.
In terrestrial environments, such as the Serengeti in Kenya or the
vast plains in Northern Europe or North America, the interplay between physics and biology operating on different scales produces a
wide range of grouping patterns in species such as wildebeest, reindeer, and bison. Each can be found in herds of various sizes and
geometries, the details reflecting how self-organization has operated
as a result of particular local conditions and particular accidents of
history. There are evolutionary reasons for animals to be in groups—
grouping can aid in the finding of resources, in escaping predation, or
simply in finding mates—but the specific grouping patterns are not so
important. The great herds of Serengeti wildebeest, for example,
which arise from the collective movements of many thousands of animals each paying attention only to its local environment and to what
its neighbors are doing, thus exhibit many different shapes and forms.

Six Fundamental Questions

45

FIGURE 3.1. Aerial photograph of a large wildebeest herd. Courtesy A.R.E.
Sinclair and University of Chicago Press (plate 3 from Sinclair, The African
Buffalo [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977]).

In the oceans, patterns of circulation and currents cause patches of
water to become isolated and coherent rather than mixing freely with
the rest of the ocean. These give rise to aggregations offish and invertebrates, as well as of the tiny plants (phytoplankton) that lie at the
base of the food chain. Within those patches of animals, smaller
patches form for entirely different reasons: individuals, to some extent, need each other's company, and their mutual attractiveness organizes them into small patches within the large patches.
It requires no stretch of the imagination to realize that human
groupings are governed by similar sorts of extrinsic and intrinsic
rules, at different scales. Basically, we must live on dry land, most
preferably (but not necessarily) near large water bodies that allow the
easy flow of goods and services. These basic principles impose overriding distributional patterns; but within these, smaller groups form,
owing to human behaviors. Individuals like to live near other individuals in order to reap the benefits of community life and the division of
labor. Some individuals prefer smaller communities, some larger ones;
but even small communities tend to grow and to develop connections

44

FRAGILE DOMINION

with other small communities, creating larger meta-communities.
Spatial structure at a variety of scales thus develops.
Chapter 4 explores in greater depth the interplay between necessity
and self-organization in the structure of ecosystems. As this brief discussion has shown, the details of that interaction are not uniquely
speciled but vary with the scale of investigation.

Question 3:
How Do Ecosystems Assemble Themselves?
Ecological and evolutionary processes are similar in kind, distinguished primarily by the distinct time and space scales over which
they operate. This difference in scales, however, makes it essential to
separate ecological and evolutionary events from one another and to
study the interplay between them. Ecological interactions take place
within an evolutionary context and in turn shape the ongoing evolutionary process. Interactions between species lead to the local replacement of one by another, or at least to differential success that influences the relative abundance of types. Communities communicate
with one another through the exchange of individuals. The collective
dynamics of communities lead to biogeographic patterns in the distribution of species and to the determination of the global inventory of
plants and animals, the Earth's biota. In turn, the assembly of any
community following a disturbance, whether a volcanic eruption or
the death of even a single tree in a forest, involves the biased selection
of species from this global biota.
Chapter 5 examines the assembly rules by which communities are
formed from the effectively infinite range of possibilities. If there are
N species in the world, one could in principle form communities in
which any of those N species would be present or absent. With N
such binary decisions to be made, there are 2N possible branches to
the decision tree. One branch results in a community with no species,
but that still leaves 2N-l possible communities that could be constructed from those $" species. This simple calculation deals only with
the presence or absence of each species and hence does not take into
consideration variation in abundances. Thus, it obviously grossly understates the number of communities that could be formed but provides us nonetheless with a convenient place to begin.

Six Fundamental Questions

47

By this calculation, if there were only ten species in the world, there
would be more than one thousand possible communities that could be
formed from them. With as few as twenty species, there are over one
million possibilities. With one hundred species, the number of possible
communities is astronomical. Since there are really not ten, twenty, or
even one hundred species in the world, but on the order often million,
the number of possible communities is far beyond what we can fathom.
So what determines which communities do arise, and which don't,
from this unmanageable diversity of possibilities?
First of all, environmental variation Emits where species can be and
restricts the range of possible types that can persist in any environment. But the number of remaining possibilities clearly still is off the
scale, since we know that the thousands of species to be found in any
environment are only a small subset of those that could survive there
if introduced under favorable conditions. Evidence for that comes
from the sorry history of the introduction of exotic species, countless
numbers of which have become pests in their new habitats: gypsy
moths, Mediterranean fruit flies, killer bees, kudzu, purple loosestrife,
walking catfish, rabbits, zebra mussels—the list of introduced species
that have flourished when transported to a new habitat is endless.
Hawaii, in particular, is a virtual mishmash of introduced species,
which dominate the island landscapes. So environment helps explain
the patterns, but it is only a part of the story.
History also is vitally important. Over the course of the evolutionary development of the world, there have been uncountable junctures
at which any of a large number of species could have made their way
into any of a large number of communities. Accidents of history have
determined which have made their appearances, to some extent limiting opportunities for other species (and to some extent creating new
opportunities for yet other species).
Philosophers and developmental psychologists tell us that human
development is the closing of doors of opportunity. A newborn baby
is a blank slate, with infinite possibilities for intellectual growth.
Events in early childhood development take the individual down certain paths, restricting the potential for future choice. The same is true
of our developing planet, which is home to the particular collection
of species that share it with us in part because of physical constraints,
and in part because of accidents of history that have become frozen
and reinforced. This is nonlinearity at work. This is self-organization.

48

FRAGILE DOMINION

History has restricted the composition of any ecological community,
as well as the composition of its neighbors. When opportunity for
colonization presents itself within an ecosystem, a limited set of
colonists apply for admission; it is a case of being in the right place at
the right time. And from those applicants, only those that can integrate themselves into the existing community will succeed. Pest
species find such opportunities, usually with the help of humans,
when they get to places where they have not been before. More generally, the new colonists are species not so different from those that
have been there before, because neighboring communities, which
supply the potential colonists, are likely to have similar biotas.
When broad-scale disturbance occurs, as, for example, following a
volcanic lava flow, colonists are drawn from a larger geographic area.
Still, there are strict rules governing the successional recolonization
of the newly exposed surfaces. The irst colonists must be autotrophic
(photosynthetic, or otherwise able to manufacture their own food
from inorganic materials), that is, capable of fending for themselves
and deriving sustenance from a harsh environment. These in turn
prepare the way for others, in a reasonably regular pattern of successional development. Within the constraints set by environment, history, and the composition of neighboring environments, ecological
communities self-organize according to a roughly repeatable set of
rules. The interplay of all of these factors provides us with insights
into why certain communities exist; the challenge is to determine the
relative importance of these various influences.

Question 4:
How Does Evolution Shape
These Ecological Assemblages?
The subtle interplay between ecological and evolutionary events represents the integration of processes along a continuum of scales rather
than a dialogue between two sharply distinguished ones. We tend to
think of ecological dynamics as occurring over time periods of days to
years, and of evolutionary events as occurring over millennia. This assumption, however, is a gross and misleading simplification. Important evolutionary change, such as the development of pesticide resis-

Six Fundamental Questions

49

tance in weeds or of antibiotic resistance in bacteria, can occur in a
very small number of generations. The very large differences in life
spans among species that tightly interact within ecosystems means
that the evolutionary time scale for some species, such as bacteria and
viruses, may be as short as or even much shorter than the ecological
time scale for other species. Thus, bacterial resistance to antibiotics
has become a frightening and major public health problem in our lifetimes; plant breeders are in a continuing battle to develop new crop
strains that can fend off rapidly evolving fungal pests; and efforts at
pest control have been continually frustrated either by the development of resistance to chemicals or by the loss of effectiveness of biological control agents. The classic example of the last challenge, the
limited success of the Mymma virus in controlling rabbit pests in Australia and elsewhere, is a case to which I return in great detail later.
The coincidence of some ecological and evolutionary rime scales is
not just a consequence of the interactions among species with very
different life spans. Individuals are organized into groups, and those
groups into larger groups. Individuals grow, reproduce, and die; so
do groups. The time scales over which these events occur are very different and thus create evolutionary changes over a range of scales..
Many groups are loosely defined, transient entities with little influence on the evolutionary process; sometimes, however, the influences
are strong, and group-level processes can exert important pressure on
the evolution of individuals. Indeed, we will learn that organisms
themselves are not the fundamental elements of the process but are
simply coalitions of genes that have their own, more rapid dynamic.
This exploration of scales demonstrates that the dynamics of any
ecosystem involve a continuing panoply of ecological and evolutionary interactions among a diversity of agents and meta-agents. The
ecosystem is a complex adaptive system whose development over a
period of years involves selection among its components over much
shorter periods of time, while also reflecting other evolutionary
processes that have occurred over much broader space and longer
time scales. A forest is a complex of species, some adapted to the slow
growth and eventual dominance of the canopy, others adapted to
rapid exploitation of the temporary gaps that form. When a tree dies
in the forest, or when a cluster of trees is felled by windthrow, a local
successional process begins. The early colonists are adapted for rapid

58

FRAGILE DOMINION

dispersal and growth; these include species such as grasses, forbs, and
shrubs that require and thrive on lots of sunlight. As the forest develops, light availability in the understory diminishes, and these species
are replaced in succession by those that make their living not by opportunism but by their ability to grow under low-light conditions and
that hence will prosper in a highly competitive environment. Is the
forest landscape so different in this way from the economic landscape,
in which opportunistic entrepreneurs leap in to exploit newly available possibilities, ultimately to be replaced by other companies better
suited for the long haul?
Ecologically, specific traits adapt a species for exploiting a particular
ecological niche; evolutionarily, the availability of new ecological opportunities creates pressure favoring their exploitation. Evolution
hates a vacuum. That is not to say that every niche will be filled, or
that a list of niches arrives in the same box with a newly minted
ecosystem, with instructions on how to assemble ("Place hex species
cc in serrated niche x7, being sure to keep edges reversed and ecosystem flat"). As a system develops, new opportunities are created as
parasites or predators find new hosts and prey to exploit, or as pollinators and hosts develop their mutual interests. In this way, ongoing
evolution changes the adaptive landscape for other species; this is a
particular manifestation of the system's nonlinearity, and it reinforces
the importance of historical accidents that irrevocably influence the
system's later development.
Over the evolutionary time scale, a similar dynamic applies to
ecosystem types; a hardwood forest in the northeastern United
States, for example, is just one unit of a meta-forest, a collection of
forests with similar but not identical compositions. Following a major
disturbance, the reassembly of a forest is not a novel occurrence; it
takes place within the context of that meta-forest, which provides the
evolutionary background. The evolution of the northeastern forests
as a group, in turn, represents the collective dynamics of a multiplicity
of individual forests.
The interplay between ecological and evolutionary processes is
central to understanding the emergence of biodiversity, a topic to
which I will return in discussing the next question. Forest evolution
involves processes identical in kind to those that determine the characteristics of the species that make a living on lava flows, or the inter-

Six Fundamental Questions

51

tidal invertebrates that exploit wave-induced gaps in mussel beds.
Chapter 6 explores this issue in detail and is in many ways the central
chapter of the book.

Question 5:
What Is the Relationship Between
an Ecosystem's Structure and How It Functions?
I have already emphasized that the loss of biodiversity threatens the
maintenance of a wide range of goods and services that humans derive from ecosystems. Such benefits range from the food, fuel, and
fiber that we harvest to the maintenance of climate and clean air and
water. Not all species or components of biodiversity are equally important in maintaining those features, leading some to suggest that
conservation biology must focus on developing a version of triage: giving the greatest attention to the most vital components. But to be
able to develop such a scheme requires an understanding of the roles
that individual species, for example, play in maintaining system properties. How should we go about acquiring that understanding? This is
the topic of Chapter 7.
An electronics expert can look at the wiring diagram of a stereo or
a television and understand how the receiver works; an automobile
mechanic similarly can deduce how the automobile operates by examining its parts and how they are hooked together. Such diagnostic
abilities, of course, are possible because these devices are built according to standard plans, with only minor variations; furthermore, the
principles of design have been shaped exactly to achieve specific functions. To a large extent, these principles extend to the design of organisms; for example, a doctor's principal tools of analysis involve examination of the parts, directly or indirectly.
Ecosystems are different. Their dynamics emerge from the pieces
and their interactions, rather than guiding the principles of design
and assembly. Indeed, ecologists, eager to make this distinction clear,
generally prefer to talk about the functioning of an ecosystem rather
than the function or functions; ecosystems, from an evolutionary perspective, have no function, or at least they have not evolved to fulfill
specific functions. This does not mean that they do not serve func-

52

FRAGILE DOMINION

tions; they do. The species that exist within ecosystems rely on the
environment that those ecosystems provide and, of course, to some
extent help define that environment; but this is very different from
suggesting that the ecosystem has been designed to have certain
properties in order to make it possible for particular specks to exist.
Fishermen live on coasts because that is where the fish are; the ish do
not come to the coast in order to accommodate fishermen.
This fact complicates any analysis of the relationship between the
structure of an ecosystem and its functioning, including the services it
provides. In the absence of design for purpose, one lacks the handbooks that explain what individual parts have to do with overall system dynamics. But ecosystems have important properties that emerge
from the adaptive evolution of their components; emergent processes
include the processing of energy and materials and the mediation of
climate, all of which are important to humans as well as to all manner
of plant and animal life. It is in principle not difficult to measure the
flow of energy through the parts of an ecosystem and to add the flows
together to give a static picture of ecosystem processes. But such a
description gives little insight into system functioning, just as tracing
the flow of food as it is processed in the body gives little insight into
what makes an individual tick. The health of an individual is governed
by homeostatk mechanisms, feedback loops that keep critical
processes on target. Overexertion brings exhaustion, causing an individual to slow down; thermostats in the brain stimulate the secretion
of hormones to regulate the production of heat in body tissues. Introduction of an alien agent, an antigen, into a vertebrate activates an
immune response, which produces antibodies to eliminate or control
the antigen, AH of these are adaptations, feedback responses that hel
maintain the internal environment.
In a similar manner, there are homeostatic mechanisms that regulate ecosystem processes, maintaining their resiliency in the face of
perturbations. Unlike the homeostatic mechanisms in the body,
homeostatic mechanisms that maintain ecosystem processes have not
been shaped by selection in order to maintain those processes; rather,
the processes that emerge are those that exist because there happen to
be homeostatic processes to maintain them. In a sense, it is the
processes that have been selected rather than the homeostatic mechanisms. Nonetheless, understanding how ecosystems work requires

Six Fundamental Questions

53

understanding those homeostatic mechanisms, and doing so requires,
in turn, studying systems far from equilibrium.
Far-from-equilibrium dynamics impose an important requirement
on the elucidation of ecosystem behavior, and of the relationship between structure and functioning: the experimental manipulation of
natural systems, Eugene Likens, Herbert Bormann, and their colleagues, for example, by establishing various cutting regimes in
forests in the Hubbard Brook Watershed, have learned about the effect of practices such as clear-cutting on a forest's ability to maintain
its functioning,2 From studies such as these, and from the work of
other investigators such as Robert Paine in marine intertidal regions,
David Schindler and Stephen Carpenter in lakes, and David Tilman in
experimental plant communities, a picture has begun to emerge of
how ecosystem functioning depends on the details of biotic structure.3 Such studies allow us to begin to evaluate how to measure biodiversity in terms of its importance to maintaining ecosystem goods
and services.

Question 6:
Does Evolution Increase
the Resiliency of an Ecosystem?
The fourth question asked how evolution shapes community properties, and the fifth, how the structural and functional features of
ecosystems relate to one another, and in particular how ecosystem
structure affects the resiliency of its processes in the face of perturbations. One specific aspect of this challenge is to understand how the
diversity within a functional group buffers the functioning of that
group against stresses. Just as a genetically diverse species is better
able to respond to environmental challenges, so, too, may a genetically diverse functional group be expected to be more capable of responding to challenges at a higher level.
Many conventional theories suggest that there is selection for generating and maintaining genetic variability within populations, and in
particular that sex and the associated genetic recombination are maintained in fluctuating environments because they enable the genome
to maintain the variability needed to respond to changing conditions,

54

FRAGILE DOMINION

including temperature variation as well as the spread of parasites and
infectious diseases. Natural selection is a process that destroys variation, preserving the most fit from among pretenders; environmental
change, however, puts a premium on the maintenance of the variation necessary for continued evolution. At the organismic level, this
evolutionary tendency can lead to second-order selection for reassertment and novelty, in the form of recombination and mutation. The
tension between the forces that generate variation and those that dissipate it results in a compromise in which intermediate levels of variation are maintained. But to what extent are such forces at work at
higher levels of organization, such as the species, the functional
group, or the ecosystem? A functional group is much less tightly organized genetically than a species, and a species is less organized than
a collection of genetically related individuals. What happens to variation within these groups over evolutionary time, as well as over the
time scale of the development of an ecosystem? Competition between
species can lead to competitive exclusion, and hence to the loss of diversity. Are the compensatory forces operating at levels above the
species sufficient to maintain diversity? Or are there other processes,
such as chance and history, that endogeneously generate and sustain
diversity, without major selective influences flowing down from the
system level?
Per Bak and his colleagues have suggested that self-organizing systems drive themselves to criticctlity, producing accidents waiting to
happen, sandpiles at the perpetual edge of collapse.4 The term "criticality" is borrowed from physics: a critical temperature is one that
characterizes a phase transition, such as that between solid and liquid.
Critical temperatures for water, for example, are the freezing point
and the boiling point. If ecological systems evolve to critical points,
then it would suggest that functional groups have no buffering capacity, and that ecosystems are forever on the verge of catastrophe. Most
ecologists would dispute this, arguing that there is some redundancy
within functional groups, such that shifts within groups would have
little effect on system processes. The idea is to some extent testable,
because the hypothesis that systems are at the edge of criticality implies that we should see cascades of catastrophes obeying characteristic probability distributions, in which the frequency of a particular
level of disturbance decreases as a constant power of the level of

Six fundamental Questions

55

severity. Earthquakes, for example, seem to fit such distributions; in
particular, there are many more small earthquakes than large ones,
and the pattern of decay in frequency fits well a distribution of the
power law type.5 Do such laws apply to catastrophes hitting ecological
systems, or extinctions striking taxonomic groups? Despite efforts to
test this idea, for example, for extinctions in the Phanerozoic era, the
hypothesis remains unsubstantiated. However, it certainly represents
one of the most intriguing and tantalizing open research problems,
with tremendous implications for our understanding of the nature of
ecological systems and the influence of evolutionary processes.
Stuart Kauffman, among others, argues that Per Bak's selforganized criticality is manifest in an evolutionary tendency for
ecosystems to reach the edge ofcha.0s—& world in which extinction
and speciation are constantly occurring, maintaining the variation
needed for adaptability—and that it is in this precarious balancing
that ecosystems achieve a form of stability.6 This theory, in its rawest
form, would be anathema to an evolutionary biologist, because it
suggests that selective processes operating at the level of ecosystems
maintain the same sort of variation that mutation and recombination
sustain at lower levels of organization. Without identification of a
mechanism for keeping an ecosystem at this edge, it is a difficult hypothesis to swallow. Kauffman understands this and has developed
and encouraged exploration of mechanistic models that might support the contention that evolution to the edge of chaos is a universal
property of self-organizing systems.7 Indeed, Per Bak and his colleagues have demonstrated such tendencies in some highly idealized
models, but ones that suppress much of the similarly self-organized
complexity of ecosystems,8 I return to explore this further in Chapter
8.
Thus, the challenge is set. How has biodiversity arisen? What maintains it? And how fragile is it and the services it provides? The chapters that follow explore the answers to these fiindamental questions,
providing a bridge to understanding how to protect ourselves from
the loss of those services.

This page intentionally left blank

4

PATTERNS IN
NATURE

The fundamental challenge in understanding the organization of any
complex system is to sort out the role of history. Which of the features that we see could have been no other way, given the influence of
the local environment? Which, on the other hand, were determined
by chance, accidents of history at critical junctures of a developmental
process that offered multiple alternative pathways for exploration? If
our focus were child development, the issue would be the familiar
one of nature versus nurture, of genetics versus environment. In the
case of ecosystem patterns, it is an issue of necessity versus accident,
as reflected in the first two questions from the master list. Hence, before we begin to explore possible endogenous mechanisms for patterns—that is, those that represent the self-organization of ecosystems—it is important that we understand just how much scope for
variation there is in the process. Natural systems, after all, like any systems, must obey the laws of physics and chemistry. These restrict the
development of ecosystems by limiting where particular biological
forms can exist as well as by imposing thermodynamic constraints on
energy exchanges. We will discover in this chapter that such constraints determine where rain forests can occur, where deserts will be,
and where grasslands are to be found; but that, within those broad
constraints, there is a great deal of latitude concerning the exact
species that may be found.
57

58

FRAGILE DOMINION

The Possible and the Actual
In the biblical creation story, the fish are put in the sea, the fowl in
the air, the cattle and creeping things upon the Earth. Good ideas
all—imagine what would have transpired had the fish been put on
land, the cattle in the air, the fowl in the sea. Not much would have
survived except for a few seabirds, dodging falling cows. Each organism has its place, shaped by evolution to meet the constraints of the
environments to which it has adapted. This principle allows ecologists
to classify individuals according to habitats, and habitats according to
the types of species that can live there. Such classification provides
only the broad outlines of explanation. Within any habitat, only a
small proportion of the species that could exist there are found, since
colonization accidents and subsequent interactions between species
have shaped the actual assemblage. In the same way, and for the same
reasons, most species are found in only a small fraction of the habitats
where they could thrive.
The late Yale University ecologist and limnologist G. Evelyn
Hutchinson, the most important figure in American ecology, illustrated this dichotomy by distinguishing a species' fundamental niche,
the range of conditions under which it could survive, from its smaller
realized niche, the range of conditions in which it is actually found.
The term niche confounds two concepts, the range of physical conditions in which a species may be discovered and the spectrum of ecological roles it may play within a community. For the present discussion, it
is the first aspect that is of primary interest because the goal is to understand what the external constraints on evolutionary processes are.
The dichotomy between the fundamental and the realized mirrors
the duality that Francois Jacob called the possible and the actual Indeed, the title of this section is borrowed shamelessly from the title of
Ms 1982 book, which I heartily recommend for its perspective on
evolution.1 Hutchinson was concerned primarily with processes hi
ecological time, using the terms "fundamental" and "realized" to distinguish a species' potential niche from the roles and places it manages to fill. Jacob's attention, in contrast, was on the evolutionary
time frame. "Possible," then, referred not just to extant species but
also to hypothetical ones that are absent from the real world-—hence,
not among the "actual," The differences between Hutchinson's con-

Pattems in Nature

59

cerns and Jacob's are subtle, but worth preserving through the separate terms. The similarities between the concepts, however, are basic
to science and deserve deeper exploration.
The distinction between the possible and the actual, between the
fundamental and the realized, highlights a dilemma we face in trying
to make any predictions about future evolutionary change—for example, in endeavoring to anticipate what projected climate change
will mean for forest communities and other aspects of the world's
biodiversity. The vegetation that exists under any particular set of
conditions reflects only the realized niches of the species that are
there. That is, in an extension of Hutchinson's profound concept, the
specks to be found in any community represent its realized biotarather than its fundamental biota, the complete set of species that
could survive under the range of soil, climatic, and other physical
conditions that prevail there. Since it is impossible to infer what the
hypothetical fundamental biota is simply from information about the
much more limited realized biota, it is consequently impossible to
predict what the realized biota in any new environment will be. Indeed, even if we somehow knew the fundamental biota exactly, perhaps from experimental studies that expose physiological limits, it
would still be impossible to determine exactly what subset would
form the new realized biota. The speciics of what species would be
found would remain unresolved: Would species that could potentially
survive ever reach the new habitat? And even if they did, how would
their success in becoming established be affected by the other species
that got there first? These are questions about the dynamics of colonization; that is, they go well beyond what can be learned from statics. One can gain some insight into resolving them by constructing
and exploring mathematical and computer models that are predicated
on knowledge of fundamental mechanisms and interactions. Such
models, however, are not without their own problems; hence, they
can reduce our ignorance somewhat but never eliminate it entirely.

Ckcumstantial Evidence
Unraveling the details of why species are found where they are has
been one of the most exciting detective stories in ecology. It is, perhaps, the central problem. Without dynamics, we must turn to corre-

60

FRAGILE DOMINION

lations—circumstantial evidence. Inference from such information
certainly has its weaknesses but provides a potent place to begin formulating hypotheses. The fact that the owner of a building took out a
fire insurance policy on his building the day before it burned down
does not prove malfeasance, but it makes for an interesting coincidence. It even is likely to suggest some intriguing hypotheses to the
insurance company and the local gendarmes seeking to solve the mystery of why the fire began. Correlations establish connections and
help guide the search for explanations.
Ray Hilborn and Marc Mangel, two very clever mathematical ecologists, recently published The Ecological Detective, a book that, as its
evocative title suggests, tells the story of how ecologists can use models and statistical methods to explore hypotheses and solve ecological
whodunits,2 Like other detectives, ecologists find it useful to begin
from correlations, especially those between organisms and environment, but also ones involving the coincidences of species within particular habitats.
Correlational approaches can be quite problematical, however. Coincidence of species within the same habitat may mean that those
species share similar resources, or it may be that they exploit different
resources and coexist because they have found ways to live side by
side without engaging in excessive competition. The plot thickens.
For example, environments may be characterized broadly by mean
temperature and moisture, but these gross measures smooth over the
smaller-scale variations that species have learned to distinguish. Thus,
coarse descriptions of habitats at only the level of macroscopic or average statistics can suppress much of the important fine-scale detail, in
space as well as in time, that is essential to understanding patterns of
species coexistence.
A second problem is evident in efforts to use correlations to infer
ecological compatibility or incompatibility of species. Since any local
biota represents only a sample from a much larger fundamental biota,
the fact that two species do not exist in the same habitat tells us
nothing definitive about whether they could. Much of our understanding of community assembly processes has come from the
study of islands, and especially groups of islands like the Galapagos
that share at least some common physical and biological features.
When nearby islands are found to have different biotas, explanation

Patterns in Nature

tl

can be sought in terms of physical differences between the islands,
such as their size, their ruggedness, or their topographic complexity;
in terms of their degree of isolation from mainlands or simply the
vagaries of colonization; or in terms of the compatibility of new
arrivals with species already present. Given the fact that, with a
mainland pool of even as few as 100 species, there are more than
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 (one nonillion) possible communities that could be assembled, any process of assembly
obviously produces only a tiny subset of the range of possibilities.
This does not mean that deterministic rules of assembly have played
no role in shaping the realized biotas; of course they have. But it does
caution against reading too much into the absence of a species from a
particular location; there is no way that we could observe more than a
small sample of the spectrum of possibilities.
Nonetheless, there is much to be learned from correlative studies
concerning the fundamental biotas of particular habitat types; it is a
way to understand the scale at which reliable predictions can be
made. Alpine regions in which both annual precipitation and temperatures are low is home to tundra and to those species that are characteristic of tundra. Hotter, drier areas host deserts and desert species;
hotter, wetter areas are occupied by rain forests and rain forest
species.
Taking particular climatic conditions as given, and assuming they
drive ecological assembly, has an inherent problem: climate is not independent of community composition. That is, as communities
change in response to changing climate, there is a feedback between
vegetation and climatic conditions. Desert conditions can arise, for
example, if overgrazing removes the vegetation that would otherwise
return moisture to the atmosphere. That change affects predictions of
future climatic conditions, but it does not alter the fact that desert
species are found in deserts, and that deserts are home to desert
species.
The defining characteristic of the fundamental plant biota of the
desert is an ability to survive under conditions of high temperature
and high water stress. The cactus, a specialist for desert conditions,
has replaced leaves with stems that reduce water loss and thus has developed the capacity to store water. Many annuals exist in the desert,
primarily therophytes; in these, seeds are more easily protected from

62

FRAGILE DOMINION

extreme temperatures than the above-ground parts of adult plants
and thus provide a sensible way to wait out harsh conditions. Perennial species in the desert are characterized by high investment in root
systems that help draw water from the ground and expose as litde as
possible of the plant to harsh above-ground conditions. Many plant
species found in places like Death Valley, California, are hemkryptophytes, which die back to ground level during harsh conditions,
thereby protecting under the soil the buds that will regenerate and
form the next year's growth. Hemicryptophytes, however, are more
typically associated with temperate and arctic regions, where winter
presents challenges for plants that are not annuals.
The classification of species into therophytes and hemkryptophytes—along with phanerophytes, chamaephytes, and cryptophytes—goes back to the efforts of the Danish botanist Christen
Raunkiaer in 1903. Raunkiaer reasoned that by distinguishing plants
according to where they placed their buds, one could infer the types
of environments in which they could survive. The validity of Raunkiaer's logic is demonstrated by the fact that his scheme has survived in
practice for a century.
By focusing on adaptations for desert conditions, we can characterize the fundamental biota of the desert. In this way, we have a good
idea of what desert plant species look like. Furthermore, based on
what we know about desert plant species, and what we know separately about animal adaptations for tolerance to arid conditions, we
can infer a great deal about the types of animal species to be found in
deserts; for example, they obviously must be able to exploit for food
the unique desert plant forms. Thus, seed-eating rodents are common in deserts, because they possess the ability to make use of the
available resources and because through nocturnal habits and hibernation they have evolved to avoid the most extreme climatic conditions.
Considerations of this sort have led to a variety of schemes for classifying the vegetation of particular kinds of habitats. While it is not
feasible to specify the exact species assemblage in any ecosystem simply on the basis of physical variables, it is possible to say a great deal
about the functional groups that one is likely to find. And the broader
the spatial perspective—that is, the scetk—the more reliable and the
more detailed the predictions can be.

Patterns in Nature

63

Scales of Perception
The issue of scale is a fundamental one in efforts to relate community
characteristics to environmental conditions. General statements are
easily made about the vegetation over large zones, but the fine-scale
details are less easily specified. The next section discusses the broadest
scale, the so-called life zones, such as tundra and rain forests, at which
level quite robust predictions can be made. Within life zones, at what
may be called the mesoscale, or middle scales, patterns exist but exhibit more variation; these are the topic of the subsequent section. Finally, at the finest scales, exact prediction is virtually impossible because of the role of chance.
These observations are not unique to ecological systems. In general, in describing the dynamics of any system, the coarser the field of
vision, the easier it is to make definitive statements. Financial advisers
warn that no market predictions can be guaranteed over the short
term, though these same advisers confidently tell investors who are in
for the long haul that equities are the way to go. Over any period of
ten years or more, it has almost always been the case that stocks provide better rewards than do more conservative investments. Everyone
tells me that now, and I believe them. Nobody told me that when I
was younger; I assume that they knew it then, too, but maybe believed it less because the Great Depression was still a vivid memory.
The same is true for weather prediction: a longer perspective allows
more robust prediction.
These examples deal with time scales, but spatial scales provide perhaps even more obvious illustrations. Any large city predictably has a
plethora of fast-food establishments, rest rooms, and gas stations, but
try to find one when you need it in an unfamiliar neighborhood.
What is predictable at the level of the city is unpredictable at the more
local level. In the same way, it is more reliable to make predictions
about the collective behavior of whole forests than it is about individual trees or small parcels of land, in terms of how the vegetation will
develop over, say, the next fifty to one hundred years. There is in this
a general principle, the foundation, in fact, of statistical mechanical
theories that allow us to deal predictably with the macroscopic consequences of unpredictable local phenomena. In the simplest cases, this
is just the Law of Large Numbers, the mathematician's way of making

64

FRAGILE DOMINION

sense of large ensembles of statistically independent events. In other
cases, the macroscopic regularities may have a deeper explanation, reflecting, for example, homeostatic mechanisms operating at some
higher level of organization.
Whatever the mechanism, the point is that one's perception of any
system and its fluctuations depends on the perspective assumed, the
scale of observation. For many phenomena of interest, a coarser scale
allows one to average over variations and make more definitive statements, whether about space, time, or the ensemble of agents in a
complex adaptive system. It is far easier to make reliable predictions
about demand for automobiles over the next decade than it is to
make predictions about demand for Jeep Cherokees. In the same way
it is easier to make reliable predictions about total fish catches than
about the catches of any particular species, or to make predictions
about forest biomass than about any tree species. The chestnut largely
disappeared from American forests unpredictably, owing to the sudden emergence of blight, but other species in its functional group essentially filled the gaps, leaving little obvious change in forests except
for the absence of chestnuts.
A coarser scale does not necessarily guarantee enhanced predictability. I have a much better idea of what I will be doing over the
next week than over the next ten years. The fact that I do not even
know whether I will be alive ten years from now puts an unfortunate
damper on my predictive capabilities. Averaging may not help predictability if it is taken over scales where there is a strong trend. The
main message, then, is that scale matters in prediction; things come
into focus, stroboscopkally, on certain scales, and not on others.
Moreover, the explanations for the patterns seen on different scales
differ.
Recognition of this principle has guided our understanding of natural systems and led us to explore the interplay of mechanisms that
operate on different scales. The variations in how I feel from day to
day are driven by essentially random events. The chance that I will
come down with a cold virus this winter depends largely on what is
circulating in the community, though, of course, my reaction to exposure does depend on my own susceptibility. On the other hand,
conditions such as air and water quality may certainly be contributing
factors, and obviously the gradual decline in my physical fitness over

Patterns in Nature

65

the decades has more to do with my own aging process than with the
external environment. The point is that, on short time scales, the factors accounting for variability in how I feel are very different from the
ones on longer time scales; my doctor and I must synthesize these in
developing an integrated view of my health. Though I am not reassured when my physician tells me that my internal systems are as
good as can be expected for someone my age, I understand.
The same principle applies to the stock market. Economists and
market analysts depend on the fact that short-term market fluctuations arc largely unpredictable, though "Adam Smith" argues, "I suspect that even if the random walkers announced a perfect mathematic
proof of randomness, I would go on believing that in the long run future earnings influence present value."3 Short-term market fluctuations are obviously heavily influenced by essentially random events external to the market, such as congressional actions, war in Somalia, or
the outcome of an election. Over the longer term, these influences
tend to even out or self-correct, and market variation must be explained in other ways. If I understood these, I probably would be
spending my time doing something other than writing this book,
even though it is a labor of love.
Averaging over time and averaging over space are not so different
in effect; thus, for example, it is easier to predict the behavior of the
whole forest than the behavior of the trees. Similarly, predictability
generally goes down as one divides things more and more into categories—that is, as one reduces the degree of aggregation into metaagents. This is, after all, the central tenet that makes the insurance industry a good deal for buyer and seller alike. When I buy insurance, I
am protecting myself against uncertainty associated with the fact that
I and my family constitute a small sample; the insurance company, on
the other hand, cares little about individual cases because it takes a
broad sample. It averages over uncertainty, in the way I would by
buying mutual funds, or the way a plant would by dispersing its seeds
over diverse microhabitats. A similar dichotomy explains Las Vegas,
though in that case many people crave uncertainty and the slim likelihood of sudden wealth.
Prediction of the dynamics of ecological systems—or of socioeconomic systems, for that matter—similarly varies a great deal depending on how one chooses to lump things together. The demand for

66

FRAGILE DOMINION

university professors twenty years from now, for example, will predictably be driven by human birth rates now. Less predictable is how
demographic change will affect the demand for professors of music,
and even less so for "Berlioz specialists. Demographic trends are unlikely to have much to do with interest in Berlioz, which will be governed by other factors.
Universities must look to prediction of trends such as these in planning for their futures, but no industry is as dependent on knowing
how to aggregate as is the insurance industry. If teenagers are healthier than middle-aged folk but more reckless, insurance companies
charge them less for health insurance or life insurance, but more for
auto insurance. Actuarial rates, indeed, are all about how to structure
populations and aggregate individuals into groups in order to make
rates reflect comparative risks to the insurer. At times, the ways in
which categories are formed are deemed socially unacceptable because they discriminate against certain groups; this consequence does
not, however, undercut the bask logic. The paradox of insurance is
that rates must be set and any rate structure is necessarily discriminatory because it assigns individuals to groups based on a few defining
characteristics while ignoring the differences between individuals
within a group. In regulating the insurance industry, society simply
decides which forms of discrimination are acceptable, and which are
not.
Because aggregation suppresses detail about variation within
groups, different degrees of aggregation present very different views
of system dynamics. Brian Arthur, one of the principal intellectual
forces at the Santa Fe Institute, cites as a prime example the development of the videotape industry.4 Videotaping was an innovation that
could not be denied; independent of the technology that was developed, people were going to want the capability to make and view
tapes that could capture anything from Baby's first steps to sports
events and first-run movies. The dynamics of the aggregate market
were driven by consumer demand for a product and by the industry's
willingness to provide it for a price. Within the industry, however, a
self-organizing dynamic drove events in classic nonlinear fashion: because of the incompatibility of different systems, industry's favorite
way to frustrate consumers, the increasing popularity of VHS systems
made Betamax equipment a foolish investment for most people.

Patterns in Nature

67

There was no obvious overwhelming technological superiority of one
system over another, but the inability of people with Betamax systems
to play VHS tapes on their machines, or to have others view the tapes
they had made, drove the Betamax system into oblivion. The competitive dynamics within the industry thus was governed by a very different set of factors than was the dynamics of the industry as a whole,
though clearly there was interplay between the two scales.
The same phenomenon, not surprisingly, is played out over and
over again in the commercial marketplace; equally compelling cases
can be made regarding slide projectors, typewriter and computer keyboards, and even computer programming languages. Perhaps the
best-known example involves the standard keyboard, which begins in
the upper left with the letters QWERTY. Paul David argues that the
current keyboard design is an accident of history: inferior even to
some of the early alternatives, it has been locked in by historical accident.5 Brian Arthur cites this and other examples, including the computer language FORTRAN, as cases in which technologies became
established when competition was minimal and thereafter could not
be dislodged, or were at least difficult to dislodge, even by superior
designs.
A number of key ideas emerge from these examples, with broad
implications for understanding evolution. For the introduction and
diffusion of innovations, whether technological or biological, local
oftimaliiyy replaces global optimality as the order of the day. A solution that works can become established in the absence of intense
competition, even if it is not optimal in any absolute sense. Once it is
established, the competitive landscape becomes altered so that the
sufficient solution can repel competitive forays by technologically superior solutions because of the dynamics of the marketplace or, in the
case of evolution, the dynamics of the biological community. This is
nonlinearity at its most evident: changes in mere abundance of a type
can change the relative advantages or disadvantages of that type,
sometimes favoring the further spread of that type, sometimes limiting it. Those changes in advantage may be enhanced and reinforced
by further technological or evolutionary advances, such as the development and introduction of software and peripherals, or they may
simply reflect the reinforcement of product loyalty on what would
otherwise be a level playing field. Whatever the reasons, the adaptive

68

FRAGILE DOMINION

landscape becomes a very rugged one, with multiple peaks and multiple possibilities for dynamics.6
Francois Jacob provides numerous examples of accidents of history
becoming locked in through the nonlinearities of evolution and the
process of tinkering,7 A prime example is provided by the variety of
different solutions that have arisen, in different groups of organisms,
to the problem of vision. There are at least three different principles
on which forms of eyes have arisen in evolution in response to the
challenge of finding a way to see things; pinholes, multiple holes, and
lenses such as are characteristic of vertebrate eyes. The evolution of
eyes with lenses has been a complex process, dependent on a fortunate sequence of prior steps that allowed the development of lenses.
Adaptation builds on adaptation. As plants evolve to capture the
sun's energy, pathogens and herbivores evolve to steal some of it; in
some cases, associations can evolve further for the mutual benefit of
both species. Some ant species, for example, specialize in particular
tropical tree species.8 The ants make their homes in acacia trees and in
turn provide the trees some protection against other insect pests. This
arrangement works out well for both species, and so the acacia has developed adaptations to make food more easily accessible for the ants.9
Most important, these acacias, unlike closely related species, maintain
leaves year-round, so that the ants always have a needed food source in
the associated nectaries and Beltian bodies. Many other such mutualistic associations are to be found between species, as, for example, in the
remarkable coadaptations of some plants and their pollinators, or the
scaly lichens that unite species of fungi and algae.
These examples address evolutionary mechanisms and the question
of why certain ecological relationships have arisen while others have
not. Similarly, historical accidents reinforced by nonlinear processes
account for differences among the biological communities to be
found in quite comparable habitats. Chance colonizations result in
faunctl (animal) or floral (plant) differences among similar areas, as
among the islands of Hawaii or the Galapagos,10 These initial differences can so inluence the development of the community that they
affect the later success of other invaders. Thus, when rats were introduced as exotics into Fiji and Samoa, they had little effect on native
bird communities because the existence of native rats or ratlike enemies (land crabs) of birds had "immunized" the community, selecting

Pettterns in Nature

69

for behavioral repertoires that reduced mortality due to predation.11
In contrast, similar exotic introductions into Hawaii and Midway,
which had no native rat populations, had disastrous effects on bird
populations, owing to predation.12
Nonlinearity means that one must examine evolution as a set of
problems in game theory: a winning type is not necessarily the best of
all solutions, judged against some absolute standard; rather, it is a
type that, once established in the population, cannot be displaced.
This is an obvious way of looking at things when thinking about economic competition, and it is equally valid for the natural world. It assumes that the broad outlines of evolutionary adaptation in the face
of environmental change may be predictable, but that the details are
not.13 Even with hindsight, therefore, we are constantly amazed at
some of the novelties that the evolutionary process has crafted. It explains in part the incredible diversity of ways that different organisms
have evolved to meet similar challenges, such as the escape from unfavorable conditions, or simply the vicissitudes of their environments.14

The Broad Scale:
The Zones of Holdridge
The primary determinants of vegetation are precipitation and temperature, which combine to govern the availability of water and nutrients. Polar environments are on the whole cold and dry; things get
hotter and wetter as one moves toward the equator. There are exceptions, but given the way that the Earth moves about the sun, the
broad features must be true. This gradient in temperature and moisture, as modified by topographic features such as mountains and valleys, provides the background against which plant life is distributed.
A particularly useful complement to this rule is the Holdridge life
zone system, presented by Leslie R. Holdridge in a classic paper in
the journal Science a half-century ago.15 The Holdridge scheme classifies vegetation into a variety of types—such as desert scrub, rain
forest, and dry tundra—and relates these to average total annual precipitation and mean annual temperature. The Holdridge system is
only one of a variety of efforts to relate vegetation to climatic conditions, but it serves as well as any. Together with the generalization
mentioned earlier about latitudinal trends in precipitation and tcm-

70

FRAGILE DOMINION

perature, it offers some important insights into latitudinal trends in
plant species diversity.
Within a broad latitudinal zone, there is, of course, much scope for
variation. Philadelphia and Madrid both are at 40 degrees north latitude but experience very different climates. Traversing the globe, at
40 degrees aorth, one finds, depending on longitude, a wide range of
vegetation types, from mountains to deserts, from Mediterranean
scrub near Madrid to deciduous broadleaf forests near Philadelphia.
Climate patterns vary a great deal, and their description is an essential
refinement of the boundary conditions on vegetation types. Average
conditions also do not suffice for determining vegetation type; seasonality matters, of course, a great deal.

Mesoscales, Communities,
and Superorganisms
The delineation of species distributions in response to variation in environmental factors, at scales finer than those accommodated by the
Holdridge system, often can be studied by careful description of the
distribution of species along gradients in space. Places can be characterized by their patterns of temperature and precipitation, including
how those critical variables fluctuate over time; those same sites then
are also characterized according to their vegetation. From this coincident information, one can construct candidate schemes for relating
vegetation to climate.
The most influential studies of this kind were carried out by my
late and close colleague Robert Whittaker, along altitudinal gradients
in habitats such as the Siskiyou Mountains in Oregon and the Great
Smoky Mountains. I can still see Bob Whittaker, with his long strides
and seven-league boots, gobbling up distances between home and office in Ithaca with the same purposeful mien that I saw the few times
I was fortunate enough to be in the field with him. I can imagine him
as he was in the Siskiyous and am hardly surprised that he was able to
cover so much territory and achieve so much. In addition to chronicling a great deal of information about how individual tree species
were distributed in relation to climatic conditions, Whittaker—
through his data collection and analysis—produced the most telling
evidence that has been collected against the then-popular notion that

Patterns in Nature

71

communities were like superorganisms, fixed in their composition and
representing evolutionary units uniquely determined by local climate.
Early in this century, two elegant and competing views of plant
communities were offered. The first, put forth primarily by Henry
Gleason, argued that as one studied the changes in plant species composition along gradients—for example, up mountain slopes—individual species made their appearance or disappearance independently of
other species. In this view, plant species were inMvidualisticMy distributed, each according to its unique relationship to the environment. The alternative view, advanced by Frederic Clements, was that
plant communities were units; in the Clementsian view, as one moved
along a gradient, one would reach points, thresholds, where one
group of species dropped out and was replaced by an essentially completely different assemblage. Thus, a community was like a superorganism, which responded to evolutionary forces as if it were a single
unit. The Clementsian viewpoint was very attractive and much more
popular than the Gleasonian view—that is, until Whittaker. Whittaker's data showed that, along the gradients he studied, species came
and went by themselves, and that the notion of a superorganism was
not valid.
Since the superorganism point of view raised the unit of selection
to much higher organizational levels than were appropriate, the implications of Whittaker's work for the theory of evolution of communities and ecosystems were far-reaching. The issues were quite similar
to those that surround the debate over Gaia mentioned earlier. That
is, Clements viewed the ecological community as a superorganism;
Gaia views the whole biosphere as such. In each case, the issue is
whether important evolutionary forces can be acting at such aggregated levels, or whether we must understand system properties as
simply having emerged from pressures at lower levels of organization.
In the case of ecological communities, the problem is confounded by
the fact that what we call a community or an ecosystem is often a fiction, an arbitrary restriction of spatial boundaries rather than a reflection of real thresholds of species change.
Whittaker's work does not imply that there are no thresholds, of
course; along any gradient there may be major points of transition, or
ecotones: places where community composition changes dramatically
and in concert. The edge of a lake or ocean provides an obvious ex-

72

FRAGILE DOMINION

ample; clearly the characteristic organisms of the deep ocean differ
from those of the coasts, whose organisms in turn differ from those of
the inland regions. But these boundaries distinguish large and diffusely related groups of species, not the small number of tightly
bound species that could serve as essential evolutionary units.
Marine communities exhibit their own characteristic patterns of
distribution, governed largely by ocean circulation and the distribution of nutrients and organisms. Across the globe, regions of high
marine primary production can be found in polar and coastal areas, as
well as in upwelling areas (such as at the equator) that bring up nutrients from the depths. Open ocean areas and the central oceanic gyres
are typically regions of low productivity. Primary productivity refers
to the conversion of solar energy into carbon compounds, and it fuels
the base of the food chain. In the oceans, primary productivity is primarily the domain of the small plants, phytoplankton, that inhabit the
upper layers. Thus, the distributional patterns of productivity refer essentially to the distributional patterns of the production of phytoplankton. The availability of energy in the form of phytoplankton, of
course, determines where the small animals, the zoopltmkton, can
grow, and so on to fish, although the high mobility of ish species
gives them somewhat broader distributions.
Vertical patterns are also important within the marine environment, just as they are on land. Light can penetrate only so far into the
water, giving rise to the description of the upper layer as the photic
zone. Anyone who has ever scuba-dived knows that the depths are increasingly devoid of light, but that where things become dark depends a great deal on certain factors, such as the constitution of the
bottom, that influence the clarity of the water. Water clarity above
coral reefs is excellent to great depths compared with muddy lakes,
which become dark a few feet from the surface. In any case, and in
virtually any but the most shallow environments, the distributional
patterns of species vary a great deal with depth. Environments are
typically characterized by the rate at which light is extinguished with
depth; this determines not only the widths of particular zones but
also their degree of communication with one another. If light penetrates deeply, so that zones are broad, then the exchange between
zones is relatively smaller in effect than if zones are narrow.

Patterns in Nature

n

Summing Up
This chapter has shown that there are general rules that govern the
kinds of plants and animals that one may expect to observe in diffeFent classes of environment. Those rules necessarily deal with broad
classes of species, typically distinguished and identified by the adaptations that enable them to live in those environments. To'a lesser extent, one may predict the appearance of particular species in particular
habitats, but the reliability with which that can be done depends on
the commonness of the species and the size of the area in question.
There are immediate and obvious economic parallels. Any large
city has characteristic zones, perhaps associated with areas near large
highways, where one can reliably expect to find the sorts of conveniences that travelers enjoy: places to fuel their automobiles and bodies quickly and to recycle unwanted wastes. Thus, service stations and
fast-food establishments dot the highway^ exits, which are more numerous near cities. At any exit, one may hope to find an assortment of
types of gasoline and types of food, but with no guarantee that one
will find any one establishment in particular.
The fast-food establishments are a functional meta-group, composed of smaller functional groups specializing in burgers _or fried
chicken or pizza. Within any particular functional group, there is considerable redundancy, and types are largely indistinguishable except
by the burger or pizza connoisseurs and cognoscenti. One is most
likely, of course, to find McDonald's, the most prevalent species of its
type, but that cannot be guaranteed. If one is not committed to a particular exit but willing to get off at any one of the "Next 17 Exits"
that yield multiple points of entry into Gotham City, then more specific preferences can be indulged, since the increase of spatial scale increases the likelihood that a desired species, such as McDonald's or
Wendy's, can be found. Thus, both the spatial scale of interest (the
area considered) and the scale of functional resolution (whether one
will settle for any fast-food restaurant or must have a McDonald's) affect the ability to predict what is likely to be found. In this particular
example, temporal scale is less important, except to the degree that
time translates into space as one circles the beltway. It really will not
do, for example, to get off at exit 18 and wait until a McDonald's is

74

FRAGILE DOMINION

built; the scales of waiting and building are simply not commensurate. In other situations, however, temporal scale can be very important to predictive ability.
For plants or animals, the scales of many fluctuations are rapid
enough that strategies have simply evolved to average over them or to
shut down activity during unfavorable times and gear it back up during better times. This is evident in the daily patterns, the so-called diurnal rhythms, that govern sleep-wake cycles, as well as in the yearly
patterns of activity and hibernation, or of growth and dormancy, that
represent the ways of life for many species.
In many ways, variability in space and in time is interchangeable.
Small patches of forest, for example, are highly variable and highly
unpredictable. Larger areas tend to be less variable and more predictable. That fact has not been lost on plant species in their evolutionary meanderings. Strategies have evolved to deal with unpredictability; greater predictability may be achieved by averaging over
space, through dispersal, or over time, through dormancy or by becoming perennial. Space and time are two different ways for plants to
assemble their mutual funds, reducing risk while eschewing potentially larger payoffs; evolution is for the long haul. Animals, of course,
employ similar strategies in their foraging behaviors, searching
broadly (as do highly mobile vertebrates) or sitting and waiting (as do
many intertidal invertebrates).
Thus, on broad spatial scales and long temporal scales, ecological
systems exhibit well-established patterns of species distributions, as
reflected by schemes such as Holdridge's. These deal most reliably in
generalities, and least reliably in the prediction of exact species composition. For many human purposes, however, that is just fine, since it
is exactly the broad features that somewhat interchangeable species
share that represent what is important to us. This is no accident; having alternatives in terms of resource species is an averaging strategy
not so different from averaging over space and time. Specialists are
ecologically vulnerable; generalists have options. Resiliency, which
here translates into the ability of a species to survive even in the face
of the loss of an important resource species, depends on flexibility, the
ability to substitute.
In the financial markets, there are niches for all sorts of investment
strategies. Most small investors are somewhat conservative general-

Patterns in Nature

75

ists, developing averaging strategies to ensure a reasonable return
while guarding against large losses. Others are willing to accept shortterm setbacks for potential big payoffs and thus prefer more aggressive specialist strategies, focusing on a few risky investments. As one
gets older, with a shorter remaining time horizon, conservative strategies become more attractive. There is a similar diversification of
niches in ecological systems. Most species develop averaging strategies, for example, by wide distribution of their seeds, so that they are
reasonably assured of some return. Most seeds will be wasted, but a
few will find open gaps in which they can persist long enough to
grow and reproduce. At the other extreme are species looking for the
big payoff—a patch of land that they can settle into and dominate for
many years. These are the climax species in the forest, the large trees,
such as beech or maple, that fill the canopy and define the forests. In
between the early transients and the climax species are a whole progression of others that are intermediate on the transient-climax spectrum.
In toto, this spectrum of species defines what is called a successional gradient; through the partitioning of this gradient, the system
maintains its diversity. The classification into risk-taking or conservative species, however, is not so simple and is somewhat paradoxical.
The species that average by distributing their seeds widely are generally termed opportunistic species, since they make their living by
putting individual seeds into high-risk situations. A few seeds will find
a rare and risky opportunity for high payoff, but most of them will be
lost. The parent plant, however, is following a very conservative investment strategy, producing huge numbers of seeds that are individually very cheap to produce and sprinkling them over the landscape in
the relative assurance that a few of them will strike paydirt. The large
canopy species, on the other hand, produce smaller numbers of larger
seeds, perhaps involving elaborate shells for protection and hence requiring a great degree of investment. Each seed is more carefully and
conservatively invested, but there are far fewer of them.
The spectrum from opportunism to long-haul strategies has obvious parallels to economic markets. As new technologies emerge, the
number of start-up companies proliferates from only a few to hundreds within a few years; many of these ultimately disappear, however,
as a process of winnowing reduces the number of companies back to a

76

FRAGILE DOMINION

few dominants. The same is true of a developing patch of forest undergoing secondary succession—that is, the reinvasion by a broadly
predictable sequence of species following a disturbance. In the early
stages of recolonization, there is very little competition and great
scope for growth. The species that appear are those that are adapted
to finding favorable places for fast growth. If the area that has been
disturbed is large, there are lots of potential colonization sites, and
lots of ways for a variety of species to enter the system. It is no surprise, then, that there is very high species diversity early in the successional process, or indeed that such diversity increases as the system
develops. At some point, however, the honeymoon is over. The
growth of these thousand points of flight begins to bring beachheads
into contact with one another, and competition becomes increasingly
important.
The same scenario is played out dramatically on coral reefs and has
led to the evolution of a variety of aggressive ways for one coral
species to engage in antisocial behavior, such as poisoning competitors. The corals are the Borgias of the invertebrate world.
The increased importance of competition for space in the later
stages of community development leads to a winnowing of species
and a decrease in diversity. In the absence of new disturbance, the forest community will move inexorably toward dominance by one or
two world-champion competitors. Disturbance is a constant feature
of natural forests, however, at a variety of scales, so in a typical large
forest diversity is maintained by the continual playing out of the disturbance-recolonization dynamic on smaller scales. Recurrent disturbance, especially forest fires, plays a vital role in maintaining diversity
and resiliency in the forest, as well as in most other natural systems,
serving to stimulate a process of renewal. This somewhat counterintuitive finding, to which I return in the next chapter, has changed the
way forest managers deal with fire suppression.
Though exact species composition is unpredictable, descriptors of
biodiversity typically follow more regular rules, since these are statistical compressions of a great deal of information into a summary measure or set of measures. Just as averaging over space or time can lead
to more predictability, so, too, can averaging over details of the exact
composition of an ecosystem. Biodiversity does not refer to a single
number, though discussion of it usually begins with species counts.

Patterns in Nature

77

Equally important, however, is the diversity of populations within a
species, the diversity of species within a functional group, and the diversity of functional groups within an ecosystem. Furthermore,
species themselves are not monolithic collections of indistinguishable
units; genetic and demographic diversity within populations plays a
vital role in establishing the resiliency of ecosystems and their ability
to continue to provide the goods and services we rely on.
Thus, biodiversity is distributed, like the stars and gases and dust in
the sky, into nebulae and galaxies of determinate and indeterminate
structure, producing a picture whose intricacies defy simple description. Any effort to measure biodiversity collapses this rich tapestry
into simplifications that we can fit into our brains, our models, and
our laws. That does not diminish the importance of settling on suitable ways of describing biodiversity that capture its essential importance to the human endeavor, while suppressing much of its glorious
detail. The issue is to understand which detail is important to the
maintenance of services, and which can be suppressed without changing the basic message. Counting species is not the answer, because we
know that species differ a great deal in their importance, and even
weighted species counts would miss the critical questions of how biodiversity is organized above and below the level of the species. Deciding on the relative importance of different components of biodiversity must depend on an understanding of how systems are organized
and of how structure and functioning are related. It is a question, like
most, more easily posed than answered.
Measurement of biodiversity, and of its importance, must rise
above simply providing lists of parts and transcend a taxonomy, however good, that simply arranges things within boxes. One must, as
John Holland's list of four key properties emphasizes, also talk about
flows and nonlinearities—that is, statics and dynamics. Flows are easier to describe than nonlinear dynamics, because it is feasible to measure them by observation alone, and over relatively shorter periods of
time. Economists measure the lows of goods and services through an
economy, sociologists and cultural anthropologists measure the flows
of customs and information, and toxicologists and epidemiologists
measure the flows of harmful agents. The nonlinear consequences of
those flows are another matter, potentially of far greater importance
depending on how buffered the receiving systems are against change.

78

FRAGILE DOMINION

Ecologists similarly describe systems first of all by the low of materials through compartments, in the same way that physicians or physiologists describe the flow of blood or nutrients or coffee through an
organism, or economists the iow of capital through an economy. A
farm ecologist describing the flow and residence times of nitrogen in
an agricultural ecosystem, from fertilizer to crops, is thus engaged in
an activity analogous to what a pharmacologist does in describing the
flow and residence times of drugs in the body, going from one organ
to the next. The ecological question, as Joel Cohen put it so impeccably, is, "Who eats whom?" The process of gathering such culinary
data is not typically very appetizing, often involving exercises in analysis of the stomach contents of large numbers of individuals. But it's a
job, and someone has to do it. From such studies we have learned a
great deal about the food webs (more technically termed trophic webs,
from the Greek word for food) of a variety of ecological systems,
From inventories of food webs, such as those organized by Frederic
Briand and Joel Cohen, and insightful analyses one can begin to discern patterns, commonalities, and differences among the organizational structures of diverse food webs.
It is has long been well understood, from purely thermodynamic
considerations, that there are limits to the number of layers food
webs can have, that is, to the number of steps energy can take in going from the sun to the top of the chain. At each step, typically at
least 90 percent of the energy is lost in conversion from the biomass
of one species into another. Thus, a classic pyramid structure forms,
in which there is far less energy available at each trophic level than at
the level on which it feeds. The notion of trophic level is an oversimplification for the convenience of discussion. Ecosystems are not organized into layers, each feeding only on the layer below; lines are
crossed freely. Humans, for example, eat pretty much anything.
Nonetheless, the basic message remains that any parcel of energy can
make just so many stops on its journey, since it becomes dissipated at
each step along the way. Given that such limits exist, we need to ask
whether they are reached in practice, or whether other constraints—
for example, ecosystem stability—impose stricter limits. The basic issue, the degree to which food web dimensions are extrinsically determined versus the degree to which they are intrinsically determined,
has been the focus of clever analyses by a variety of scientists. A valuable synthesis is provided by Stuart Pimm in his book Food Webs.16

Patterns in Nature

79

Not just the length of food webs but their topologies as well have
captured the imaginations of investigators. Common patterns, such as
the relative numbers of species at different trophic levels, have been
detected, most dramatically in the work of Joel Cohen,17 although
many of these patterns have recently been contested by other researchers.18 Whatever the truth, it is clear that there are some commonalities to be found, especially in ecosystems of similar type.
More generally, as one looks beyond trophic webs to the comparative functional organization of diverse ecosystems that exist under
similar environmental conditions, one finds similarities that reflect
what biologists call convergent evolution. Convergent evolution refers
to the tendency of separate organisms or communities of organisms
independently to evolve similar adaptations and patterns in response
to similar environmental challenges, though possibly separated by
great geographical distances. A case in point is revealed by comparisons of the structure of ecosystems across a range of arid and semiarid regions.19 Desert shrubs, for example, typically have succulent
stems wherever they are found. Thus, succulent stems typify these
plants. Similarly, Mediterranean-climate chaparral are ssclerofhylls
(have hard leaves); thus, sclerophylly is a common characteristic of
chaparral plants across the globe.20 More generally, plant morphology
can be predicted in general terms given information about the physical characteristics of the habitat.21 Not only the life forms of individual plants but also community characteristics, such as productivity,
food chain length, and broad features of patterns of energy flow, are
determined primarily by the local physical environment rather than by
evolutionary history. Thus, ecosystems in similar environments converge to resemble each other in their overall features, though they
differ a great deal in specific detail.

In Conclusion
Through a bit of ecological detective work, we have learned that
community composition and organization are the children of two
parents: local environmental conditions, such as temperature and humidity, and the vagaries of history. Local conditions determine where
forests can occur, and even the types of forests, but the particular
identities of the species to be found are governed by chance colonization events and by what is available in nearby communities. Broader

30

FRAGILE DOMINION

spatial areas are more easily predictable than small patches of forest,
because chance events tend to be averaged out more. And what is
true for the forest is true for the grassland, or for the intertidal zone
of rocky coasts, or for wetland communities: there is predictability,
and there is uncertainty, and it is that uncertainty—that unpredictability in local outcomes-—that gives us the rich tapestry of diversity that can be seen in natural communities. Because of the uncertainty in outcome, each new gap that forms will follow its own
unique pathway of growth and replacement, and the forest mosaic—
or for that matter, the intertidal mosaic, or the grassland mosaic—will
be a patchwork of accidents of colonization and later growth. Uncertainty, thus, is the parent of biodiversity, and localized disturbances
such as fires—which, at least up to a point, increase the level of uncertainty—are key to the maintenance of diversity.
Ecosystems are self-organizing systems in which random disturbance and colonization events create a heterogeneous landscape of
diverse species, which then become knitted together through nutrient
fluxes and other forms of interaction. Not all is chance, however, as
generalizations of the sort discussed in the last section show. Ecosystem development becomes channeled into one of a limited number of
typical patterns, determined by local environmental conditions as well
as by initial events early in their ontogeny (their development). If we
were to classify each system type in terms of a basic organizational
plan, we would have a powerful tool in developing a general theory
of ecosystem structure and functioning. What do general theories of
complex adaptive systems have to tell us about the commonalities to
be expected, and the roles of extrinsic and historical factors? I turn to
these questions in the subsequent chapters.

5

ECOLOGICAL
ASSEMBLY

The assembly of an ecological community following a disturbance, a
process called succession, is quite different from putting together a
new bookshelf from its parts; indeed, it is more like playing with a set
of Lego bricks. There is no unique blueprint, though there are a
number of basic forms that can be created. There is considerable iexibility in design, but there is also a great deal of historical constraint,
in that the way the irst pieces are fitted together limits the possibilities to follow. Tinkering, again, is the dominant metaphor and leads
to a multiplicity of possible combinations and structures. In general,
not all pieces will be used. Among those that are used, some will serve
as keystones: their removal would lead to the collapse of the integrity
of the structure. Others will be adornments: their removal would
have minor effect.
Where ecosystems differ from most Lego structures is in the constant turnover of the pieces, at least at local scales. Species come and
go, replaced by others that appear to take their place. This has been
most dramatically demonstrated in the study of islands, which have
provided laboratories for ecological and evolutionary studies since
Charles Darwin's GaMpagos voyage on the Beagle. Precisely because
the assembly process has so many twists and turns, groups of similar
islands provide naturalists with the opportunity to observe the colonization experiment many times over. Any species differences between islands may in part be due to underlying habitat variation, but
81

82

FRAGILE DOMINION

they may also be by-products of the vagaries of the assembly process,
through which accidents of colonization are transformed through
subsequent events into facts on the ground, constraints on the further development of the island biota. Sorting out the relative importance of extrinsic and intrinsic factors, and of fate and chance, thus
looms as the essential issue in the comparison of the biology of similar
islands. This now-familiar challenge, which has arisen over and over
again in this book, is also a central problem in the study of complex
adaptive systems in general.

The Biology of Islands
Following Darwin's original fundamental work, numerous other investigators carried out biological studies of islands. In general, interest was focused on how species composition could be related to the
specific characteristics of individual islands. Sherwin Carlquist, in his
book Island Life, summarized much of what was known in 1965,
which was a whole lot less than we know today.1 At about that time, a
unique combination of three scientific talents—Robert MacArthur,
Edward Wilson, and Daniel Simberloff—realized that a number of
things had to be done if the anecdotal information that had accumulated was to be shaped into a science of islands.
Robert MacArthur, at Princeton, was undoubtedly one of the most
creative and important influences on the transformation of the science of ecology into its modern form. His roots in the natural history
of birds and his ability to crystallize observations into neat and simple
mathematical packages pointed the way to generalizations that provided evolutionary context for understanding why island biotas have
the species that they do. His crisp and elegant writings over too short
a career inspired a whole generation of young ecologists, while providing enough rigor to ecological relationships to attract the attention of researchers from outside the discipline and introduce them to
the fascinating puzzles of evolutionary ecology. Many of his disciples
had been originally trained in mathematics or physics, and they would
become leaders in the development of theoretical ecology in the
decades that followed MacArthur's untimely death at the age of
forty-three.
Like Lawrence Slobodkin, MacArthur was a student of G. Evelyn
Hutchinson, whose role as a mentor of brilliant young ecologists re-

Ecological Assembly

83

mains unsurpassed. An incisive theoretician as well as a stunning empiricist, Hutchinson brought both these talents to bear on his writings, whose substance and imagery captured the reader's attention
and impelled him or her to want to study the subject farther. His
style of training graduate students, as Larry SlobodMn once explained
to me, was to encourage, reinforce, and get out of the way. He also
chose his students well, and his incredible legacy is testimony to the
success of his philosophy of mentoring.
MacArthur was a worthy intellectual descendant of Hutchinson's,
who nonetheless outlived his student by two decades. Though
Hutchinson was not afraid of mathematics and used it insightfully to
support his writings, MacArthur made greater use of it as a vehicle for
excursions into the fantasy world of what might be and what might
have been. It was important, therefore, that he found an empirically
based collaborator of equal stature in Edward O. Wilson, who joined
him in his most lasting and influential work, The Theory of Island Bio^geography.2 Wilson, revered among myrmecologists (ant fanatics) for
his landmark studies of the social behavior of ants, is more widely
known for his stimulating and at times controversial writings on human sociobiology. He remains to this day one of the most important
biologists in the world.
The combination of MacArthur and Wilson was a collaboration
made in heaven, bringing together two of the true geniuses in the
subject. Together they crafted the fundamentals of a theory of island
bi0jjeo$ra.phy} a theory that endeavored to explain the diverse biotas of
groups of islands in terms of such properties as size, topographic
complexity, and distance from the mainland; they recognized as well
that accidents of colonization and extinction were fundamental determinants of the exact species composition, but nonetheless they
sought to derive regularities from a sea of detail.
The most profound prediction of the MacArthur-Wilson theory
was that islands are constantly in flux in terms of their species composition, but that they reach a balance between arrivals and departures
so that the number of species reaches an equilibrium. The idea of
such a dynamic equilibrium is similar to what happens if water is run
into a bathtub in which the plug is missing. If the inflow rate is strong
enough, initially water flows in much faster than it flows out. As the
amount in the tub increases, the outflow rate also increases until it
reaches a level equal to the inflow rate. When inlow equals outflow,

84

FRAGILE DOMINION

there is no change in water level, although there is constant turnover
of the water. Such turnover is also characteristic of lakes, which are
just big bathtubs with the plugs missing. Water is constantly flowing
out of lakes, into rivers and streams and on to the oceans; it is replaced by new water, from snowmelt and rainfall at higher elevations.
Lake scientists, who are called limnologists, characterize a lake by its
flushing rate, basically the rate at which the water in the lake is renewed. Since the flushing rate determines how long a packet of water
will remain in the lake, it also determines how long toxic materials
that have entered the lake will remain there—that is, what their residence times will be.
MacArthur and Wilson thought about islands as if they were bathtubs. Species flow into an island via immigration; they flow out by
local extinction. An empty island should have a relatively high inflow
rate because every mainland species is a potential colonist. As the
number of species that have been successfully established on the island increases, the number of potential colonists decreases. Furthermore, the mainland species that have not yet managed to colonize
are likely to be the less vagile—that is, less likely to be able to travel
from the mainland to the island. Insects that attach themselves to
birds, for example, can in theory make their way quickly to islands;
those that must cover the distance themselves, or attach to flotsam,
might delay their appearance. Thus, although there may be exceptions to this rule, MacArthur and Wilson hypothesized that immigration rates should decrease as the island biota developed. On the
other hand, extinction rates should increase as the island becomes
more crowded, both because there are more candidate species for
extinction and because competitive interactions increase as species
expand and come more and more into contact with one another.
Such competitive interactions lead to the eventual elimination on the
islands of the inferior competitors, in the classical Darwinian manner.
Eventually, the number of species should reach an equilibrium level,
a dynamic balance between the two processes of immigration and extinction. Instead of a flushing rate, island biologists speak of a species
turnover rate, but the concept is the same. Species come and go on
the island. Some stay virtually forever, or at least until a major catastrophe such as a hurricane hits the island; others have quite a short
residence time.

Ecological Assembly

85

MacArthur and Wilson made a number of additional predictions,
all potentially testable. Whatever the immigration and extinction
rates, some equilibrium should be reached representing a balance between them. Islands far from shore should have lower immigration
rates, and hence fewer species at equilibrium. Similarly, smaller islands
should have higher extinction rates (per species), again leading to
fewer species.
With this simple and elegant theory in hand, they set out to find a
way to test it. Graduate students are always useful in this regard, and
Wilson found a particularly bright and industrious one in Daniel Simberloff, now a professor at the University of Tennessee. For his thesis
work, Simberioff (after tortured consideration of the ethical issues involved) fumigated small mangrove islands in the Florida Keys and
carefully studied the recolonization process. The essential predictions
of the theory were borne out, and SimberlofFs work remains a classic
study today.3 It was the experimental verification of MacArthur and
Wilson's ideas that transformed armchair speculation into science,
and into a fundamental element of current ecological theory and
practice.
Controlled experiments such as Simberioff's are invaluable, but
rare. The costs are large, and the moral implications always are present.
Mangrove islands, populated mainly by vegetation and insects, are one
thing; it would be virtually impossible to reproduce such experiments
where large vertebrates were involved. A number of natural experiments do exist, however, and have provided targets of opportunity for
colonization biologists. Classical examples include the recolonization
of Krakatoa, an island west of Java, following a volcanic eruption that
destroyed it more than a century ago. Although it represents a unique,
nonrepeatable occurrence, Krakatoa still provides a long-term laboratory for studying the process of primary succession. Primary succession
refers to the colonization of a new substrate, in this case, the lava that
covered what was left of the old island. During primary succession,
there are important physical and chemical changes to the substrate that
result from the activity of the species that have colonized there. In this
way, primary succession differs from secondary succession, which refers
to the recolonization of an area where the local plants have been removed but the basic physical properties have not been so disturbed as
to eliminate the effects of earlier primary succession.

m

FRAGILE DOMINION

As would be expected from general theory, the number of plant
species on Krakatoa continually increased over time and was still in
exponential increase when Willem M. Doctors van Leeuwen published his study of the recovery process.4 Mosses and lichens colonized first, followed by more complex species such as flowering
plants. Similar studies, with similar results, have been carried out for
other sites, such as the new island of Surtsey, which formed as the result of a volcanic eruption in Iceland in 1965, and the areas near
Washington State's Mount Saint Helens, which blew off its scenic top
just a few years ago.
The Mount Saint Helens studies, carried out largely by terrestrial
ecologists such as Jerry Franklin and Peter Kareiva at the University
of Washington, emphasize the importance of the theory of island biogeography to islands of habitat in all sorts of systems, including
forests and grasslands. Thus, the ideas have relevance well beyond the
conventional sorts of islands that Simberloff, MacArthur, and Wilson
studied or discussed—bits of land surrounded by expanses of saltwater. MacArthur and Wilson, of course, knew that they were developing theories of deep significance for a wide range of systems, not just
for mangroves. This was, in fact, their motivation; neither had paid
much attention to islands before. As fascinating and romantic as islands are, their greater value is as model systems. In this, they play a
role very similar to mathematical or scale models—they simplify interactions, emphasizing and exaggerating a few dominant processes at
the expense of the complexity and detail that one finds in more enmeshed situations. Thus, even large islands such as Australia, New
Zealand, and Hawaii provide ideal systems for study. Their distance
from other sources of species has isolated them in their evolutionary
development, allowing the establishment of unique types of plants
and animals—for example, the marsupials; on these islands, researchers can focus their attention on the same basic mechanisms that
form the cornerstones of the MacArthur-Wilson theory. Australia is
large, but far from any other source. New Zealand is smaller, and
even more isolated. The Hawaiian Islands form a tiny chain, a dot in
the middle of the Pacific, far from any mainland source. The
MacArthur-Wilson theory makes strong predictions about the comparative dynamics of these different land masses, and those predictions are consistent with what is to be found there. Hawaii provides

Ecological Assembly

87

an object lesson in how to measure distances, however; humans have
introduced large numbers of species into Hawaii, in effect reducing
the distance of the islands from the mainland. The biota of Hawaii is
a mess, dominated by introduced species to the extent that very few
native species remain.
The lessons learned from island models are especially valuable in
studying virtual islands in terrestrial situations—for example, patches
of natural area in the midst of urban areas, or gaps caused by natural
or human influences in forests. Indeed, forests are mosaics of gaps in
various stages of recovery from disturbance and thereby support a diversity of different plant types. The process of recovery from the natural deaths of trees in a forest is fundamentally different from what
happens following a volcanic disturbance; instead of bare rock, for example, the substrate is developed soil. Hence, the process is termed
secondary succession, to distinguish it from the more fundamental
primary succession. The lessons from island biogeography provide
great insight into what will happen to a forest patch. Its size, its complexity, and its distance from source areas will all influence its development.

Islands in the Forest
The theory of island biogeography, suitably extended, is central to
understanding the dynamics of forests. In forests, gaps are constantly
forming as the result of the natural deaths of individual trees (or simply the loss of branches), the blowdowns of large numbers of trees
during storms, or the demise of whole areas due to forest fires or
clear-cutting practice. The source of the disturbance affects the recovery process of any such gap in the forest: it determines the quality of
the substrate and whether there are seeds remaining from which to
rebuild. Also important, however, as in the basic theory of island biogeography, is the size of the island gaps and the degree of isolation
from sources of colonists.
In most forests, localized disturbances are a vital part of their continual renewal; small fires, for example, once the clarion call for
Smokey the Bear to come to the rescue, are now recognized as essential for maintaining the health of the ecosystem. Fire opens up space
where species that cannot tolerate shade—like larch and various pines

88

FRAGILE DOMINION

in the western mountains of the United States—have the opportunity
to flourish. It contributes to the recycling of nutrients. And most important, it introduces diversity and heterogeneity to the forest, helping to "immunize" it against more major disturbances, including especially catastrophic fires that might destroy the entire forest. In a
healthy forest, little disturbances—deriving not only from fire but
also from natural mortality, windthrows, and disease—occur sporadically all over the landscape, reinitiating local sequences of secondary
succession. Certain species, such as mosses, herbs, and shrubs, are
best adapted to the early stages of the successional process; others, including small conifers, do best in the intermediate stages; and still
others, such as hardwoods, thrive during the late stages. In Connecticut forests, for example, black cherry and red oak make their appearance fairly early following a disturbance, hemlock comes in later, and
beech is adapted to the late stages of succession. The early species
have made adaptations, such as developing high respiration rates, that
permit them to perform well under high light; these species are hampered, however, by the cost of such adaptations, which become apparent as the forest develops: the canopy closes up and light becomes
less available.

The Ecological Quilting Bee
The typical pattern of development varies from system to system, but
it is the sharing of different stages of successional development that
maintains diversity in virtually any ecosystem. The natural forest becomes a tapestry of patches in different stages of succession, and
hence a tapestry of diversity. The small local disturbances not only
maintain the character of the system by maintaining the species that
are early colonists but poor competitors; they also maintain the resiliencyof the system, preserving the opportunistic species that thrive
under the conditions accompanying the unpredictable but inevitable
environmental changes that occur at broader spatial scales, such as
massive windthrows or fire.
The lessons of this example extend beyond forests; they apply immediately to other vegetation systems: to grasslands, where small
mammals such as pocket gophers may serve as the disturbing agents;
to marine and aquatic systems, such as planktonic communities;5 and

Ecological Assembly

Bf

to the rocky intertidal coasts. Indeed, it was in these glorious intertidal communities, in work with Robert Paine, that my understanding
of such processes first came into focus.
The intertidal communities of the exposed Outer Coast of Washington State are dominated by a large bivalve, the mussel Mytilus californianm. This species is like a canopy tree in the forest: it dominates
all other petitioners in the lottery for space. Just as the canopy species
would turn forests into monocultures were it not for disturbance, so,
too, would the mussels take over the exposed intertidal. Disturbance,
however, dressed in various forms, removes the mussels, reinitiating a
local successional process that maintains a wide variety of algae and
invertebrates that would otherwise be little in evidence in the zones
preferred by the mussels. The phenomenon is a vitally important one
in many kinds of ecosystems.
But the news is not all good. The forces that maintain diversity by
presenting havens for fugitives preserve good and bad alike. Pest
species ia agricultural systems survive on individual fields, from which
they disperse to other fields before they can be exterminated. Infectious diseases of humans play a similar game, finding new patches of
susceptible individuals that serve as a base for further spread before local health professionals can get an outbreak under control. Indeed,
even a single host individual can be thought of as an island, a potential
home for many different infectious agents. Each individual harbors
many pathogens and parasites at any one time, so each is, in effect, an
island occupied by many species. As the body rids itself of some parasites, it acquires new ones; a healthy individual is roughly in dynamic
balance, at least over long periods of time. As with oceanic islands, the
rate of acquisition of new parasite types by an individual depends on
his or her degree of isolation or, in effect, distance from source areas.
Indeed, just as for islands in the ocean, it may be that the number of
occupying species gradually increases over time. The analogy breaks
down, however, because increasing parasite burden (even for a single
parasite species) can lead to the demise of the host individual; oceanic
islands do not die because of an accumulation of species or individuals.
This difference has important evolutionary implications for the coevolution of hosts and parasites, a topic to which I return in later chapters.
In large islands or systems of islands, new types also arise by speciettion, the process by which existing species give rise to new ones.

90

FRAGILE DOMINION

There are also strong analogies here in the dynamics of infectious diseases. In particular, one hotly debated theory for how AIDS eventually leads to the death of an infected individual rests on just such a
process. In this view, mutation of HIV within a host produces new
types in a process analogous to speciation.6 Eventually variants of the
virus arise that overcome the immune system's defenses. The "diversity threshold" theory of AIDS progression may in fact turn out not
to be correct, but the perspective that it adopts—of an individual host
organism as a small ecosystem, populated by beneficial and harmful
organisms in a struggle for hegemony—is a potentially powerful one
for the management of disease.

Species-Area Relationships
Island biogeography predicts that, for a variety of reasons, larger areas
hold more species. The reason is simple: species have more places to
establish and persist in large areas, which in turn also provide a bigger
target for colonists. Larger areas may also be expected to support a
greater diversity of habitat types. At small scales, this heterogeneity
favors, say, distinct forest species; at larger scales, the mosaic may include forests or swamps or other communities. Again, increased heterogeneity leads to higher levels of diversity. Indeed, the increase in
species diversity from smaller to larger areas produces one of the most
robust and well-established laws in ecology: as the area studied increases, the number of species also increases, as a power of that area.
This power law is not a law in the same sense as a geometric law or
a law of physics; when we refer to laws in ecology, we generally mean
that there are statistical regularities that seem robust over a wide
range of examples. In geometry, we would say that the area of a
square increases as a power—in particular, the square—of the length
of one side. Or that the volume of a cube increases as a power—
namely, the cube—of the length of one edge. We would know that
this is exactly true for every square or cube imaginable.
Even in geometry, powers need not be nice integers, like two or
three. We could turn around the above arguments, for example, and
say that the length of the side of a square increases as the one-half
power of its area, or that the length of the edge of a cube increases as
the one-third power of its volume. For species on islands or in

Ecological Assembly

91

patches of different sizes within a single large area, the number of
species increases as somewhere between the 0.1 power of area and the
0.4 power of area. The exact number varies for different groups of islands or for different types of habitats. Such "laws" thus are really
rules of thumb, statistical regularities that admit many exceptions and
variations.
Why do such regularities exist at all? Do they represent something
unique to the number of species on islands? Or are they the natural
consequences of a set of local rules of interaction that are common to
a whole class of complex adaptive systems, of which species on islands
provide only one example? If the latter interpretation is correct, then
the regularities should apply more broadly. They should hold for the
numbers of pathogens in diverse agricultural areas, or for the numbers of viral diseases prevalent in various cities. Larger communities
should have more health food stores, sustain a greater diversity of political preferences, and even be richer storehouses of jokes. And in
each case, there should be a nice power law relationship between
whatever is being counted and the size of the region under consideration.
It may seem that I am comparing apples and oranges here, trying
to find commonalities among a litany of quite diverse situations.
There are, however, some common threads that link them together.
All of the examples deal with comparisons among areas, and each area
may be thought of as comprising lots of sites that are either occupied
or not by each of the types being considered. For species on islands,
the notion of occupied is pretty clear, as it is for most of the other examples. For jokes in a community, occupied means only that the people at a site know the joke.
Each example also describes a dynamic process in which the number of occupied sites changes over time. Geographical spread depends
in part on an infectious process, generally with a strong local component: people tell jokes to their neighbors, give them horrible diseases,
or persuade them to adopt or change their political positions. Health
food shops raise public awareness of fitness and spin off branch stores
that market the same goods. And so on.
Finally, there is in every one of these examples a process of local extinction through which diseases disappear (sometimes by killing their
hosts), stores fail, and people forget jokes or decide that they are no

92

FRAGILE DOMINION

FIGURE 5.1 Species-Area Relationship for the West Indies. Illustration by Amy Bordvik.

longer interested in supporting a particular political candidate or position.
Thus, all of these examples have the same basic structure: a large
area made up of many sites, each occupied or not by the various
types. Local spread. Extinction. That is all. There is really nothing
else going on. Hence, it is not surprising that models of all of these
situations have similar features and give rise to similar patterns. The
exact conclusions differ, of course, from situation to situation, because the details—for example, the methods of transmission and the
levels at which these occur—are different. There is enough commonality among these examples, however, to argue for exploration of the
simplest possible models that contain these ingredients, to see what
generalities emerge.
This illuminates my philosophy of using models; start simple so
that you understand what you are doing before moving on. Although
it is important not to stop with these but eventually to introduce the
detail that distinguishes one situation from another, simple models
are a good place to start because their transparent features provide
clarity. In the next several sections, I will introduce a framework for
developing such models and then return to apply them to ecosystems
in order to help us understand how observed species-area relationships arise.

Ecological Assembly

93

Stochastic CeEular Automata
A central goal of scientific inquiry is to relate pattern and process—
that is, statics and dynamics. The fundamental dilemma is that snapshots in time provide very limited insights into complex phenomena.
Just as many roads lead to Rome, many dynamic pathways can produce similar patterns in any natural system. Mathematical and computer models can help us to make the connections between our observations and the mechanisms responsible for them. By exploring
the outcomes or consequences of certain assumptions, these models
allow us to produce a catalog of possible explanations; experiments
and further observations then help in winnowing the Est to establish
probable cause.
A simple model is something to build on. In its sleek lines and limited assumptions, it can provide a base for elaboration while capturing
the essence of a variety of more detailed possible explanations. A particularly useful platform of this sort is provided by a family of models
known as stochastic cellular automata,., or interacting particle systems.
My frequent collaborator Richard Durrett, of Cornell University, is
one of the gurus of interacting particle systems. He and others have
demonstrated over a broad range of examples the remarkable power
of such models to illuminate diverse phenomena.
Interacting particle models regard space as a grid divided into
boxes or "cells," each in one of a finite number of conditions, termed
states. In such models, individual cells change states according to sets
of probabilistic rules, under the influence of their neighbors. The
most basic examples of examples are called, evocatively, the voter
model and the contact process. I will focus on the relevance of these
models for ecological systems, but they apply equally well to other examples—such as the prevalence of businesses or political preferences,
as discussed in the previous section.
The Voter Model
The voter model, as the term suggests, describes the dynamics of
change in voter preference. It imagines a world in which no one has
any fundamental convictions that affect voting behavior, Given a
choice among candidates, each person arbitrarily picks one to support, but without feeling any real commitment. Feeling unsure, the

94

FRAGILE DOMINION

FIGURE 5.2
A snapshot of the
contact process. Simulation by Linda Buttel.

individual voter constantly polls neighbors to find out whom they
support. If the weight of opinion is against the current choice, the
voter, with a certain probability, switches to the local favorite. Eventually, through this process, consensus develops, a consensus driven
entirely by random events rather than substance. One can introduce
more reality by assigning to individuals intrinsic preferences that provide resistance to the weight of local opinion; it is important, however, that we understand the simplest model before considering this
complication.
The basic voter model provides a point of departure, a baseline for
comparison. Each individual is assigned to a permanent location in
space—that is, to a cell. A neighborhood size—say, the nearest four
cells—is also specified. As one would expect, changing the size of the
neighborhood—that is, changing the size of the peer group—
changes the dynamics; indeed, if the neighborhood size becomes too
large, the unique aspects of local interactions are lost. Television popularity polls serve the function of increasing the size of the peer group
many times over, and as a result, a much higher degree of volatility is
probably to be found in contemporary national election campaigns
than was the case in years past. Changing the neighborhood size can
also affect the final outcome. For example, for the voter model, what-

Ecological Assembly

95

ever the neighborhood size, a consensus eventually forms in which all
individuals think alike, but the winner may be changed, for a given
initial distribution of preferences, by a change in the size of neighborhoods.
The basic voter model is not the end of our line of inquiry, but
rather a foundation for refinements. We can learn more from the
model if we imagine that the space in question is not actual physical
space but rather an abstract spectrum of individual characteristics,
such as socioeconomic status. Income level, for example, stratifies society into groups of people who interact more with one another than
across levels, and who therefore influence each other's opinions more
than they do those from other income classes. For some issues, there
are intrinsic voting preferences associated with particular income levels, and the results of elections then represent the interplay between
such preferences and local persuasion by neighbors. Consensus may
form within individual income levels without necessarily reaching
across levels. Global consensus thus may not be achieved, and majority rule or some surrogate must be invoked to effect decisions.
In other cases, however, people within particular income groups or
different political parties may have no reasons other than custom and
history for the specific positions they take on selected issues; that is,
the attitudes taken by individual groups are associated with accidents
of history and probably are not very deeply held. In this volatile situation, dramatic shifts in positions can occur, and consensus can develop. Given the controlling role of money in any economy, it may
seem unlikely that positions on issues would not bear at least some essential relationship to wealth, but evidence to the contrary may be
found in the apparent paradoxes in commonly held stances—say, on
individual rights and liberties, affirmative action, or single-sex
schools. My argument here, surely debatable, is that the traditional
litmus tests of most sociopolitical agendas necessarily contain internal
contradictions. Quotas in hiring, for example, reflect the best and
worst of human intentions—the antipodal motivations to be inclusive
and to be exclusive. Similarly, single-sex schools represent efforts not
only to deny women equal access but to provide them with the best
of opportunities. For such cases, contradictions seem unavoidable,
and congruence with the fundamental philosophical agendas of particular political groups is less than clear. Positions on many such issues

96

FRAGILE DOMINION

thus may have been codified as parts of the platforms of particular
groups owing to accidents of history, and they may simply have become accepted by members of those groups as the dues of association. This is the voter model at work.
The Contact Process
The contact process is an extension of the voter model in which an
individual may decide not to vote for anyone at all. More precisely,
think of a landscape as made up of sites that are either occupied or
not; an occupied site may be held by one of any number of possible
types. Occupied sites may represent voters with a particular preference, and unoccupied sites those who have no preference. It is perhaps more natural, however, to think of the contact process in regard
to ecosystems, in which types represent different species. It is, indeed,
an ideal vehicle for starting to think about the mechanisms determining biological diversity.
Only two kinds of events are permitted: an occupied site may become extinct, or it may send out colonists to a neighboring unoccupied site. Each of these events is allowed to occur with a certain probability per unit of time, and the result is an ever-changing landscape
that roughly resembles a forest or grassland, or perhaps the geographical distribution of pathogens. As each type becomes established locally, it spreads to neighboring areas; the consequence is the rapid development of clusters of individuals of particular types. Over longer
time scales, those clusters interact with one another, giving rise to a
slower dynamic that controls the overall diversity of types.
Variants on the contact model are very useful tools for investigating mechanisms of colonization and coexistence—the very factors
that help generate and maintain biodiversity. Through such extensions, we can explore how bask details of the local system—the size
of a neighborhood, the frequency with which sites are disturbed (the
death rate of cells), the rate of colonization of neighboring sites (the
birth rate), and dispersal distances—affect its characteristic features or
those of any ecosystem. Typically, such features would include the
abundances of various species in relation to the area studied and the
fluctuations of those abundances—the most basic measures of the dynamics of biodiversity. Simple extensions of such models have proved

Ecological Assembly

97

useful in conservation biology. Roland Lamberson, Barry Noon, and
their colleagues, for example, implemented very similar models to
study the effects of logging practice on habitat for the spotted owl,
helping to inform debate on the preservation of old-growth habitats
in the northwestern United States.7
With my associates Kirk Moloney and Jianguo Wu, I have used
elaborations of models just like this one to simulate the behavior of
annual grass species in the serpentine soils at Jasper Ridge Reserve,
above Stanford University; in this effort we have benefited from
decades of research by the distinguished plant biologist Harold
Mooney and his colleagues. Chocolate chip cookies, which my wife
Carole baked and brought along, helped keep Hal Mooney involved,
though I am sure the intellectual nourishment would have been sufficient. In the models we built, the Jasper Ridge landscape is divided
into cells, each of which may or may not include a population, say, of
the annual plant species Bramus, or of its competitor Plantttgo,, or of
some other species. The power of such models is that we can (in the
computer) change small features of the system, such as the abundance of pocket gophers (which, by their burrowing behavior, create
a force for disturbance similar to the role that fire plays in the forest),
and in a matter of minutes explore the potential consequences for
the abundance of the various plant species that exist in the grassland.
Similar models have found wide application in a variety of systems,
including especially forests, grasslands, and intertidal zone mussel
beds.
The most rudimentary models of this kind must be enhanced with
detail if one wants to make predictions about particular systems—for
example, how forests will respond to climate change. Daniel Botkin,
now at George Mason University, pioneered such work with early
models of forests in which the measured growth characteristics of individual tree species provided the foundation. Subsequent research,
by Botkin and by other researchers, has extended the range of these
detailed forest growth simulators so that they can realistically represent the dynamics of a variety of specific forests. The simplest models,
however, remain the vehicles of choice if we are interested in patterns
that are common to a wide range of forests. Indeed, even when prediction for a specific forest is the goal, simplification of the detailed
simulators is essential for making robust projections.8

98

FRAGILE DOMINION

A simple model gives us not only something we can understand
easily but something that is likely to be robust, not sensitive to irrelevant detail. The philosophy of developing simple models has borne
sweet fruit elsewhere in science, especially in physics. Some dismiss
the importation of such approaches into biology as "physics envy,"
but this caviling misses the point. The power of simple models is that
they isolate the essential truths, stripping away details that obscure
the relevant dynamic features. There is beauty in the diversity of nature; indeed, that is the subject of this book. But there is elegance and
basic understanding to be found in the general patterns that emerge
from consideration of that diversity, and it is the illumination of those
patterns that turns anecdotal reporting into science.9
It is the relevance of such models to a wide range of areas, from ecology and evolution to immunology to physics, that suggests that their
predictions represent something basic. One must be carefal, of course;
removing too many details for the sake of exposing fundamental troths
may lead to sterile and seemingly profound statements about nothing.
Abstraction is like medication: if used sparingly and with care, it can do
a great deal of good; overused and abused, it can be fatal.
The contact process is the model of immediate interest, so it is
worth exploring its general predictions and the implications for the
generation and maintenance of biodiversity. Clearly, if birth rates are
much larger than death rates, sites (cells) do not stay empty for more
than a negligible period of time; every site therefore is almost always
occupied by one type or another. In other words, for very large birth
rates, the contact process is no different from the voter model. As the
birth rate is reduced, however, the degree of occupancy diminishes;
eventually, as the birth rate for a particular species is made small
enough, a threshold is reached below which extinction becomes virtually certain. Perhaps this is not surprising: it is clear that the birth
rate must be bigger than the death rate for the population to survive.
What is less obvious, however, is that it must be considerably larger
than the death rate—as much as 60 percent larger for very big landscapes. This is a deep result proved by mathematicians exploring a
subject called percolation theory and related topics in the study of cellular automata.
The birth rate must be much larger than the death rate, instead of
simply larger, because occupied sites tend to be clustered together—a

Ecolqgicftl Assembly

99

not surprising result of colonization being a local process. We are familiar with this local clustering in the spread of human diseases,
which begin in individual households, spread to neighbors and
schoolmates, and only later reach the general population. We observe
it in the spread of mold on cheese left too long, allowing us to cut
away the bad parts rather than give up on the whole hunk. And we
see it in the spread of populations of plants and animals, like kudzu
and zebra mussels and the Africanized bee. These start from a few introductions, spread to neighbors, and form clusters that become foci
for expansion. Because of this clustering in the contact process, sites
near occupied ones are more likely also to be occupied. Hence, many
putative births will be wasted by occurring at already occupied sites.
The implication is that more births are needed to compensate for
those that are wasted, raising the bar for persistence.
Figure 5.3 illustrates this phenomenon with a snapshot of a landscape populated by three different species, after several hundred generations of the contact process. Note the high degree of clustering of
individual species, and imagine the consequences for the potential
spread of types. Potential parents in the middle of clusters cannot Ind
any settlement sites for their offspring that are not already occupied
by their own types. The other side of the coin is that this reduction in
the rates at which types can invade tends to preserve inferior competitors longer, allowing them to find colonization sites themselves before they are eliminated locally. Overall, such clustering and spatial
segregation thus helps to maintain biodiversity; indeed, it is probably
the key contributor to sustaining biodiversity in most forests.

Local Diversity and Species-Area Curves
With these tools in hand, let's reconsider the species-area problem introduced earlier. My Princeton colleague Stephen Hubbell, an expert
on the diversity of tropical forests, has amassed large data sets from a
wide variety of different forests and revisited the fundamental problem of why regularities arise in the consideration of species-areacurves. To explain these, he has proposed a simple model, which is
Just a minor variant of the contact process; again, the justification for
invoking a simple model is in the conviction that when regularities

100

FRAGILE DOMINION

FIGURE 5.3
A snapshot of the contact process, simulating
local competition involving three species on
a broad landscape.
Shadings denote different species. Simulation
by Linda Buttel.

are so widespread, the reason must transcend the particulars of individual situations.
Hubbell imagines a landscape made up of various sites, each of
which can support a number of plants of different species; thus, in Ms
model, each site is large enough to support some degree of biodiversity on its own. The basics of the model mirror the contact process:
individuals may die, or they may send offspring to colonize neighboring sites.
Hubbell adds a critical third ingredient: individuals of one type
may spontaneously be replaced by individuals of a different type. This
feature can be thought of as imitating either emigration from some
unseen mainland source (on ecological time scales) or mutation (on
evolutionary time scales). By varying the rate of spontaneous change,
Hubbell is able to investigate the consequences of different degrees
of isolation, or of different mutation rates.
Hubbell's model is beautifully simple, but difficult to analyze.
Therefore, Rick Durrett and I, with the indefatigable assistance of
Linda Buttel on the computer keys, have considered a slight variant
that is more open to mathematical examination. Our model, which is
termed the contact process with mutation, simply assumes a finer grid
by breaking up Steve Hubbell's sites farther into fundamental units,

Ecological Assembly

101

each the size of an individual plant. Thus, as in the basic multitype
contact process, a site is either empty or occupied by a single individual. All other assumptions are the same.
From this simple model, in which ail interactions are local, characteristic species-area relationships emerge. The larger the area considered, the larger the number of species found. Although many of the
rates that drive the model are difficult to measure, it produces patterns that are in general quite consistent with observations. There are
some discrepancies, pointing the way to the need for more elaborate
models. The purpose of a simple model like this, however, is to see
how much of the pattern can be explained without masses of assumptions, with the recognition that refinements are needed if one is to go
the next step. What is remarkable is that the general shapes of these
ubiquitous relationships can be explained with a model that assumes
so little and therefore has very wide relevance. It does not mean that
more is not going on in any particular system, but simply that parsimony argues against complicated explanations when simple ones are
available.

The Assembly of Ecological Systems
HubbelFs model provides a way of studying at least some aspects of
how ecological communities are put together at different space and
time scales. To carry our story further, however, we must explore
how phenomena at different scales relate to one another, and in particular the relationship between ecological and evolutionary
processes.
Ecological systems are self-organizing—complex adaptive systems
assembled from sets of available components as one would assemble a
new computer system. Over long periods of time, feedback from
computer users leads to changes in the lists of parts that are made
available; in the same way, over long periods of time, feedback from
ecological interactions in individual communities leads to changes in
the lists or at least the availability of candidate species for ecosystem
assembly. This involves evolutionary change, a topic I reserve for discussion in later chapters.
The self-assembly process is not uniquely specified, and individual
communities take many twists and turns along the way. Indeed, even

102

FRAGILE DOMINION

FIGURE 5.4 Theoretical Relationship Showing That Variability Derays with Spatial Perspective and That Predictability Increases. IEustration by Amy Bordvik.

once they are fully formed, ecological communities show a high degree of turnover and an impressive level of change. That was demonstrated most evidently in the classic studies in island biogeography
discussed earlier, but any site in a forest would similarly exhibit high
turnover in the occupants of the forest floor over long periods of
time. In an equilibrium forest community, the climax community,
variation in the kinds of trees that are present is constrained; many of
the choices that were available in the early development of the forest
are no longer open. Still, the variation that remains makes it impossible to forecast with certainty the local composition at Ine scales; for
purposes of prediction, one must change the scale, for example, by
studying larger areas of the landscape.
A decade ago, Linda Buttel and I began to explore the consequences of such change in perceptual scale, by constructing a model
of landscape development that shared much with Hubbell's model.
The principal difference was that our model recognized a competitive
hierarchy among species; we had in mind the various stages of successional development of the forest. We knew that the picture we got
would be dependent on the window through which we peered—that
is, on the size of the spatial area we examined. In particular, we knew
that variability would go down, and hence predictability would go
up, as we increased the size of the window. We were not prepared,

Ecological Assembly

103

however, for the clarity of the patterns that emerged. When we plotted the logarithm of variability against the logarithm of the size of the
window, we found a remarkably linear relationship over a wide range
of scales; variability was related to the size of the area considered according to a power law, just like the relationship between number of
species and area described earlier. Here, however, the relationship was
reversed—the larger the scale, the less the variability.
The exponents of the power laws become the slopes of the lines in
Figure 5.4. Note that those slopes are negative, reflecting the reduced
variability and increased predictability with larger scales. The exponents also are dependent on how tightly correlated, or interrelated,
nearby sites are. Correlations are statistical measures of the degree to
which different locations exhibit ups and downs at the same time. A
zero correlation means that sites are independent; a positive correlation indicates that they tend to have their peaks and their valleys at
the same times as one another, and a negative correlation, naturally,
means just the reverse. The observed relationship holds only up to a
distance called the correlation length, beyond which distance events
are uncorrelated. This explains the elbow in Figure 5.4.
Long-term data sets of fluctuations in species abundance are hard
to come by, making testing of this model difficult. However, lots of
data exist for static distributions of species abundances and other
ecosystem properties. For many dynamic processes, space and time
are largely interchangeable: the variation that one can observe across
space at any one time will eventually be seen at any site if we wait long
enough. It makes sense therefore to look at the data again through
different perceptual windows, but examining variation across space
rather than across time.10 Power laws turn out to be common; that is,
the variation decreases as a negative power of window size. Eventually, for large enough window sizes, this relationship breaks down because sites within the window become uncorrelated.
This behavior is very reminiscent of critical phenomena—the magnetization of materials, or the conversion of water to ice—near phase
transitions in physical systems, where such power laws are observed
up to a certain scale. Most materials near such phase transitions exhibit power law scaling because events become correlated over wide
areas. In Cat's Cradle, Kurt Vonnegut builds on this theme. Dr. Asa
Breed, the somewhat mad scientist, explains the properties of a hypo-

104

FRAGILE DOMINION

thetkal crystalline form of water, ice-nine, which eventually destroys
the world (delete this line from your memory if you have not yet read
that wonderful book). From a tiny grain of ice-nine, Dr. Breed explains, copies of it form and stack, reproducing the pattern over and
over again in a growing crystal.
Ice-nine never stopped spreading, frosting the feet of the sage
Bokonon at book's end. More typically, in natural systems, the influence of an event at one point diminishes at distances away from that
point, eventually disappearing altogether beyond the correlation
length of the system. Trying to understand why ecosystems should be
operating within this range—where scaling is important, suggestive of
self-organized criticality—is what began my collaboration with Rick
Durrett a decade ago, and it has kept us busy since. Together, we
have learned a great deal, though much remains unanswered.

Ecosystem Organization
Despite the chance nature of local events, we have seen that regularities do appear in the organization of ecological systems. Patterns
emerge from the interplay of local interactions and interchange
among sites. In its broad features, this mirrors the prototype of pattern formation in biology, embryo^enesis, the development of an organism from an embryo. But there is an important difference. In the
development of an organism, selection is operating on the final product, shaping developmental pathways to reproduce a basic body plan,
with no room for mistakes. Errors in this process result in birth defects and spontaneous abortions.
In contrast, there are many quite viable organizational plans for
ecological systems; healthy forests, for example, can and do show
great variation from one to the other in terms of species composition.
Selection has operated at the level of the individual, not at the level of
the whole forest. There surely are regularities, but these are typical of
what one sees as emergent in any complex adaptive system. Largescale patterns primarily result from, rather than drive, evolution at
lower levels. Social and economic systems are similar in that their
structures and macroscopic dynamics largely emerge from the selfish
behaviors of individual agents rather than from top-down control.
This is why the Tragedy of the Commons is such a ubiquitous problem;
it is also one reason we have wars.

Ecological Assembly

105

Regularities in ecological system structure and dynamics often
come into focus when one takes a wider spatial perspective, as in
moving from a clump of trees to a forest, or when one takes a longer
temporal perspective, as in moving from weather to climate. Regularities may also appear as a consequence of a broadened organizational
perspective, as in moving from individual species to functional
groups, or simply to the total biodiversity of an area. For example, if
one looks past simple species counts to* the distribution of biodiversity, one finds canonical distributional patterns that seem independent
of the system considered. The statistician Frank Preston discovered
these basic patterns a half-century ago, and the distribution that bears
his name remains one of the most accepted rules in ecology. Preston
showed that abundances of individual species follow a lognormnl distribution: that is, the logarithms of species abundances have a bellshaped frequency distribution, much as would be expected for the
exam grades in a large class. This is illustrated in Figure 5.5; as can be
seen, there are relatively few rare species, and relatively few abundant
ones. Most species have abundances in the middle of the range. Numerous investigators, from Preston to Robert May to Steve Hubbell,
have developed mathematics to explain this regularity and to understand what determines the differences one does see (such as the width
of the bell curve) in moving from one habitat to another. Closely related empirical studies, mentioned in the last chapter, examine the
convergent evolution of communities that share similar physical environments, for example, arid ecosystems,11 sorting out the effects of
environment and history.
Simply listing species and their abundances is like describing a machine by its parts: it gives little insight into how the system works.
How a machine functions is determined by how the pieces fit together, and how they interrelate in behavior; the same is true for an
ecosystem. The wiring diagram for an ecosystem is embodied in its
trophic web or food web, as introduced in the previous chapter. Just
as Preston found statistical similarities among the distributions of
abundances in a variety of ecosystems, others have * examined and argued about the regularities that may be discovered in the topologies
of webs across ecosystems.12 How do those regularities arise? What
accounts for the differences between ecosystems,* How much of the
variety is due to environmental variation, for example, physically controlled patterns of productivity, and how much rew*esents the diver-

106

FRAGILE DOMINION

FIGURE 5.5 The Bell-shaped Lognormal Curve of Species Distribution. Illustration by Lee Worden.

sity that can emerge from the self-organization of a complex adaptive
system? We cannot answer such questions just by statistical analysis of
patterns; we must try to simulate and emulate the process of community assembly itself. Again, both controlled experiments and dynamical models can play a central role and have been used extensively to
explore the consequences of various ideas about how food webs take
form.13
David Tilman and his colleagues, in an important series of recent
investigations, have shown that the productivity of ecosystems—the
sum of all materials produced by plants—is to a large extent buffered
against changes in species composition; that is, it is much less variable
than are individual species abundances.14 The reasons may be debated, but surely much of the constancy is explained by the fact that
species simply replace each other in function. Similar studies have
shown that marine fisheries have remained at reliable levels, although
important individual stocks have come and gone.15 Although total
yields are at all-time highs, many fisheries favored by humans are severely threatened.16 These data again illustrate the consequences of
averaging over sectors, and the resultant smoothing of fluctuations.
Broadening the perspective, whether over space, over time, or over
organizational complexity, can lead to increased regularity and predictability.

Ecological Assembly

107

Models and Experiments: Exploring Dynamics
It is reassuring to be able to reproduce broad general patterns from
very simple models; such efforts can, however, take one just so far.
The ultimate test of understanding is to be able to build a model that
incorporates detailed knowledge of a particular system and to test its
predictions against observations from that system. In a wide class of
applications, where large numbers of individual agents are interacting
with one another, that challenge means deriving testable predictions
about the collective behavior of large ensembles of units from detailed information about how those units interact with one another.
The classical success story in the physical sciences is the development
of statistical mechanical theories to explain the thermodynamic behavior of fluids in terms of atomic physics. Other disciplines have
faced similar challenges, though the rules of interaction are unfortunately not usually so well understood as are the principles of atomic
physics. Indeed, this problem of explaining dynamics at the macro
level in terms of interactions at the micro level is the crux of the matter in the study of any complex adaptive system, from socioeconomics
to the brain. In ecological systems, the issue arises repeatedly; it is the
bridge between molecular biology and organismal biology, between
organismal biology and population biology, between population biology and ecosystem science.
Statistical mechanical theories have long intrigued theoreticians in
ecology. Extremely clever work by researchers such as Ed Kerner and
Egbert Leigh in the 1950s and 1960s used constructs from physics,
in particular the Gibbs ensemble, to develop a formal theory of ecological organization; indeed, many aspects of their framework could
be traced back to the master, Vito Volterra.17 The elegance of their
work stimulated a brief flurry of research by others; the assumptions,
however, clearly were violated in fundamental ways in ecological systems, and the approach proved to be a blind alley.
Robert MacArthur, much intrigued by such efforts, began to develop still fairly general models of ecological organization, starting
from realistic assumptions about the dynamics of individual species
and their interactions with one another, and attempting to derive
general principles about limits to how many species could be packed
into a community, and about the efficiency of resource use. His lead

108

FRAGILE DOMINION

paper in the inaugural issue of the now venerable journal Theoretical
Population Biology was a marvel of innovation and creation. Such
modeling was suggestive and stimulating, but even in its best form it
was never intended to be testable in any particular system.
While MacArthur was developing his theories, a quite different
philosophy was driving other theoretical research on the structure
and functioning of ecosystems. MacArthur was a population biologist—an evolutionary ecologist who approached ecosystems from the
bottom up. His work was inexpensive and modest in scale, and he
tended to work alone or with a few selected collaborators. MacArthur
was committed to the notion that ecosystem properties would
emerge from consideration of the dynamics of populations and would
be illuminated by an evolutionary perspective derived from studying
populations. At about the same time, the International Biological
Program (IBP) brought together large numbers of researchers to develop massive computer models. While MacArthur and others in the
same tradition dealt in generalities and universal principles, the IBP
dealt with specific ecosystems. The legacy of the IBP was mixed, reflecting the fact that it involved large networks of teams of researchers. Much basic empirical work was carried out that provided a
database far beyond what had previously been available. Furthermore,
some of the deepest thinkers in the IBP, such as Robert O'Neill at
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, used the modeling efforts as a
springboard to understanding fundamental principles of ecology as
well as fundamental issues in modeling. The driving force behind the
IBP, however, was the creation of large, highly detailed models that
could take advantage of what then seemed to be great computing
power. Though beginning from a top-down perspective, in which
ecosystem processes were the objects of interest, many IBP models
nonetheless foundered by accepting the notion that the more detail
that was included in the models, the better they would represent reality. The IBP models provided counterpoint to MacArthur's efforts in
that they were tailored, in painful detail, to particular systems. Models
of such overwhelming complexity, however, are so demanding of
data—sensitive to small differences in the measurement of particular
variables and capable of expanding on and propagating their own errors—that they have little value beyond providing a framework on
which to hang information that has been gathered in support of

Ecological Assembly

109

them. Daniel Janzen, a prominent population biologist, complained
that these models got "all the nouns, but none of the verbs."18
As a result of these differing philosophies about how to approach
the question of ecosystem organization, the gap between population
biology and ecosystem science remained too wide for too long. Indeed, it was not theoretical work but stunning empirical successes
that began to drive a merger of the best of both disciplines. Evelyn
Hutchinson saw no sharp boundaries in his work on lakes, and the influence of his approach could be seen clearly in the best work of population biologists and ecosystem scientists alike. Lake Washington became a model for how to restore a polluted ecosystem.19 The
Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest became the most important experimental ecological facility in the world, providing understanding
of the ecosystem consequences of clear-cutting forests and the first
evidence of acid precipitation in North America.20 Robert Paine's
landmark studies in the rocky intertidal provided a framework for understanding the importance of disturbance in structuring communities; similar insights emerged from Hubbard Brook. These and other
studies showed that there were fundamental linkages between levels
of organization. Ecosystem properties were shown to emerge from
the dynamics and interactions of populations; in turn, populations
could be understood only within the context of the ecosystems in
which they occurred. There were profound implications for modeling
as well. The dynamics of systems, and in particular their capacity to
recover from perturbations, could not be understood from observations alone; experimental manipulations, controlled or otherwise,
were essential to exposing the nonlinearities that governed system resilience.
The work of a few pioneers (Bormann and Likens, Paine,
Schindler) stimulated experimental approaches to ecosystem studies
that began to produce the data sets that could provide the critical
tests for models. Botkin's forest growth simulator, JABQWA,
spawned healthy offspring,21 which are today proving valuable in explorations of the environmental effects of greenhouse gases. Models
such as these are imitators of landscape development, tailored to particular forests, such as those of the northeastern United States.22 In
structure, they are applicable to a broader class of forests, even tropical forests and chaparral, with little modification. In effect, they are

110

FRAGILE DOMINION

flexible because they are elaborate versions of much simpler interacting particle models, such as the contact process. Sites on a landscape
are occupied by trees of particular types, which grow and cast shade
over their neighbors or otherwise compete for resources. Such competitive interactions affect the future growth of trees, as well as their
reproduction, mortality, and dispersal. The basis for such models is a
set of empirical relationships for those fundamental processes, derived
and measured to apply to particular forests.
When one of the latest of these models, SORTIE, the creation of
my colleague Stephen Pacala and his collaborators Charles Canharn
and John Silander, is allowed to run on the computer, patterns of
clustering of trees begin to emerge, much as for the mukitype contact
process. The result, as can be seen from the snapshot in Figure 5,6, is
something that looks like a scale model of a forest. The landscape is a
mosaic of stylized trees, huddled together in clumps of their own
type. Over time, the picture changes; the clumps are more or less the
same, but they move around. It is, indeed, as realistic an imitation of
a forest as one can imagine. In its explicit predictions, however, it offers more information than we should expect to be able to know
about a system. The future exact locations of trees of particular
species are in reality unknowable; what is knowable are averages of
abundances over broad spatial areas, or long time scales, and perhaps
similar information about the degree of clumping. The challenge in
describing any system of this sort is to separate the unknowable from
what is simply unknown but ultimately knowable.23
SORTIE is solidly grounded in empirical detail; as a tree grows,
the model assesses the light hitting it from each of 256 directions.
Such precision may be important for an individual tree but surely cannot matter at the level of a landscape; if it did, all hope of prediction
would be lost. Imagine the dilemma if your physician needed to be
able to predict how every cell in your body would react to a drug,
and how those individual responses would translate into an organismal response. If individual cells were independent, that might be possible, at least in the sense of statistical averages. But the body is a
complex adaptive system and thus governed by nonlinearities that resist predictive sorties. In the same way, ecosystems are complex adaptive systems; if all the fine-scale detail that is built into predictive
SORTIEs were essential, the model would be useless. It is tempting

Ecological Assembly

111

FIGURE 5.6 A snapshot of a simulation model of the dynamics of the Great
Mountain Forest (Connecticut). Simulation shows forest at year 1000, to the
presence of local disturbance due to treefali. Model developed by Pacala, Silander,
and Canham, "Forest Models Defined by Field Measurements"; simulation by
Douglas Deutschman and Linda Buttel on the Cornell University supercomputer.

to believe that the surest way to a better model is to get more and
more accurate models of the pieces, and that if the pieces are right, all
else will follow. Not true. Indeed, the pieces must contain some of
the truth, but the surest way to a better model is to string together
the pieces so that small errors in the fine-scale details don't matter
much.
Designing predictive models so that small errors in detail will be
forgiven is not the province of mathematicians and computer scientists alone. This is, after all, how we run our lives. To survive, one
must be constantly making predictions and acting on them. Who is
this person approaching me? Is it a friend or a foe? Should I continue
to approach or take evasive action? A wealth of detail is available, too
much, indeed, for me to process completely. My response system is a
complex adaptive system, shaped in part by evolution but honed by
experience. Its first job is to abstract, to categorize information by
suppressing unnecessary detail24; the way it does that is continually
being updated, based on the success or failure of previous decisions.
The most successful schemes—indeed, the only successful schemes—

112

FRAGILE DOMINION

are ones that suppress irrelevant detail to allow decisions to be made
quickly and robustly. The same principles need to be applied to computer models: one must abstract, condense, and simplify in order to
suppress irrelevant detail and allow the message to surface from a sea
of noise. There are various ways to do this, from making mathematical analyses to simply running the model over and over again, providing a library of experiences similar to what we use in honing our responses to environmental stimuli. It is in this process of abstraction
and simplification that a science of prediction emerges.
Forest models provide beautiful examples of how one can use
simulation techniques to understand how ecological systems selforganize. They are grounded in measurements and testable against
historical records of particular forests. Eventually a characteristic forest, to some extent independent of what the theoretical forest looks
like at the beginning of time in the computer, begins to take shape.
Driven by local patterns of dispersal and interspecific competition, the
landscape becomes organized into dusters of trees of particular types.
The existence of those clusters changes the dynamic, since now
species interact more with their own type than with other types. The
world as seen by an individual tree changes; this is manifest as nonlinearity in the landscape dynamic and helps shape the future growth of
the forest. Depending on the details, the entire development of the
forest may be shaped by chance events early in succession, but many
models are sufficiently constrained in their scope that this is not observed. In any case, it is the processes of local disturbance and renewal
that maintain the diversity that we see in systems, and in most models
of those systems. Local variability and heterogeneity provide the material for change by which the system adapts and maintains its resilience. This point is at the center of the theory of complex adaptive
systems, and one to which I shall return repeatedly. It is key to the
writings of a diversity of scientists who have influenced my own
thoughts about adaptation, including especially Larry Slobodkin,
Crawford "Buzz" Holling, and John Holland. Indeed, the subtitle of
Holland's book in this series, How Adaptation Builds Complexity,
captures this theme elegantly.25
Forest models are not alone in demonstrating such general features.
Grasslands and the rocky intertidal are much like forests and other
complex adaptive systems in the broad features of self-organization;

Ecological Assembly

113

local disturbance leads to clustering and noniinearity, and to the maintenance of biodiversity.
In the rocky intertidal, my own work years ago with Bob Paine focused on a relatively small area of the northwest coast, small enough
that many of the key factors were extrinsic to the area studied.26 Disturbance, largely due to wave action, played a role similar to what
Alexander S. Watt elegantly described for forest systems, ripping
holes in mussel beds and renewing a limiting resource.27 Diversity is
maintained because of the global certainty of local uncertainty; that
is, the continual renewal of opportunity through localized and random disturbances creates evolutionary opportunity for locally transient species.
Paine and I found that the logarithms of sizes of disturbances had a
frequency distribution described by a bell curve. This is what is to be
expected, according to mathematical theory, if a large number of independent extrinsic factors are contributing to the formation of
patches; in contrast, were disturbances the manifestation of criticality,
the evidence of a system generating its own catastrophes, a power law
distribution should be expected, as in Per Bak's theory. Once these
local extrinsic disturbances occur, however, self-organization would
still take over, shaping the community's development. The areas we
studied are among those on the outer coast in which extrinsic disturbance is most severe; other areas, such as in the protected waters of
the San Juan Islands, or off the California coast where Joan Roughgarden has focused her work, may demonstrate patterns of disturbance that are more the result of self-organized criticality. This is indeed suggested by the biology; buffered from the effects of strong
wave forces, the invertebrates in more protected areas are likely to live
longer, to become more crowded, and to become humrnocked or
stacked on top of one another. It would be fascinating to compare the
size distributions in such areas with those of the outer coast to see
whether power law distributions describe the data better than the
lognormal, perhaps suggesting evidence for self-organized criticality.
At this point, such a suggestion is no more than idle speculation.
Similar phenomena are also evident in other complex adaptive systems. Joshua Epstein and Robert Axtell have explored the dynamics
of social agents on resource landscapes that they call "sugarscapes"—
sugar is, in their model, the sought-after good—demonstrating that

114

FRAGILE DOMINION

many of the regularities that emerge in the distribution of wealth and
resources can be understood as the necessary consequences of the
self-organization of human societies, special forms of ecological systems. Indeed, Epstein and Axtell explicitly treat economic systems as
ecological systems, through simulations of the behaviors of individual
agents finding and exploiting resources. Not surprisingly, the same
sorts of patterns of aggregation and self-organization that are evident
in simulations of ecosystem dynamics reappear in Josh and Rob's
work.
Brian Arthur has long emphasized the importance of nonlinearities
and path dependence in the development of organization in economic systems, and Steven Durlauf focused much of the economic
program at the Santa Fe Institute on the problem of developing an
appropriate statistical mechanics of economic systems. As always, for
all of these investigations, a fundamental challenge is to separate extrinsic and intrinsic influences on the development of pattern.

The Ecological Theater and
the Evolutionary Play
Few scientific disciplines have advanced as rapidly as ecology. Thanks to
research carried out by a variety of scientists, a newly minted ecologist
today understands a great deal more about the dynamics and organization of ecosystems than most experts did a half-century ago. At small
spatial scales, for example, we know that there is a great deal of uncertainty and variability in species composition, but that that uncertainty
largely disappears as attention moves to landscapes. Indeed, local disturbance and uncertainty—such as is provided, for example, by small
fires—is the main force renewing diversity and maintaining species in
the system that would be outcompeted in less dynamic landscapes. Understanding this has changed the way we manage fires on public lands.
More generally, the theory of island biogeography, originally tested for
mangrove keys in the ocean, has proved a powerful tool for understanding how biodiversity is maintained in forests, mussel beds, grasslands—and, indeed, in virtually any ecosystem.
The most important challenge for ecologists remains to understand the linkages between what is going on at the level of the physi-

Ecological Assembly

115

ology and behavior of individual organisms and emergent properties
such as the productivity and resiliency of ecosystems.
Ecosystems are prototypical examples of complex adaptive systems,
with strong similarities, for example, to socioeconomk systems,
Through modeling exercises informed by experiment, we have seen
that we can learn much about dynamics, and explain a great deal
about statics, by building ecological systems up from their components and developing an equivalent statistical mechanics. Such approaches have transformed our understanding.
Self-organization on ecological time scales, however, which has
been the focus of this chapter, is no different in kind from self-organization over evolutionary time; indeed, the attempt to distinguish
these sharply is only a pedagogical simplification and is confounded
by the existence of a continuum of space, time, and organizational
scales inextricably tied up with one another. If ecological communities are assembled from components shaped by evolution, how does
the sum total of those ecological experiences feed back to change the
evolutionary context? Hutchinson, to whom ecological theory owes
so much, set the problem in his wonderful book The Ecological Theater a-nd the Evolutionary Piety, from which this section of my chapter
derives its title. Inspired by that metaphor, I turn in the next chapter
to try to put these thoughts within their evolutionary framework.

This page intentionally left blank

6

THE EVOLUTION OF
BIODIVERSITY

Playing with Legos is for beginners. The Lego metaphor given earlier
imagined a single player assembling an ecological community. The
truth of the matter is that community assembly is really an interaction
among multiple players; for the advanced class, now, we must move
to a competitive game situation, a far better analogy.
The assembly of ecological communities is more like a giant Scrabble match. For both situations, the game consists of drawing tiles
from a master set and placing them on a board, a landscape, in which
only local rules of interaction constrain a remarkable diversity of possible realizations of the game. The game of Scrabble requires players
to take turns, constructing a crossword puzzle in which every word
formed is part of the standard language. Though there technically are
a finite number of ways that pieces can be placed on the board, the
actual number is so high that every game may be regarded as a
unique event. One cannot hope to predict at the beginning the exact
placement of letters, but one can guess rather confidently that there
will be nearly one hundred tiles on the board at the end of the game,
and not be off by much. In the same way, ecological communities assemble themselves in unpredictable ways from master sets of species
existing in some larger context. The exact composition of such a
community is impossible to predict, but macroscopic descriptors such
as the equilibrium number of species (tiles) can be estimated fairly
well, even for areas that have never been studied before. Such esti117

118

FRAGILE DOMINION

mates could be based on comparisons with similar habitats and the
use of graphs that relate the number of species to the size of an area.
There is one important difference worth mentioning, however, since
it could lead to a wildly successful improvement of Scrabble. My creation, Ecological Scrabble, is a game that never ends. The rules permit not only the placement of tiles on empty spaces but also the substitution of tiles for ones that are already on the board. This cannot
be done randomly; the replacement of tiles must leave a configuration
that makes sense in terms of the local interactions. This would make
for a quite challenging extension of the game of Scrabble and adds
new dimensions to the picture.
Who determines the set of species from which tiles are to be
drawn? In the case of Scrabble, we know the answer: there are real
people who made and maybe still make such decisions, based on the
frequency of letters in the words in whatever language a version of
Scrabble is being designed. In principle, initial guesses at what would
make for good games of Scrabble could be changed after experience
with many games showed that the preference for letter use did not
mirror that found in a dictionary. The rules of Scrabble assign more
points for the use of a rare letter, so these are played preferentially in
key situations. It is not at all clear what available letter frequencies
would make for the most exciting game; those frequencies, and the
values given to letters, could be changed over time to reflect the experiences people have had playing with particular letter sets. I have no
idea how this could be done or was done by Selchow and Righter,
which marketed Scrabble, but I am sure that something like it must
have happened.
Imagine how this would have worked if Scrabble had been designed the way Ecological Scrabble was. Picture a big factory with
hundreds of workers playing versions of Scrabble with different-size
boards and different frequencies and valuations of tiles; each player
has an attached happiness meter that indicates satisfaction with the
game. Over time, the sets that generate the most happiness are distributed to more and more people until everyone has the same version, which on the whole generates the most happiness. That version
is then marketed. Indeed, there is some advantage to marketing a
number of different versions to reflect the fact that people differ in
their preferences. To some extent this is done with regular Scrabble—

The Evolution of Biodiversity

1 19

there are versions in different languages and kids' versions—but the
realities of marketing and a desire for standards constrain the real diversity of choices.
The point of this somewhat contrived example is a fundamental
one. Even the design of a product, which we tend to think of as specified by an engineer, is to some extent part of a complex adaptive system, which learns from experiments, typically carried out at scales far
below the level of the total system. In the design of a board game, an
initial design stage is followed by an improvement stage that consists
of the playing out of many versions of the game. Improvement
depends critically on heterogeneity and diversity—that is, on the existence of many alternatives to choose from. Learning is efficient because one can compare the success of one version of the game with
that of another. The system as a whole changes over time because of a
process of selection, essentially natural selection, among its parts.
In game design there are people who actually make the decisions
about how to use the information filtering back about customer satisfaction, but in theory this process could be automated. A training
program for a machine learning to play a game, for example, could
change the probability of certain situational responses based on measures of overall success associated with that response; in the same way,
we adjust our own responses to various situations based on experiences with similar situations in the past. A common feature of all of
these examples is that the measure of success is integrated over a
number of individual decisions or responses that have been made, and
there is a statistical sorting that needs to be done.
The assembly of an ecological community is in essence part of such
an automated design process that is continually changing the available components and their roles. The experiences of a type over all
communities affect its total reproductive success. Those types that
leave the most offspring come to be represented more in future generations—this is how the set of available types is determined. This is
evolution writ large, or at least writ larger than what might go on
within an individual community. In this way, the set of available
colonists constrains community assembly, and in turn, the collective
experiences of colonists across all communities refine and reshape the
colonist pool. The process is hierarchical: a meta--community—that is,
an ensemble of communities—changes in composition on a slow time

120

FRAGILE DOMINION

scale as the result of interactions within many individual communities
on fast time scales.

Islands and Evolution
The clearest examples of meta-communities are island chains, which
are wonderful places to study evolution. The Galapagos Islands, for
example, have provided a remarkable showcase for evolutionary studies since Charles Darwin and the Beagle landed there. Peter and Rosemary Grant, colleagues of mine at Princeton, are the leading contemporary Galapagos researchers, carrying out modern classic studies of
evolution in Darwin's finches.1 As I discuss in more detail later in this
chapter, the Grants have shown conclusively that important evolutionary change can occur over remarkably short time scales. The island setting also makes clear the importance of chance and history in
creating ecological and evolutionary differences among islands.
Any island chain, indeed, presents an ideal laboratory for studying
the interplay of local ecological processes and global evolutionary
change, because of the sharp division of the environment into discrete
and distinct habitats. Although such features are perhaps clearest in
oceanic archipelagoes, the meta-community structure is a fairly typical
one even in terrestrial habitats. Trees exist in patches of forest habitat,
adrift in a sea of urban development and farms; agricultural fields and
lakes similarly constitute their own archipelagoes. Indeed, it is hard to
think of many examples for which the island model is not appropriate
for the examination of the evolution of indigenous biotas.
The dynamic is played out on smaller scales as well; within an individual forest, islands are continually appearing and disappearing, creating temporary islands of opportunity. Over evolutionary time,
species acquire attributes that specialize them to particular stages in
the local successional process. Early successional species develop
adaptations, such as high dispersal rates or dormancy, that allow them
to find new habitats quickly. Late successional species, on the other
hand, develop competitive traits, such as the ability to grow in the
shade and overtop other species, that allow them to displace the early
colonists. Such adaptations emerge from the collective realization of
the unfolding of the successional dynamic over and over again at local
scales. In this way, the forest biota is shaped; in the same way, agricul-

The Evolution of Biodiversity

121

tural fields acquire their characteristic pest species, lakes their resident
fauna and flora, and animal populations their parasite burdens.
This hierarchical perspective, of course, provides the context, but
not the mechanisms, for evolutionary change. How, indeed, does
evolution happen? At the most primitive level, the story is simple in
detail, overwhelming in its force and elegance. Evolution by natural
selection can take place only within a population that is genetically
variable for some trait that influences the fitness—that is, the reproductive success—of its bearer. As one generation is replaced by another, those forms of the gene that impart higher fitness increase in
frequency in the population, displacing the less fit. That is the essence
of the story. It becomes complicated in its specifics because genes do
not act independently of one another, and because the effect that a
gene has on an individual's fitness may change over time. The basks,
however, remain constant: chance and choice.
The details of evolutionary change are encoded in the genes, the
basic units of selection. Evolutionary systems, however, are the epitome of complex adaptive systems: change is manifest at a spectrum of
hierarchical levels from the gene to the organism to the population
and beyond. Understanding how evolution works, therefore, requires
integrating molecular and population perspectives by elucidating the
dynamics of populations of genes. This is the province of population
genetics, one of the most venerable branches of biology.

The Genetic Basis of Evolutionary Change
In the first half of the twentieth century, three intellectual giants—Sewall Wright, Sir Ronald Fisher, and J.B.S. Haldane—-collectively laid
the foundations for the theory of population genetics. One of
Wright's most enduring contributions illustrated the essentials of the
evolutionary process through an evocative visual metaphor, the adaptive landscape. Wright first presented this idea in a major invited address at the landmark 1932 International Congress of Genetics, organized in my old hometown, Ithaca, New York,
My close friend William Provine's account of the congress makes for
fascinating reading.2 Wright, Fisher, and Haldane were all invited to
lecture in a special session. The session was organized because everyone
recognized that these three geniuses were revolutionizing the subject,

122

FRAGILE DOMINION

but few could understand the details of their papers. The session was to
provide a format for them to present their landmark research in ways
that even a layperson could understand. The problem of communicating mathematical ideas to a general audience remains a daunting one
today, and the fathers of population genetics were no less challenged.
Wright's effort at communication was to imagine a mountainous
landscape, with a rugged topography characterized by huge numbers
of peaks and valleys. A species was represented as moving on this
landscape much as a ball would, but seeking peaks rather than following gravity to the wells. Turning the landscape upside down would
have made the metaphor of a ball on a landscape a natural one but
would have lost the notion that the peaks represented adaptive peaks,
points where fitness was higher than at any nearby neighboring peaks.
Wright wrote:
The central problem of evolution as I sec it is that of a mechanism by
which the specks may continually find its way from lower to higher
peaks in such a field. In order that this may occur, there must be some
triaJ and error mechanism on a grand scale by which the species may
explore the region surrounding the small portion of the field which it
occupies.3

On the one hand, this simple conceptualization has been a remarkably useful pedagogical tool. On the other hand, it has some serious
technical limitations, to which I return later.
Wright had strong roots in animal breeding, and the notion of the
adaptive landscape is well tailored for the challenges that face a
breeder. Under artificial selection, the breeder decides which types
are to be preferred—that is, to be selected. In effect, fitnesses are assigned to specific types in the sense that only those that are favored
are allowed to breed. An adaptive landscape is similarly defined: a
flowing surface suspended above the various gene combinations available, as in Figure 6.1. If, for example, the breeder is selecting for coat
color, the surface above gene combinations that produce the most favored coat colors represents the peaks of the surface. Through generations of selection, the population is driven to a local peak, though
not necessarily to the highest of all peaks. The landscape itself remains
constant until the breeder chooses to change it, selecting for other
features of interest or responding to new challenges.

The Evolution of Biodiversity

123

FIGURE 6,1 An Adaptive Landscape with Many Peaks and Valleys.
Illustration by Lee Warden.

The metaphor of the adaptive landscape allows one to visualize a
number of fundamental features of evolution in nature. As Francois
Jacob emphasized, evolutionary change is highly contingent on historical accidents, which influence the multitude of choices to be made
among the possible peaks to be reached.4 The process of achieving a
peak is one of gradual and steady hill climbing. Some peaks may be
low and draw from very small regions; such narrow peaks are therefore rarely achieved, because few pathways lead to them. Furthermore, populations that are perched on low peaks are vulnerable to invasion: the infusion of novel types by immigration or mutation can
easily destabilize such a fragile equilibrium, introducing genotypes (individual genetic types) that sit on the slopes of distant mountains,
thereby catapulting the population toward a new equilibrium.
The adaptive landscape provides a rich metaphor. Before exposing
its flaws, therefore, I turn in the next section to exploration of some
of its implications for understanding the evolutionary process.

Evolutionary Flows on Landscapes
Stuart Kauffman and I, in 1987, became interested in deriving some
of the further implications of the adaptive landscape for studying evo-

124

FRAGILE DOMINION

lutionary change, as well as for looking at adaptive processes in other
complex adaptive systems, such as the immune system.5 We began by
considering completely uncorrel&ted landscapes—that is, ones in
which slight mutational changes would produce types whose fitness
was no more closely related to the parental type than would be a type
chosen at random from the population. This is not a very accurate
model for real evolution, but it provides a baseline for understanding.
In such simple landscapes, the number of possible peaks becomes
very large, leading to an evolutionary process in which history plays a
dominant role.
Consider, for example, the evolution of proteins., large chains of
a-mino acids. Since there are 20 amino acids, there are 20 choices for
each position along the chain. If the chain has N links, then 20^ possible proteins can be formed, a number that increases rapidly with N.
Evolution typically operates on very high-dimensional spaces. The
number of local peaks may also become astronomically large in realistic situations. If fitnesses are assigned randomly to polyfeptide chains
(chains of amino acids), and if N » 50 (that is, the chains are made up
of 50 amino acids each), we showed that about one-tenth of 1 percent of all chains have fitnesses that are local maxima; that is, about
one-tenth of 1 percent have fitnesses that are higher than any other
chains that could be formed by changing exactly one arnino acid.
One-tenth of 1 percent may seem small, but it is a percentage of a
very large number. Hence, the number of possible local peaks is astronomical even for short-chain molecules; proteins typically involve
much longer chains and so exist in even larger configuration spaces.
An evolutionary walk on an uncorrelated landscape of possible proteins thus has a dizzying range of possible pathways that it can follow;
it would be hopeless to try to predict its eventual equilibrium.
There are many problems with this example, of course. First of all,
while it is true that a type that is more fit than its one-step neighbors
is technically associated with a local peak on the fitness surface, such a
peak is more a pimple than a mountain unless that type exercises similar dominance over a larger neighborhood. Populations would not
stay perched for long on pimples, since simultaneous mutations at
two amino acid loci could allow evolution to explore much larger
neighborhoods. Even more fundamentally, real landscapes are not
uncorrelated; changing one amino acid in a chain is likely to produce

The Evolution of Biodiversity

125

a new protein with fitness not so different from that of the original
type. The effect of this is to produce landscapes with far fewer peaks,
though the number still may be quite large,
To explore how this hill-climbing process might work in practice
for correlated and therefore more realistic landscapes, we asked how
such an evolutionary process would deal with one of the classic problems in the theory of optimization, the traveling salesman problem,6
Our objective was not to find the most effective algorithm for solving
the problem; for that purpose far better techniques already were
known, including pioneering work on linear programming by one of
my own mentors, George Bernard Dantzig. Rather, we wanted to understand how efficient an evolutionary algorithm would be in dealing
with it. We did not realize it originally, but stochastic optimization
methods7 very similar to those that we explored actually represent the
state of the art for large ensembles of cities.8
The traveling salesman problem has attracted so much attention
because it is a prototype of a wider class of problems of far-reaching
importance in theory and practice. The formulation assumes that a
salesman must visit each of a large set of cities on a sales tour, and it
asks what order of visiting will result in the shortest amount of total
travel. It is easy to see that for even a moderate number of cities the
complexity of this problem is forbidding: the number of possible
tours increases factorially with the number of cities. An efficient way
to search the possible space of tours is essential. We idealized the various tours as distinct genetic types; that is, we thought of the arrangement of cities along a tour as being equivalent to the arrangement of
genes along a chromosome. The fitness of a tour is determined by its
length: for example, since shorter tours are more desirable, one might
define fitness as the reciprocal of the length of a tour. In this way, a
landscape was defined, consisting of the universe of possible tours and
their associated fitnesses.
To have an evolutionary dynamic on this landscape, one needs a
source of variation, analogous, for example, to mutation in biological
systems. For us, mutation consisted of a variety of mechanisms for rearranging the order in which cities would be visited; the simplest involved switching the position of one city with that of another. So in
each generation each tour begat another tour, selected as the fittest
among candidates that included the original tour and various mu-

m

FRAGILE DOMINION

tants. The new tour might resemble its progenitor, or it might differ
in the order of a few cities if that rearrangement produced a shorter
tour. The simplicity of this scheme mirrors the simplicity of the evolutionary process itself; generate variants (chance); select the best
(choice). And it works. Beginning from randomly defined genotypes—that is, randomly ordered visits to the required cities—we
found this evolutionary mimic to be capable of rapid and substantial
improvement until a local optimum was achieved. The details depend
on the rules of mutation and selection, but in general, the landscape
had several peaks, leading to a strong historical contingency in the dynamic optimization process. That is, depending on how things got
started, one could end up at a variety of different shorter tours that
were resistant to further improvement.

Evolution as Optimization
The notion of optimization on landscapes as a metaphor for the evolutionary process has some fundamental weaknesses. The main problem is that environments change, so that fitnesses vary and landscapes
shift. Trying to climb hills on such a landscape is like trying to stay on
the crest of a wave.
Under some conditions, however, the model is not a bad one. If
environmental change is slow, as it is in the world of the breeder, the
notion of a fixed landscape makes sense, at least for short periods of
time. Indeed, the strongest formal justification for Wright's adaptive
landscape is to be found in the work of his rival, Sir Ronald Fisher.
Fisher showed that, in the simplest cases, the average fitness of all individuals in a population inexorably increases over time until the population comes to rest at some local optimum—that is, until it sits on a
peak in the adaptive landscape, fisher's fundamental theorem of natural selection applies to populations rather than individuals, so it is a
bit different from Wright's original formulation; but Wright's representation of his ideas went through a comparable evolution of its
own, so Fisher's theorem is not far off the mark.9
The problem is not so easMy solved, however. Unlike individuals,
populations do not have a unique fitness associated with them; rather,
they are made up of collections of individuals that differ in their fitnesses. One may attempt to characterize a population by the average

The Evolution of Biodiversity

12?

of the fitnesses of the individuals that make it up, but that simply disguises the existence of variation. In reality, one should think of a population, not as a point on the adaptive landscape, but as a cloud of
points distributed about a central position. If the center sits on some
narrow peak, the population distribution reaches down the sides of
the hill, and perhaps a bit up the next one. Consider, for example, the
emergence of complex biological structures—the eyes of higher organisms, or adaptations for feeding or sexual union—that require
mutational changes at several different loci. Such adaptations have often mystified biologists, because the intermediate steps between an
existing type and an evolutionary breakthrough may all represent selectively inferior types. If mutation maintains variation, however,
thereby preserving these inferior types against selective extinction,
eventually successful combinations can be found that allow evolutionary jumps.
The various mechanisms, such as mutation and sexual recombination, that maintain variation within populations change the evolutionary dynamic fundamentally. Evolution proceeds by the reproductive success of individuals and by virtue of the variation within
populations; suppressing variation eliminates the sine qua non of evolution. The model that Stu Kauffman and I first explored, by ignoring
variation within populations, understated the ability of evolution to
escape local peaks and find other optima. We knew about this shortcoming and attempted to address it by allowing for the occasional replacement of more fit types by less fit types. In this way, the optimization process could escape narrowly defined local optima. Our
approach was phenomenological, one meant to imitate the consequences of a variety of mechanisms, such as mutation (spontaneous
change at a single genetic locus) and recombination (change arising
from novel combinations of genes at different loci), that preserve
variation.10
Sewall Wright, in his landmark 1931 paper, presented a fundamental mechanism by which populations could escape from local peaks.11
He argued that a large population will be broken up into smaller populations, distributed over a variety of habitats. The local adaptation of
these subpopulations to differing conditions helps maintain a heterogeneity in the population that, through emigration and sexual recombination, generates a much larger range of variants than could muta-

128

FRAGILE DOMINION

tion alone. Wright argued that this shifting balance theory provides
one important mechanism by which variation is maintained and the
search for optima is enhanced.
There are deeper problems with the notion of the adaptive landscape, however,12 In nature there is no breeder to hold the fitness
landscape constant. Environmental change is constantly shifting the
background against which selection is taking place; thus, adaptation
occurs on a landscape that is in a perpetual state of oscillation, with
peaks dissolving into valleys and new peaks arising from former valleys. Worse, those fluctuations result not from extrinsic influences
alone but also as the result of evolution itself. For example, as evolution shapes a population of plants to exploit a particular type of habitat, competition in that habitat type consequently increases. With increased competition comes decreased fitness, making other habitat
types more desirable than they were previously. The fitness landscape
has shifted, like a waterbed, from the weight of too many individuals
perched on what once were peaks.
This phenomenon is known as frequency dependence when it operates within populations. Frequency dependence means simply that fitnesses are not constant but instead depend on the frequencies of
types within a population. For example, on a particular island selection may initially favor birds with large bills that allow exploitation of
seeds of a particular type. As the frequency of birds with large bills increases, the seed resource becomes overexploited and the fitness of
the large-billed birds is diminished.
Frequency dependence can operate in many ways to decrease the
fitness of common types. Competition for limited resources provides
the most obvious example, but it is not unique. Since predators may
preferentially search for common prey types, increasing frequency of a
particular type also increases predation risk and lowers fitness. Similarly, disease risk may increase with the frequency of a type, since the
probability of transmission becomes higher. On the other hand, frequency dependence can also operate to enhance the fitness of common types. It is quite common in many species, for example, that individuals prefer to mate with their own kind. Under such
circumstances, rare types are at an obvious disadvantage. Discriminatory practices may arise to reinforce these preferences, making fitness
strongly frequency-dependent. We are all too familiar with such be-

The Evolution of Biodiversity

129

havior in our own species, and the burdens suffered by minorities
within any society as a consequence.
All of these mechanisms also operate among populations, and even
among species. Resistance to a pathogen, for example, is selectively
advantageous only in an environment where the pathogen exists. The
same gene that provides resistance to malaria also can cause sickle-cell
anemia when it is inherited from both parents. Thus, the gene is a seriously disadvantageous one in a malaria-free environment. More
generally, the adaptive landscape for any species is linked to the characteristics and abundances of other species; indeed, interacting populations, such as parasites and hosts, may be intertwined in an ongoing
coevolutionary dynamic that influences changes in both.
Thus, the evolutionary context for any species includes not only
the physical environment but the biological environment as well. As
evolution proceeds, it changes that biological environment, altering
selection pressures and the adaptive landscape. Indeed, physical and
biological environments are so intricately related in their influence on
evolution that it is impossible to separate them. Even such a basic
adaptation as the geometry of a tree's branches or roots, fundamental
for the acquisition of sunlight or other resources, is profoundly influenced by the geometries of other trees. The study of evolution addresses problems in game theory, not ones of static optimization. I
turn next, therefore, to consider the ways in which organisms interact, and the implications for the evolution of ecosystem structure and
functioning. In this way, we shall begin to explore how patterns of interaction emerge from selective pressures within and among populations.

The Dynamics of Competition
In a world of limited resources, evolutionary success is measured in
relative performance. No population can increase forever, and competition shapes the adaptive landscape.
Any environment, whether a forest or a grassland or a lake, is a mosaic of microenvironments with different physical and chemical attributes. Organisms may in principle become adapted to virtually any microenvironment, but it remains true that some are inherently more
productive than others, more fertile ground for exploitation. Why

130

FRAGILE DOMINION

bother adapting to the less favorable environments when more favorable ones exist? The answer is obvious, and familiar to any sane businessman who opens a store in a remote area rather than in the most
populated areas: competition.
At the core, all other things being equal, populated areas are potentially more productive sources of revenue, but total revenue is not
what counts when it has to be shared with a large number of competitors. In an imaginary city with no stores, the fitness initially is highest
for stores that locate in the most populated areas; this location in
turn, however, reduces the marginal fitness gained by expanding such
stores, or the fitness available to new stores. Outlying areas begin to
look more attractive in comparison. Revisit the analogy of a fitness
landscape that is a bit like a huge, soft waterbed, with people strolling
on it and trying to climb local peaks. Each step in the direction of
higher ground transforms that high ground into low ground, while
releasing the points left behind to reach new heights. (The analogy is
admittedly not a hydrodynamkally perfect one). In the same way,
adaptation to specific microenvironments reduces the inherent attractiveness of those microenvironments relative to others and directs attention toward the exploitation of previously neglected resources.
This principle is basic to the evolution of natural communities, and
it is the major force for generating and sustaining diversity. The adaptive landscape is always undergoing some change, but to the extent
that it settles down at all, it must be composed of peaks or ridges all
more or less of the same height, separated by valleys. Were this not
true, those sitting on the higher peaks would be expanding at the expense of the others, undermining any semblance of equilibrium. Occasionally new and unexploited environments appear, owing, for example, to climate change or volcanic renewal. Competition is
temporarily suppressed, and populations can grow. The opportunities
associated with these novel habitats create new and higher blips on
the landscapes; these are rapidly found and exploited by evolutionary
forces, however, until, of course, they, too, become saturated and the
adaptive heights once again are equilibrated.
Microenvironments appear in time as well as in space. Indeed,
strategies such as dispersal exploit the interchangeability of temporal
and spatial variation, allowing organisms to use movement in space to
find niches in time. Successional species in forests provide obvious ex-

The Evolution of Biodiversity

131

amples, but it is illuminating as well to consider the adaptive forces that
have helped shape the strategies of migrant birds. Wintering in the
tropics or subtropics is not just a pleasant way for birds to catch a break
between terms; it is necessary to their survival, a way to escape the vicissitudes of winter. Birds do this by migrating, bears hibernate, insects
diapause, and plants make dormant seeds. All are playing the same
game: wait out the bad times and be ready for the good. What determines when birds return to northern climes from their winter holidays,
or when seeds break dormancy, bears awake, or trees flower? Premature reentry into the summer environment carries severe risks if there is
still the potential for major freezes, but species that wait too long may
lose opportunities for growth. Indeed, and most important, available
sites may be limited, and the tardy will find that the ship of opportunity has sailed. So evolution shapes compromises, compromises determined both by physical constraints and by resource sharing.
In the absence of competition, the strategy of choice might seem
to be one that would maximize the expected potential reproductive
output. February is too early to return to upstate New York because
there surely still will be harsh storms. August is too late because insufficient time remains for breeding. So somewhere in between must be
best, it would seem, and hence natural selection should lead to the
evolution of birds that migrate at just the right time. But discussing
natural selection in the absence of competition is like discussing
falling objects in the absence of gravity; competition is what makes selection work by choosing those types that make the best use-of limited resources. Were winter not a factor for migrating birds, competition would favor earlier migration; as we all know, the early bird gets
the worm. In arriving earlier, a bird gains better access to limited
breeding sites in exchange for accepting a higher risk from harsh
weather. The types that are selected by evolution do not represent
optima on a fixed adaptive landscape but rather are the victors in an
evolutionary game. These are what John Maynard Smith has termed
evolutionarily stable strategies: strategies that once established in a
population cannot be beaten by any rare mutant strategy.13 Ritual
mating dances in fruit flies provide a case in point. When rare, such
behaviors would bring no reward and would surely be costly to the fly;
when common, they mandate conformity for those who hope to reproduce. Evolutionarily stable types thus are the best that can be in a

132

FRAGILE DOMINION

world made up mostly of their own type; they may indeed fare poorly
under other conditions.
An analogy might be helpful here. If there were only one basketball team in the world, it would probably pay its players very little, if
at all. It would have no income stream; few people would pay to see
such a team play because with no opponents it could do little but
practice. (The Harlem Globetrotters solved this problem in part by
becoming pure entertainers and bringing along a token opposition
squad on the same payroll.) Things become more interesting, of
course, when there are a number of teams representing different
cities. People from these cities quickly come to believe that their own
worth as humans is somehow tied up with the success of the team
that represents them, so they send resources to their favorite team in
exchange for tickets to watch them, or clothing that will make others
think that they play for the team or own part of it. Better teams usually attract more resources from their fans but cost more to sustain;
hence, competition for the best players intensifies, and salaries escalate to decent living wages, such as $20 million per year for talented
young high school and college graduates. Strategies have been dramatically changed by competition, and the continual evolution of
salaries changes the context in which future salary evolution must
take place.
The basketball metaphor is a limited one for evolution because basketball teams do not give birth to offspring teams that share their features. Other examples from the world of business, however, push the
analogy a bit further. Chain stores—in effect, the cloning of a successful model store in order to produce similar stores in other locations—
change the competitive landscape and drive out mom-and-pop shops
that have been successful for generations in the absence of serious
competition. As a chain proliferates, it changes the adaptive landscape; if it eventually monopolizes the whole market, it is at a gametheoretical optimum. By selling for less, it makes less profit but is able
to dominate the market. This brings to mind the old joke about the
store owner who said that with his low prices he lost money on every
sale but made it up in volume.
For most sectors of the economy, no single chain completely dominates. Although diversity may decrease over time as chains proliferate, coexistence among these giants is the rule rather than the excep-

The Evolution of Biodiversity

133

tion, whether the products of interest are hamburgers, stereos, or
sneakers. Each exploits a different microenvironment, and there is no
single evolutionarily stable type. Rather, the totality of strategies in
the market collectively dei0es the context that determines the relative successes of types. Competition begets adaptations that provide
temporary advantage, proliferate, and then are sustained because they
are necessary in an environment where everyone has them. They are,
in essence, evolutionarily stable. Airline frequent-Iyer programs provide an obvious example of a market feature sustained solely by competition, a fiscal analogue to the elaborate plumage of peacocks. Both
are costly to maintain and could be eliminated by collusion, but both
are maintained because collusion is not permitted. Every airline
would be better off were there no frequent-flyer programs. But if
there were none, there would be great temptation for some airline to
start one, since it would enjoy an immediate advantage, and others
would be forced to follow suit. This is indeed what happened as such
programs developed.
In the marketplace, diversity emerges naturally from competition
and the benefits of exploiting novel ways of making a living. Such endogenous emergence of diversity also typifies biological evolution. In
the case of migrating birds, for example, Yoh Iwasa and I have shown
that selection should maintain a diversity of strategies, each making
slightly different compromises between physical and biological
stresses. Thus, some birds migrate north early in the year, risking winter in order to reduce competition; others come later, preferring to
deal with other species rather than harsh environments. This timesharing may be seen within species, and it may be seen among species.
The same multiplicity of strategies applies to germination or flowering times of plants, to emergence times of insects, or to the specialization by plants to different stages of forest successional development.
Biodiversity feeds on itself in the sense that it is the changing adaptive
landscape associated with the establishment of certain types that
makes alternative lifestyles attractive and enhances diversity.
The notion that competition, in concert with other factors, increases diversity rather than decreases it may seem counterintuitive;
Wright's adaptive landscape and Fisher's theorem tell a story of a continual erosion of heterogeneity, within the limits set by genetic mechanisms such as mutation and recombination, which restore it. It is fre-

134

FRAGILE DOMINION

quency dependence, within and among species, that makes the difference between the real world and the mathematical abstractions. If
evolution had to deal only with a fixed set of engineering challenges
that could be solved by optimization, the world would be a rather
boring place, with a depauperate biota. Frequency dependence, however, leads the process of evolution itself continually to open up new
opportunities for adaptation, building diversity upon diversity to create the rich flora and fauna that we marvel at.
The rocky intertidal, for example, is streaked by sharply delineated
zones defined by the dominant species at different tidal heights; the
variegated patterning is so strong that it is easily detected from great
distances. Barnacles, as a case in point, are the most evident species in
a narrow band above the zone in which the competitively superior
mussels dominate, and below another zone occupied primarily by algae. The upper limits to the range of barnacles, like the upper limits
for most species in the intertidal, are determined by the physiological
limits of the barnacles' ability to deal with dessieation; the lower limits are determined by biological factors, in particular, competition by
mussels. The reasons are similar to those that structure successional
gradients, only here space rather than time provides the gradient. The
lower zones, being underwater for a greater period of time, represent
relatively stable habitats. In these, colonization of new sites is less important and competitive ability more important. Thus, the competitively dominant species, analogous to the canopy species in forests,
are most abundant in the lower zones. Higher up, tidal variation
makes environments more ephemeral, favoring shorter-lived species
that can colonize rapidly. Furthermore, the upper zones of the intertidal are more stressful, because desiccation is such a dominant factor.
In these regions, therefore, selection must first deal with meeting the
minimal requirements of the physical regime; competition is a secondary concern.
Barnacles can live throughout the intertidal up to their upper limits
and are also found in patches in the lower zones; indeed, they can
grow to larger sizes, meaning greater reproductive capacity, in zones
below where they most commonly settle. In those lower zones, however, they meet competitive stresses that may overwhelm the other
advantages. This story is repeated, seriatim, for other species in other
zones of the intertidal, leading to a diversity greater than would oth-

The Evolution of Biodiversity

135

FIGURE 6,2 A stretch of the intertidal zone at Tatoosh Island, Washington.
Visible upper zones are dominated by algae and barnacles, middle zones by
mussels and gooseneck barnacles, and lower zones by macroscopic algae. Photo
by Simon Levin.

erwise be possible. It is a form of partitioning repeated in other systems as well, such as tidal salt marshes. There, as in the intertidal, the
distributions of species along a gradient of physical stress typically
show a pattern of species being limited at one end of their tidal range
by physical factors (related to submersion underwater) and at the
other end by biological factors (primarily competition). The preferred
and observed settling depths for any species in these systems, therefore, represent the same compromise between intrinsic favorability
and competitive unfavorability that determines the germination times
of plants or the return dates of migrant birds. Instead of there being a
single type found in an optimal habitat, biodiversity emerges as the
child of frequency dependence within species and competition among
species.
The emergence of biodiversity through the workings of competition can take a variety of forms. Competition for resources such as
space, light, or nutrients is the most obvious example, but competition for pollinators or for safe havens from predation can work just as
effectively. A fascinating example of this involves the evolution of as-

136

FRAGILE DOMINION

feet diversity in prey species as the result of et.posta.tic selection by
predators. Both words require definition. In religion and politics, of
course, "apostasy" refers to the abandonment of one's faith or principles. Predators looking for prey typically form search images for certain types, the way a human would search for a contact lens lost in a
shag carpet. When the preferred prey item is unavailable, the predator
may abandon its search image and look for something else—hence
the term "apostasis." Birds hunting moths for dinner, for example,
may fix their sights on particular patterns on the Lepidopteran wings;
the features that define the search image, be they geometric shapes or
colors, are known as the prey's aspect. Because predators switch from
less frequent to more frequent types, rarity confers a selective advantage. Birds that have a search image for common types—for example,
moths or butterflies with specific spot patterns on their wings—will
maintain that image; birds that have an initial search image for rare
types, finding little success, will switch their images to other, more
common types. Thus, through this mechanism, novelty is rewarded
and diversity increased.
Crypsis, which describes the ability of prey to be cryptic by evolving
coat patterns and colors that permit them to secrete themselves into
their backgrounds, can also lead to diversity as different species evolve
adaptations to match different backgrounds. One of the most stunning examples of this is industrial melanism, through which color
patterns evolve in response to industrial factors. The most famous,
but not the only, example is of the peppered moths (Bison betularia.)
in Britain. As H.B.D. KettleweM showed, moths near industrial centers (where tree trunks were sooty) were much darker than forms of
the same moth found elsewhere.14 The darker forms were cryptic
against the sooty background, providing them with protection
against predation. Eventually, as areas were cleaned up around Manchester, for example, the lighter forms very rapidly returned to
prominence through evolution by natural selection.
Crypsis and apostasis interact to shape patterns of aspect diversity.
Crypsis involves external factors, such as the sooty British trees near
Manchester; in contrast, apostasis describes a mechanism through
which diversity arises from nothing (that is, against a homogeneous
background) and feeds on itself. As with so many of the other problems discussed in this book, understanding the evolution of aspect di-

The Evolution of Biodiversity

137

versity therefore requires an understanding of the interplay between
extrinsic and intrinsic influences.

Character Displacement
As a variety of examples have already shown, competition for common resources, even very desirable ones, can increase the pressure to
exploit alternatives. Traits that govern where larvae settle, when birds
migrate, what foods animals gather, or when plants flower or set seed
all may shift evolutionarily as the result of competition. Such evolutionary change is known as character displacement.15 The most famous examples come from the work on Darwin's finches in the Galapagos done by David Lack 16 and by Peter and Rosemary Grant,17
Darwin's finches are birds of various species, among them ground
finches, of the genus Geospiza, whose success in life is fundamentally
tied to the sizes of their beaks. Through the vagaries of colonization,
the various GaMpagos Islands have distinct groups of resident species
of ground finch. On Marchena, Bindloe and Santa Cruz Islands, for
example, there are three species of seed-eating finches: G. fuliginosa,
G. fortis> and G. ma^nirostris. Daphne Major, where the Grants have
done their classic work, and the group of four islands known as Los
Hermanos (the Crossmans), in contrast, each support only a single
species.
Lack showed that the beak lengths of ground finches differ more
when they occupy the same islands than when they exist in isolation;
such evolutionary displacement of a feature or character—-in this case,
beak length—gave rise to the term "character displacement." The
beak length of G.fortis, which lives on most of the Galapagos Islands
but not on Los Hermanos, is intermediate in size where G, fortis is
alone but larger when G. fortis is joined by G. fuliginosn. G, ftfli^inosa, on the other hand, is intermediate on Los Hermanos but
smaller when it shares space with the other species. The Grants have
gone the crucial next step, demonstrating that beak size has heritable
variation that allows the population to change very rapidly in response to environmental stresses. For example, severe drought during
one normally wet period on Daphne Major depleted the supply of
seeds, especially small ones, making it advantageous to be able to exploit harder seeds; in a very short period of time, stouter bills evolved

m

FRAGILE DOMINION

in G.fortis, the lone species present. The situation was reversed under
wetter conditions.
These findings addressed adaptation to environmental factors
rather than character displacement, but the evidence that beak sizes
are so evolutionarily changeable provides strong support for character
displacement driven by competition as well. Beak size, like any other
trait, involves a trade-off between adaptation to environmental conditions and character displacement to reduce competition. In this, it is
no different than traits such as bird migration time or barnacle settling depth. In other work with Dolph Schluter, the Grants extended
their research, demonstrating the importance of character displacement among the seed-eating (granivorous) inches.18
The phenomenon of character displacement makes it difficult to
deduce the importance of competition from observation of overlap in
resource use alone. Joseph Connell termed this the "ghost of competition past": if we see little overlap, it may simply be that a history of
intense competition forced displacement.19 Similarly, apparent overlap in resource use does not mean that species are competing; if they
seem not to have displaced in character, perhaps some hidden finescale specialization (possibly as a result of invisible character displacement) has minimized competition.

The Enhancement of Diversity
The essential challenge of this chapter is to understand how ecological diversity arises through the process of evolution. Life began with
very simple uniceiled organisms, which evolved into a staggering diversity of more complex multiceilular types. The forest, for example,
is made up of multitudes of species of trees and shrubs that ply similar
trades but have found unique niches that allow them to coexist. How
has such complexity arisen from simplicity? How has ecological heterogeneity emerged from homogeneous origins? And what has limited the spread of heterogeneity and diversity?
The challenges cited in the last paragraph are not so different from
similar challenges faced in the understanding of galaxy formation, or
the development of economic systems, or simply the emergence of
spatial differentiation and patterning in developing organisms or

The Evolution of Biodiversity

139

FIGURE 6.3 Frequency Distributions of Beak Depths of Adult Male
Finches on Three Galapagos Islands. From P. R. Grant, Ecology and
Evolution 0fD»rwin}$ s Finches, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1986, Fig. 15.

chemical reaction systems. These are ail problems of pattern formation in complex adaptive systems.
In the study of pattern formation, three stages are fundamental:
(1) the breaking of uniformity, followed by (2) the enhancement and
(3) eventually (possibly) the stabilization of heterogeneity. In a developing organism, for example, all begins from a homogeneous, uniform egg. Uniformity is broken by random fluctuations of chemical

140

FRAGILE DOMINION

concentrations or structural features; once non-uniformity exists, it
can become enhanced through local chemical and mechanical interactions, initiating the process of tissue differentiation. Finally, those local interactions and diffusive fluxes of materials (which take longer to
become important) stabilize the process and regulate the development of the organism.
These three steps are characteristic of any scenario for the formation of pattern from homogeneous beginnings. They are equally relevant, therefore, to understanding the generation and maintenance of
ecological diversity. The first stage addresses the question of why all
things are not identical—that is, why heterogeneity ever arose. In the
presence of heterogeneous backgrounds that influence events—such
as climatic regimes that determine vegetation—explanation is in
terms of extrinsic factors (although this begs the question, since it
leaves unanswered the question as to why the background is heterogeneous). Against a homogeneous background, however, or for a developing organism that is to a large extent insulated from much environmental variation, the endogenous explanation is that fluctuations
that break uniformity are reinforced. We have already seen that a developing embryo, starting from a homogeneous egg and without
benefit of a blueprint, self-organizes as a result of local processes that
determine the fates of individual cells during tissue differentiation.
What are the comparable processes in the evolution of ecological diversity?
For ecological diversity to arise, some rare types must enjoy a selective advantage; if the commonest type were always the most fit, it
would displace all others and reign monolithically supreme. In each
of the examples presented so far, diversity is enhanced by a form of
negative feedback; initially favored lifestyles become less desirable as
they become more popular, because they overexploit limited resources. Since evolution proceeds by rewarding relative success, the
reduced attractiveness of one way of life translates into the enhanced
attractiveness of others. As peaks on the adaptive surface become occupied, they sink under the weight of increased competition. No population can for long sustain a growth rate that does much more than
just replace its numbers; we are becoming increasingly aware of that
Malthusian principle for our own population. In any community,
there are always some populations in expansion phases and some on

The Evolution of Biodiversity

141

the way out; over the long haul, however, the great majority of
species, or of genetic types within a species, are in relative equilibrium. If fitness is measured as the replacement rate per generation,
then every surviving type must have a long-term fitness of approximately one, meaning that each individual will on average be replaced
by one individual in the next generation. Thus, the adaptive landscape is mostly made up of unoccupied desert of fitness less than one,
punctuated by peaks and ridges of fitness equal to one,
The biosphere, of course, is never really at rest, so the view of an
adaptive landscape populated by species in equilibrium requires modification. For Darwin, adaptation "was a process of becoming rather
than a state of final optimality"20; that is, perpetual adaptation does
not necessarily translate into optimization. The adaptive landscape is
constantly evolving as a result of both extrinsic and intrinsic factors,
and frequency dependence and coevolution play fundamental roles in
that process.
Stage two in the scenario given earlier involves the enhancement of
heterogeneity. In a variety of ways, the establishment of certain
species lays the groundwork for the arrival of others, such as symbionts, predators, and parasites. In the colonization of any newly
available area, therefore, there may be nearly exponential periods of
increase in biodiversity during which colonists set the stage for others
to follow and niches radiate. Eventually stage three must set in, since
diversity cannot increase without bound.
The same mechanisms are recapitulated over evolutionary time.21
As Robert Ricklefs writes, "Evolution is self-accelerating in that environmental complexity produced by life forms creates additional opportunities for the evolution of new forms."22
Stage three also sets in over evolutionary time. For example, the
diversity of marine invertebrates remained relatively constant through
the Paleozoic and Mesozoic Eras.23 Thus, the proliferation of diversity is not a never-ending process, but some balance is ultimately
reached between the forces enhancing diversity and those restraining
it. Other taxonomic groups show similar slowing down of diversification, even discounting the intrusive presence of Homo sapiens as an
unprecedented force for extinction.
It is obvious that diversity can increase through exploitation of one
species by another, by means of parasitism or predation; the presence

142

FRAGILE DOMINION

of a potential host or prey creates opportunities that did not exist before. Another such mechanism is mutualism, in which two species
mutually benefit from each other's presence. Lichens, which are
coalitions of algae and fungi, are a form of mutualism in which two
species cooperate in order to extract nutrients from the environment. Algae perform photosynthesis, converting light energy into
organic compounds; fungi provide the nutrients necessary for carrying out synthetic processes by secretion of materials that dissolve the
nutrients from bare rock. In this way, the two species become functionally one in their ecological interactions, and organismic complexity emerges.
Mutualism is common in nature, though it is likely that it most
typically arises from previously exploitative relationships. Mycorrhizae,
for example, are soil fungi that derive resources by attaching to roots
of plants; they may also, however, transform mineral nutrients, especially nitrogen, into a form that would not otherwise be available to
the plant host. The mycorrhizal-plant association thus has evolved
into a relationship that is beneficial to both species. Like the lichen,
this mutualism depends critically on the tight association between
two species, so that, for example, the costs to the plant of giving some
of its resources to the fungi are compensated for by the increased
availability of nutrients.
Such feedback loops may not require a direct physical link; spatial
localization of effects may achieve the same outcome. More generally
than mycorrhizal associations, plants and soil microbes compete for
the same resources. They live in the same habitats and need many of
the same nutrients for growth. On the other hand, plants also depend
on microbes in their neighborhood to transform nutrients into forms
that the plants can use. Thus, high utilization (uptake) of some available nutrients may provide plants with a short-term competitive advantage over their microbial competitors by giving them more resources for growth, but at a long-term cost as other critical nutrients
decline in availability with the decline in microbial populations. In
marine waters, this feedback loop might be very weak, since local depletion of resources is a short-term cost in an environment in which
organisms and nutrients are well mixed. In the soil, however, the effects are longer-lasting, strengthening the advantages of frugality in
utilizing available resources; parsimony here in effect translates into

The Evolution of Biodiversity

143

the farming of microbes by plants, investing resources that otherwise
would be available for a payoff in other and more valuable forms. My
former research associate Ann Kinzig, together with John Harte, has
investigated these relationships more carefully and demonstrated the
essential nature of spatial localization of effects in the evolution of
prudent resource use.24 There is a very profound lesson here for human societies, as I will explore later: where the consequences of one's
actions are felt most quickly and most strongly, the motivation for environmentally wise behavior is greatest. To get people to "think globally, but act locally," one really needs to get them to think locally. The
most effective ways to do this are to close feedback loops so that the
consequences of individual or corporate behaviors rapidly come home
to roost.
To some extent, feedback loops tighten on their own as the reward
structure reinforces associations. This may occur either in ecological
time or in evolutionary time. In our own experiences, we learn
quickly who are the most selfish among our acquaintances and to
concentrate our generosities on those who will return the favor. The
aphorism "You scratch my back and I'll scratch yours" may seem callous, but it guides human actions to a very large extent. From such
reliance on reciprocity emerge seemingly altruistic behaviors that are
fittingly termed reciprocal altruism. These behaviors may extend beyond pairs of individuals, of course, leading to the formation of coalitions that reward, and in turn are held together by, actions that benefit the group. In environmental management, such forms of
cooperation have been described by Garrett Hardin as "mutual coercion, mutually agreed upon."25 It can work, but the larger the coalition, the weaker the sense of belonging and the less effective the feedback loops. Once again, localization of networks of interaction is seen
to strengthen the force of selection.
Animal groups provide excellent model systems for studying the
benefits of coalitions. For some species, such as our fellow primates or
certain equines, troops are sufficiently small that individuals recognize who belongs and who does not. Given such a strong component
of recognition and group fidelity, the coalition becomes a unit of long
duration, with major implications for both the ecology and evolution
of behavior. The beehive presents the prototypical example of a collective that operates as an evolutionary unit; here genetic links serve

144

FRAGILE DOMINION

to hold together somewhat larger assemblages. At the other extreme,
however, are the huge assemblages of swarming locusts or of marine
planktonic invertebrates, which come together for the transient gains
of group living but make no real sacrifice for the benefit of the group.
In the latter examples, to which I return in a later chapter, the attraction of individuals toward other individuals produces local clustering
and short-term gains in terms of resource acquisition or group defense; but no clearly identified groups arise, and no true grouporiented behavior.

Altruism
Understanding why and when individuals will engage in behaviors
that seem to benefit the group at some cost to themselves is central
for elucidating the organization of ecological communities, as well as
for developing strategies for managing our global commons. The
evolution of altruism has been a fascination of evolutionary biologists
since Darwin, and its manifestation goes well beyond reciprocal altruism.
For beehives, colonies of Hymenopteran wasps, or mounds of social termites, the role of genetic relatedness in holding groups together suggests that it is the genes that are controlling the action, and
that individuals are simply their agents, their interface with the external world. Samuel Butler, in Life and Habit, says, "It has, I believe,
been often remarked, that a hen is only an egg's way of making another egg."26 This concept was made operational in J.B.S. Haldane's
famous tongue-in-cheek remark that he would lay down his life for
two of his siblings, or for eight cousins. The point is that each of us
shares about half of our genes with each sibling. The degree of genetic relatedness to our cousins is less. If my mother and my cousin's
mother were sisters, for example, they would share (by descent) half
of their genes with one another; each of us, furthermore, shares half
of our genes with our mothers. So for a particular gene in my possession, there is a probability 1/2 that it has the same ancestry as a corresponding one belonging to my mother (who gave me only half of
her genes), a probability 1/4 that it is the same as one belonging to
my aunt, and hence a probability 1/8 when extended to my cousin.
Haldane was illustrating the point that the same representation of his

The Evolution of Biodiversity

145

genes could be achieved in the next generation by saving the lives of
eight of his cousins as by saving his own.
William Hamilton, in one of the classics of modern evolutionary
theory, worked out the mathematics of altruism, demonstrating why
it has arisen most easily in haplodiploid species, largely the bees,
wasps, and ants, (As already discussed, in those species, whose males
are haploid and whose females are diploid, the birth of males from
unfertilized eggs means that moles are genetically uniform at each locus, and hence that fall sisters—who by definition have the same father—share three-quarters of their genes.)27 Richard Dawkins carried
this a step farther in his evocative and provocative book The Selfish
Gene, where he argues convincingly that the genes are in control.28 In
truth, genes rarely act in isolation from one another; most ecologically important traits are controlled by genes at many different sites
or loci on the chromosome. The focus on the gene is appropriate in
some situations—it enabled Hamilton to unlock the mysteries of insect societies—but less appropriate in others in which the whole organism, that prototypical coalition of independent genes, is the focus
of selection. Nonetheless, the extreme position helps emphasize the
fundamental importance of the gene in the dynamics of altruism and
cooperation in nature.
Prisoner's Dilemma, which I described in Chapter 2, has been popular among theoreticians because it presents in simple and abstract
form the essential dilemma of the evolution of cooperation, A better
strategy for the prisoners would be for both to cooperate rather than
both defect; mutual cooperation is unstable, however, because playing it exposes one to a cheater who defects from that strategy. Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma (IPD), in which the game is played repeatedly, presents a very different situation; furthermore, it is a far better
model for the evolution of cooperation because evolution deals with
environmental patterns, not with isolated events. In 1979 a political
scientist named Robert Axelrod invited some leading game theorists
to participate in a tournament in which various strategies for playing
Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma would compete.29 Fifteen contestants
sent in candidate programs, which were pitted against one another in
a computer. Every strategy engaged in a contest with every other
strategy, including its own, and also against a purely random strategy.
The winner, surprisingly, was the very simple strategy known as tit for

146

FRAGILE DOMINION

tat. In tit for tat, one cooperates initially, and then plays whatever
strategy one's opponent played last. Tit for tat was submitted by Anatol Rapoport, a distinguished Canadian game theorist who, not irrelevantly, was also a peace activist.
A tournament is a onetime thing; evolution involves repeated experiences. To study the evolution of cooperation in IPD, Axelrod and
John Miller allowed strategies to evolve in a computer competition,30
Each program was identified with a genotype, with some genes specifying rules for what to play given the recent history of what its opponents had played, and other genes keeping track of that essential history. Initially, selfish strategies began to spread; once they dominated
the landscape, however, frequency dependence came into play and reversed the dynamic. Cooperation began to evolve, and eventually it
proliferated. Events were not independent of one another because of
memory, which provided the reward loop that is essential for the evolution of cooperation.
Repeated play changes the dynamic fundamentally; however, the
same result can be obtained if individuals play only once against any
opponent but have limited mobility. Studies of Prisoner's Dilemma or
similar games among players whose interactions are limited to the individuals in some neighborhood demonstrate quite easily that cooperative strategies can evolve, or that coexistence of strategies may be
possible.31 The explanation is simple: when individuals interact only
with others in their own neighborhood, feedback loops are tight and
paybacks swift. To simplify the dynamics, suppose that the rules of the
game are that when two selfish individuals (egoists) play each other,
one always dies (chosen by a coin flip), but that when two altruists
meet each other, both survive and both reproduce. The new offspring are dispersed into some neighborhood of their parents, not
necessarily the same as their game neighborhood. Finally, when an altruist meets an egoist, the selfish individual survives and reproduces
and the altruist dies. If the environment can support a limited number of individuals, the death of any individual opens up opportunities
for new colonization; this benefits altruists, who must constantly find
new places to establish themselves given their competitive inferiority.
Now suppose that, initially, a few altruists are sprinkled onto a
landscape populated mainly with egoists. In most places, altruists will
be surrounded by egoists and quickly eliminated. In a few places,
however, by chance, altruists will find themselves surrounded by their

The Evolution of Biodiversity

147

own type; their selfless ways will be quickly rewarded. Clusters of altruists will form, and they will send their offspring into neighboring
locales. Such clusters can be invaded by egoists, but they sustain
themselves by finding new places to settle. Locally altruists lose to
egoists, but globally they may win or at least coexist with their antagonists.32 Though individuals have no memory, the system develops a
memory of its own, through clustering. The mechanism is identical
to that which Knzig and Harte investigated for prudent resource use.

Local Interactions and
the Evolution of Good and Evil
My esteemed friend and colleague John Tyler Bonner begins his recent book Life Cycles with the sentence, "I have devoted my life to
slime molds."33 Why has so lowly an organism as the cellular slime
mold fascinated John and many others interested in development and
evolution? The slime mold is a model organism; much like a mathematical model, it captures many of the essential paradoxes in a simple
and easily studied way. One of the most interesting of its behaviors,
indeed, is how it arises in the first place as a coalition of amoebae. The
amoebae emerge from encapsulated spores, feed on the bacteria they
find, divide, feed and divide, until there is nothing left to eat. To describe what happens next, I can do no better than to quote Bonner,
who in his description eloquently betrays his love and admiration for
slime:
Next comes the magic. After a few hours of starvation, these totally independent cells stream into aggregation centers to form sausageshaped masses of cells, each of which now acts as an organized multicellular organism. . . . After a period of migration whose length
depends very much on the conditions of the slug's immediate environment, the slug stops, points up into the air, and slowly transforms itself
into a fruiting body consisting of a delicately tapered stalk one or more
millimeters high, with a terminal globe of spores at its tip. This wonderful metamorphosis is achieved first by the anterior cells of the slug,
which will become the stalk cells.34

Now, this has long been a puzzle for those interested in slime
molds. Why should evolution permit cells to lead a slug, if the anterior cells are doomed to forgo reproduction, so that their own genes

148

FRAGILE DOMINION

do not make it directly into the next generation? The most likely explanation, again, is geography, and its role in kin recognition. As the
slug begins to stream, it picks up recruits from its own neighborhood.
Because of the process of cloning that has been taking place, nearneighbors are more likely to be genetically related to the anterior cells
than would a randomly chosen individual; thus, a slug most likely involves cells that share genes in common. The altruists, the anterior
cells that will become stalk cells, have given up their fitness to benefit
their kin; it is once again the genes controlling the action. Altruistic
behavior again is rewarded because of the localization of effects,
The examples discussed so far show that what passes for altruism is
really enlightened self-interest, whether at the level of the organism
or the level of the genes. Behaviors evolve because they have enhanced fitness. I do not mean this as an explanation of human behavior; it is clear that individuals in societies sometimes engage in genuinely altruistic acts that profit neither themselves nor their genes.
(Indeed, some altruists are celibate by profession.) While such behaviors may have their origins as adaptations to increase fitness, it is naive
to suggest that all aspects of human sociobiology have an adaptationist explanation,35 Nonetheless, it is useful to understand that evolutionary mechanisms do reinforce altruism, especially when the payback is swift and sure.
It would be misleading to leave the impression that it is only altruism whose evolution is facilitated by the localization of interactions;
the same principle applies to any behavior that feeds back to benefit
the individual. Symbioses such as those between algae and fungi, or
between fungi and plants (through mycorrhizal associations), provide
such strong mutual benefit that in some cases the two organisms may
be regarded profitably as an ecological unit. Plants and pollinators
represent somewhat weaker associations, since a single pollinator may
visit many plants, and a single plant may be visited by many potential
pollinators; indeed, such visits may cross plant species lines, reducing
the effectiveness of the process. This raises a fundamental issue that
goes to the heart of understanding how organization arises in natural
communities. Pollinators that visit plants of many species may waste
pollen, contributing it to lost causes because of the reproductive incompatibility of plant species. This places a strong selective pressure
on plants to evolve fiower structures that improve efficiency and spe-

The Evolution of Biodiversity

149

cialization of pollen transfer. There is also a somewhat weaker selective pressure on the pollinator population, which is in a sense farming
flowers. If it persists in inefficient transfers, then its crop will suffer;
hence, there is some selective pressure on pollinators to practice what
is termed constancy, a sort of monogamy at the level of species in
which pollinators are faithful to a single species of plant. I say that this
is a somewhat weaker selective pressure because the immediate cost
to an individual carrying pollen from one species to another is negligible, whereas the cost to the plant is real. Nonetheless, there are mutually reinforcing pressures to enhance constancy, and hence to
tighten feedback and reward loops. If we imagine an initial community made up of diverse pollinators visiting many plant species, we see
immediately that selection will favor the evolution of mechanisms
that enhance constancy, because specialist plants and pollinators alike
have a reproductive advantage over generalists: plants in such associations receive only pollen that is of value to them, and pollinators gain
from having nourished a flourishing resource. Positive reinforcement
leads to the tightening of feedback loops, which further strengthens
that reinforcement; structure emerges from initially random associations and strong positive feedback. There are other forces at work,
however, in any plant-pollinator community, for example, the immediate loss in fitness to a pollinator that eschews an available plant even
though it cannot find its preferred type. Thus, the evolution of degrees of constancy involves complex trade-offs and will vary from
community to community.
A fascinating example is provided by the orchids, in which a remarkable diversity of shapes, colors, and smells has evolved in response to the selective advantages afforded by specific pollination systems. These systems can become very specific, as in the association
between the orchid Stctnhopea. and its pollinators, the euglossine bees
Eulftema-, Individual species of orchids have evolved fragrances that
attract specific euglossine pollinator species,36 often in one-to-one associations.37 The specificity of the fragrances, as well as coevolved
morphological features of plants and pollinators, tightens the feedback loop by reducing the possibility of interspecific transfer of pollen
and cross-fertilization of species.
Regrettably, individual advantage can also be gained, of course, by
spiteful or other antagonistic behaviors that reduce the ability of a

150

FRAGILE DOMINION

competitor to secure resources. Like the evolution of mutualism, natural selection for such competitive strategies is facilitated when interactions are localized, because the benefits are realized by the individual rather than having to be shared with others. In general,
antagonistic behaviors involve some cost to the individuals that practice them, whether those costs are metabolic or simply expressed in
increased risk. Unless there is a realized benefit that outweighs the
cost, such behaviors will be selected against. For example, bacteria
may produce chemicals that are toxic to their competitors. In particular, some E. colt are colicinogenic; that is, they produce a substance
called colicin that inhibits the success of other bacteria that lack resistance to it.38 (The production of chemicals that harm others is called
allelopathy.)
The evolution of these antagonistic behaviors can be studied experimentally. If bacteria are grown in mass culture, in which populations
are well mixed, colicinogenic behavior does not evolve because there
is no net advantage to compensate for the metabolic costs. In physically structured environments, however, such as on agar plates, allelopathy (poisoning other types) may readily evolve. This work, by
Lin Chao and Bruce Levin, represents one of the most beautifully elegant laboratory demonstrations of evolution in action and inaction.39

The difference between the two situations that Chao and Levin
studied is in the tightness of the feedback loop. In physically structured environments, the individuals affected by a bacteriocin (a toxic
chemical produced by the bacteria) are in the local neighborhood of
the colicinogenic bacteria, providing an immediate competitive advantage to the bacteria that produce the chemical. In mass culture, in
which things are mixed up, there is no such advantage. Allelopathy is
not restricted to bacteria; it is, for example, a well-established adaptation for competition in plants of the highly structured and highly
competitive chaparral plant communities.40

Parasites and Hosts, Plants and Herbivores
Parasite-host interactions provide some of the clearest examples of
true coevolutionary systems in which evolutionary changes in each
species drive changes in the other. Clearly, the fate of the host is af-

The Evolution of Biodiversity

IS!

fected strongly by the parasite, which saps resources from its host and
may ultimately kill it; evolution of resistance to parasites is thus easily
understood. The parasite, as well, is dependent on its host, which is
its home. If a parasite is too virulent, its host will die too quickly, and
the parasite's ability to survive, to reproduce, and to disperse its offspring will be lost. This has led to an acceptance in parasitology that
virulent parasites will become less so over evolutionary time, and that,
indeed, commenmlism (peaceful coexistence, in which "parasites" no
longer harm individual hosts) will be the end result.
The first part of this story is true, but the latter need not be so.
The evolutionary forces that determine a parasite's virulence illustrate
clearly a situation in which short-term individual benefits are in conflict with what is best for the group. Only when the success of the
group feeds back to affect the individual's fitness on relatively fast
time scales can such influences represent important evolutionary
forces. In this example, therefore, is a lesson regarding environmental
management, in particular concerning when and how individual behaviors may be directed to the greater good. I return to this theme in
the last chapter.
A dramatic example of these forces at work is provided by the history of the viral disease myxomatosis, introduced to control rabbit
populations in Australia and Europe. The European rabbit, Oryctolajjm cttnicttltts, was brought to Australia in 1859 and rapidly reached
epidemic proportions. The fabled reproductive potential of rabbits is
not an exaggeration, and the twelve pairs of rabbits first released on a
ranch in Victoria became an incredible several hundred million within
forty years. Babbits had devastating effects on the landscape, and especially on economically vital pasturelands. Eventually, after several
failed attempts at solving the problem, the Australian government imported a virus, myxoma, related to smallpox but harmless to humans.
Myxoma had coevolved with South American rabbits, with which it
hence coexisted. Introduced to its new host, the European rabbit, the
virus, freed of coevolutionary constraints, had a field day. It killed virtually every rabbit it met within fourteen days of contact and had the
desired effect of decimating the pesky rabbit population.
The story does not end there. Within a few years, less virulent
strains of the virus had displaced more virulent types, providing
enough genetic variation in response that rabbits began to evolve re-

152

FRAGILE DOMINION

sistance to the virus. Commensalism was not the outcome, however;
the system has remained somewhere between the two extremes of virulence. Rabbit populations recovered somewhat, and they remain
pests today, the subject of heated debate regarding the use of other
pathogens for their control. Why did the system not evolve toward
commensalism? Evolution in virus populations is a two-stage process.
Within a host, virulence is favored, because it increases the virus load
an individual host will carry and increases the chance that a vector
(which carries the disease from host to host), typically a mosquito or
a flea, will transmit the virus after it has a meal. On the other hand,
the more virulent forms of the virus Mil their hosts too rapidly, reducing the chance that an infected host will live long enough to serve as a
source for spread. The optimum virulence lies somewhere in the middle of the spectrum. There is no better documented case of coevolution in action, owing to brilliant analytical work by the legendary parasitologist Frank Fenner. The myxoma-rabbit story thus has become a
paradigm for what evolutionary biologists term tight coevolution (the
modifier "tight" here means that two species are involved in very
close association).411 return shortly to contrast this with diffuse coevolution, in which many species interact more loosely.
Parasite-host systems are ideal systems for studying coevolution,
because the fate of each species is intimately tied up with that of the
other. An individual rabbit houses a group of genetically closely related virus particles, so that the benefits to a gene that conveys reduced virulence are strong. The kin group associated with a particular
host, a special case of what David Sloan Wilson calls a trait group,
provides the clustering and associated strong reward loops that are essential for selection above the level of the individual to become important.42
Individual parasite-host systems provide models for understanding
coevolution, but most associations are not so specific. The myxoma
virus, in effect, jumped from one host rabbit specks to another (with
the help of humans); this sort of range expansion is typical of the evolutionary history of pathogens and other parasites. As primary relationships favor the restriction of reproductive potential, parasites may
find new opportunities in novel host species. In some cases, this may
lead to complex life cycles, as for diseases such as schistosomiasis or
myxomatosis, in which the parasite must utilize several different host

The Evolution of Biodiversity

153

or vector species; more generally, it may simply mean that pathogens
maintain the capability of infecting hosts of many different species,
adapting to them as they would to any microhabitat. Both examples
are familiar to us. We are well aware that many or indeed most of the
deadliest diseases that have struck the human population, from plague
to smallpox to influenza to AIDS, originated in nonhuman hosts, then
adapted to hurnans when the opportunity appeared. Furthermore,
many such diseases can be transmitted only through an intermediate
vector, for example, a mosquito, which may have been an original host
that has coevolved a commensal relationship with the pathogen.
Similarly, no host species is so fortunate as to need to contend with
only a single species of parasite. Any newborn host is an empty island
amid a sea of diseases that can potentially colonize it. The human immune system is the result of a diffuse evolutionary response to dealing
with myriad pathogen species, including especially the constant barrage of novel types; in turn, it changes the environment for colonization by parasites. Early infections in the life of an individual trigger
immune responses that affect which species of pathogen can successfully attack that individual. Thus, the epidemiological history of any
population is an experiment in island biogeography, in which
pathogens adapted for early colonization (the diseases of the young)
affect the later successional development of the individual, and hence
the dynamics of the whole community.
It is interesting to ask how such features affect the coevolution of
the etwlogic (causative) agents of disease—the viruses, bacteria, and
other microorganisms that plague humanity and our vertebrate relatives. The worldwide range of most disease organisms, however, ensures that any coevolution is very generalized and diffuse. Farenholz's
rule—the "natural classification of some groups of parasites corresponds with that of their hosts"—has been taken as evidence that
these groups of hosts and parasites must have coevolved.43 The degree to which this is a valid generalization, and at what levels of detail, remains an active area of investigation. There is no doubt—and
the examples mentioned above provide evidence—that parasites are
not restricted to the host group in which they originally arose, and
that this complicates the picture substantially.
Herbivores exploit plants for their resources; predators exploit
prey; parasites exploit hosts. In each case, one species derives benefit

154

FRAGILE DOMINION

from another, thereby reducing the success of the victim. The similar
asymmetries of these three cases leads to their common classification
in many elementary textbooks, but there are fundamental differences.
The essential element that distinguishes parasite-host interactions
from the other two examples is the tightness of the feedback loops.
Whereas a parasite typically lives its entire life on an individual host,
an herbivore may move from plant to plant, grazing along the way
but not remaining. The death of the host plant is of little importance
to the herbivore, and hence selection does not operate on the herbivores to moderate their ways, as it does for parasites whose home is at
risk if they are unrestrained in their proliferation. Plant-herbivore coevolution is thus typically diffuse, providing little evidence of strong
species-specific evolutionary adaptations. Nonetheless, coevolution is
an important mechanism in plant-herbivore systems, shaping the
emergence both of defensive chemicals that plants use to poison or
deter herbivores and of corresponding detoxification mechanisms in
herbivores. These necessarily are fairly generalized responses, however; in the case of plant chemical defenses, for example, there is little
direct evidence for tight coevolution between herbivores and plants.
Douglas Futuyma, one of the world's experts on plant-insect coevolution, argues that direct connections between the evolutionary divergence of lineages of insects and those of the plants on which they
feed are not apparent, and that there is no evidence of a correspondence between the appearance of new species in insects and their host
plants.44 To the extent that coevolution has occurred, it has largely
been sequential, with the generalized development of chemical defenses preceding by long periods the evolution of specific adaptations
by herbivores to overcome those defenses.45 There are counterexamples, as in the much more limited associations of vines of the genus
Pamflora, with heEconid butterflies; the general pattern, however, is
not only clear but a necessary consequence of the generally weaker
feedback loops.46
Predator-prey interactions are also diffuse, in general even more so
than those between herbivores and plants. Just as humans exploit
many resources, so, too, do predators feed on many species. Still, the
notion that predators might reduce their exploitation of prey as a
long-term strategy for preserving the prey population—that prudent
predation might evolve—has been a controversial fascination for ecol-

The Evolution of Biodiversity

155

ogists,47 Prudent resource use by humans, after all, is a central goal of
most strategies for environmental management, and the hope has always been that we can find and learn from examples in nature. Such
theories, however, have received little support, since they seem to rely
on evolution operating at the level of groups, without evidence of
mechanisms. Indeed, the objections among evolutionary ecologists
have been similar in kind to those directed against the strong forms of
Gaia theories.
There is some hope for such a theory, however, through recent
demonstrations of how prudent predation might evolve. In his Ph.D.
work at the University of Wisconsin, Eric Klopfer used computer
models to study the evolution of reduced attack rates by predators.48
I mention this latter work not just because Eric married my daughter
Rachel, but because it once again illustrates the importance of spatial
localization of interactions. As demonstrated in the work of Kinzig
and Harte, the individual that depletes its local environment too voraciously has no tomorrow to anticipate; more prudent consumption
of prey is sound agricultural practice if your future depends on the local prey population.49 Again, prudent behavior arises because paybacks are swift and localized. The mechanism is the same as that
which underlies the evolution of altruism or of many other strategies
that we have met in this chapter.50 I have belabored this simple point,
and will continue to do so, because it is one of the central messages of
this book.

Coda
Examination of revolutionary interactions between pairs of interacting species illustrates both the potential and the limitations for the
evolution of ecosystem structure. Where feedback loops are tight,
strong selective pressures emerge, and these can lead to mechanisms
to tighten or reinforce the nature of the feedback. Examples include
the evolution of tight mutualisms, such as those provided by lichens
or by root-mycorrhizal associations, as well as reduced virulence in
host-parasite systems. As the perspective broadens to larger numbers
of interacting species—for example, plants and herbivores or prey and
predators—the linkages become more diffuse, and the evolutionary
forces weaker. Some features of communities can still be understood

156

FRAGILE DOMINION

as the result of diffuse coevolution, but these are more likely to have
arisen sequentially than as the result of feedbacks in which the preservation of system integrity was at issue. Even in diffuse coevolution,
however, spatial localization of effects can lead to strong linkages of
actions and effects, and hence to coevolution of general characteristics of the interactions between exploiters and victims.
In this chapter, I have begun to show how evolution shapes the
properties of communities. The workings of evolution are clearest at
the level of genes and individuals and become fuzzier as we move up
the chain of organization—to groups and populations, to interactions
between species, and ultimately to ecosystems and the biosphere. Indeed, my central thesis has been that ecosystem structure and dynamics emerge from selection operating at lower levels, and that feedbacks from higher levels are weak because of the individualistic
distribution of species.51
The emergence of ecosystem structure and function, however, has
profound implications for how ecosystems function, and in particular
for their resilience in the face of perturbations. In the next chapter, I
explore these issues, turning in the following chapter to try to put
things together and ask how evolutionary processes at lower levels
combine to affect emergent ecosystem properties.

7

ON FORM AND
FUNCTION

My desk and its drawers are foil of items—both utilitarian and frivolous—that have become assembled with very limited planning by me.
Unlike the model of an efficient office, my collection is a product of
its history—of the needs of the moment and the vagaries of my travels. The hole punch, the stapler, and the tape dispenser all reflect
some degree of intent on my part, as well as continued function on
theirs. I bought them because I needed them, and I continue to need
them. The collection of ballpoint pens emblazoned with advertisements, mostly for hotels and motels, similarly fulfill an important
function, though their acquisition was more accidental than planned.
It is a bit harder, however, to justify the world-class collection of pen
caps—remainders and reminders of an earlier time when they had an
important role in keeping my shirt pockets ink-free, but now long
separated from their mates. I keep them against the day when inexplicably all the caps on my working pens will disappear and it will be
necessary to press this emergency supply into service. The pen caps at
least once had a function. They are thus more easily explained than
the diversity of Lucite paperweights, in principle ready to protect
piles of papers from nonexistent gusts of wind; or the business cards
of people I knew I would never have need to contact; or the motley
collection of other trinkets and whatnots accumulated from diverse
travels and visitors.
157

158

FRAGILE DOMINION

The contents of my desk may not seem to have much to do with
ecosystems, but take another look. My office is, indeed, a selforganized system, with me at the center (at least from my perspective). It has more the element of design than do ecological systems,
yet it still reflects a huge dose of chance and historical influence. More
generally, in fact, my whole house is a museum of memorabilia for
which my wife and I have become the curators, simply because we
happen to have acquired them at some time in the past; a wax chicken
is one of our favorites, reminding us of the friends who gave it to us
but serving no other conceivable purpose. Ecosystems also preserve
the memories of their pasts. Though many species that they contain
are critical to their continuity, others are simply decoration, The hand
of historical accident is strong. Even the key species, those that define
the character of the system, represent chance colonizations that became reinforced ecologically and evolutionarily, thereby shaping further community development. Other species are like the pen caps,
perhaps important at an earlier stage and hanging around now because there is no strong force for their exclusion. Still others are the
paperweights: the novelty value that preserves them enhances their
own fitness but has little implication for the system as a whole.
In the previous two chapters, we learned how communities become assembled, and how evolutionary forces respond to and shape
the players over longer time scales and broader biogeographic regions. What are the implications of this process of self-organization
and evolutionary reinforcement on the properties of ecosystems?
What structural properties emerge, and how do these influence how
systems operate? Where redundancy is evident, is it likely to prove
useful, like the spare lightbulbs I stock, or irrelevant, like the pen
caps?

Biodiversity and Ecosystem Processes
Investment advisers tailor portfolios to the needs and adventurous
tendencies of their clients, balancing high-end potential with risk,
both short-term and long-term. Similarly, for ecological communities, these are the key elements in representing system functioning:
the average or expected productivity (conversion of sunlight energy
into biomass), the stability or predictability of this over time, and the

On Form and Function

15f

resilience in the face of major environmental perturbations. In this
classification, I am using a very narrow definition of stability—low
variability in the face of the normal sorts of fluctuations that challenge
species.
One of the basic principles of sound investment is diversification,
for example, through mutual funds. A balanced portfolio, though it
has a lower ceiling for growth, typically exhibits more stable dynamics, reducing the risk of catastrophic collapse. Over longer periods of
time, however, unless steps are taken to maintain diversification, diversity will be lost as the faster-growing portfolio components come
to represent larger fractions of the capital investment. Both elements
come into play in the dynamics of forests and other natural systems.
Differences in the growth and reproduction of various tree species
lead to shifts in forest composition and a larger representation by the
faster growers or reproducers, unless conditions (including competitive pressures) change to favor the slower ones or the continued immigration into the area by less successful types Emits local dominance
by a few species.
The management of agricultural systems has many of the features
of portfolio management, including the importance of the two competing objectives of maximizing yield and maintaining diversity (especially to reduce the risk of catastrophic pest outbreaks, such as led to
the great potato famines in Ireland in 1846-1847). Similarly, marine
fisheries, which are not managed in the same sense as agriculture but
are also heavily exploited by humans, show the benefits of biodiversity. As I discussed in Chapter 5, though particular stocks, such as the
Northwest Atlantic haddock, have collapsed, the catches of other
species have increased in response, and the total productivity of marine capture fisheries (78 million tons in 1993) is higher now than at
any time in history. However, the palates of consumers do not necessarily find one species substitutable for another; many stocks are in
trouble, and there is considerable concern for the future of marine
fisheries as this diversity is lost.1
The link between biodiversity and ecosystem processes is complex,
involving numerous contradictory and interacting relationships. Unraveling such intricacies provides the kind of puzzle ecologists enjoy
most. Its solution requires the skillful integration of inductive reasoning and careful, controlled experimentation. David Tilman, at Min-

160

FRAGILE DOMINION

nesota's Cedar Creek Reserve, has been one of the leaders in these efforts, designing and executing a Herculean set of experiments to illuminate the key issues.2 Tilman and his collaborators planted species of
grasses in a variety of different mixtures, ranging from a few to many
species.3 Biodiversity proved to be fundamentally important to all aspects of the work: the more diverse communities had higher productivity, were more stable over time, and were more resilient in the face
of a major drought. This finding, however, tells only part of the story;
the truth is in the details, to which I will return shortly.
The Cedar Creek experiments represent an extremely important
source of information, but their value would be limited were they not
complemented by other, sometimes contrasting, results from diverse
studies in real and model ecosystems,4 Among the most compelling
are the studies of John Lawton, Shahid Naeem, and their colleagues at
Silwood Park in England.5 Lawton and Naeem used a carefully controlled set of environmental chambers, termed the Ecotron, in which
the vagaries of the environment are eliminated: light, temperature, humidity, and rainfall can all be controlled to the specifications of the investigators. Lawton and Naeem were thus able to construct miniature
ecological systems, complete with plants; herbivores (insects and
snails) to feed on them; parasitoid insects, whose larvae exploit the
herbivores; and detritivores (such as earthworms) to clean up junk
(like feces and leftover plant and animal parts), making nutrients available again for plants to use. In these chambers, Lawton and Naeem
were able to create communities with different levels of diversity—as
few as nine species (two plants, three herbivores, a parasitoid, and
three detritivores), and as many as thirty-one (sixteen plants, five herbivores, two parasitoids, and eight detritivores)—and thus were able
to compare low-diversity with high-diversity systems (see Figure 7.1).
Naeem and Lawton measured a variety of ecosystem processes, including productivity and the flux of carbon dioxide (community respiration); both of these clearly increased with diversity. Their interpretation was a simple one: higher-diversity plant communities have
more ways to array their leaves, filling space more efficiently and intercepting more light. These experiments again show that diversity
can be important to ecosystem functioning. The mechanistic explanation in terms of the capture of light in no way contradicts the claim
that, in general, the dynamics of diverse assemblages are dominated
by a few species.

On Form and, function

161

FIGURE 7.1 The Ecotron Ecosystems, Showing Species (circles) and
Feeding Links (lines), Modifed from S. Naeem, L« J. Thompson, S. P.
Lawler, J. H. Lawton, R, M. Woofin, "Declining Biodiversity Can
Alter the Performance of Ecosystems," Nature 368 (1994); 734-737.
Illustration redrawn by Amy Bordvik,

A variety of competing hypotheses underlie the Endings at Cedar
Creek and at Silwood Park. Portfolio principles undoubtedly explain
some of the results and in particular contribute to the increased stability found at Cedar Creek.6 Though individual species may fluctuate
more when they are mixed with other species (and this is what Tilman
and Downing found), the total biomass of all species may be expected
to iuctuate less because some species will be at their peaks while others are at their lows.7 Individual species take up the slack for each
other, owing in part to independent statistical fluctuation, and no
doubt in part to reduced competitive pressures.
The increased productivity, however, requires further explanation.
Indeed, experiments in a wide variety of ecological systems suggest
that ecosystem processes typically reflect the influence of a few dominant species, and that diversity itself matters little beyond the identities of those dominants.8 More diverse assemblages, however, are
more likely to contain the most productive species, and this simple
idea may explain why more diverse assemblages are often found to be
more productive,9 As the more productive species produce more biomass, they come to represent larger proportions of the community,
increasingly dominating overall performance. Support for this inter-

162

FRAGILE DOMINION

pretation is growing,10 and the concept should be no surprise to readers of this book. The community is the result of selection operating
on its components, not on the system as a whole.11 Changes in system characteristics are the result of the differential success of the
component genotypes and species. This has been the theme of the
earlier chapters, and indeed, it is the essence of the Darwinian perspective.

Complexity and Resilience
The studies discussed in the previous section examine only the effects
of diversity per se, not complexity—the way the diversity in a community is organized into interacting sets of species. Naeem and Lawton
studied miniature ecosystems with quite realistic structural organization but took pains to preserve the basic structure while manipulating
diversity. Structure makes a difference, however, as is apparent from
any examination of why some business organizations are resilient in
the face of a changing environment and others fall quickly by the
wayside. Organizations that last are those that have the flexibility to
adapt to market shifts.
Ecological systems are not random assemblages of parts, but become organized into hierarchies,12 in which each species interacts
strongly with a subset of other species (forming what some call
holom13) and much more weakly with the rest.14 How this happens is
the topic of the next chapter; in this chapter, the message is that this
hierarchical organization matters a lot for how ecosystems function.
The tropical biologist Egbert Leigh, surely one of the most creative
thinkers about such matters, and his colleague Thelma RoweH, invoke Arthur Koestler's parable of two watchmakers, Mekhos and
Bios, to illustrate this point.15 KoestJer, in turn, attributes the story to
Herbert Simon, who first introduced the watchmakers (whom he
named Tempus and Hora) in a 1962 publication.16 Why Koestler
changed the names is not clear; Herb Simon conjectures that Koestler
did not like his having mixed Latin and Greek.17 In Simon's tale,
Tempus builds watches part by part; Hora first makes subassemblies
of ten parts each, then assembles them into larger units, and so on
until the watch is completed. Interruptions are frequent for both
watchmakers, undoing whatever progress they are making on the latest units. Tempus finishes nothing, because interruptions always de-

On Form and Function

163

stroy his work, Hora, on the other hand, is never set back as much as
ten steps and eventually produces watches. Hierarchical organization
localizes damage and provides resilience. More generally, hierarchical
structures allow for built-in redundancy, providing another mechanism for resiliency.18
Hora has a clear objective, and the modular construction is his way
to achieve an end. Ecosystems have no such goals or objectives, and
to the degree that hierarchical organization has evolved, it has done
so as the result of selection acting on the components, not as a way to
confer resilience on the system as a whole. Given that it has arisen,
however, it is no less functional for the ecosystem because of its humble origins than if it had been selected for such purposes. The other
side of this coin is that self-organized hierarchies may also exhibit features—such as the existence of keystone species—that reduce resilience. We met these power brokers earlier in the book and will visit
with them again later in the chapter.
Although Charles Darwin's accounts of his travels gave superb descriptions of feeding relationships—for example, by holathnrietm (sea
cucumbers) upon corals—the study of food webs perhaps first began
with the work of the major American ecologist Stephen A. Forbes19
and, simultaneously, the work of an obscure twenty-four-year-old lab
assistant in Torino, Italy, Lorenzo Camerano.20 Most ecologists are
weM acquainted with the contributions of Forbes; few have ever heard
of Camerano, though he probably published the first graph of a food
web.21 The subject did not reach center stage, however, until the famous British ecologist Charles Elton began to publish his long-term
studies of the food webs of British woods and to put them into a synthetic framework along with a variety of other similar studies.22 Elton's food web diagrams not only set the standard for the ield but
also provided the underpinning for the maps of the flow of energy
that are the first step in understanding ecosystems.23
Elton was deeply interested in the relationships between community structure and functional properties, such as the resistance to invasion by alien species.24 Elton's work, and that of Robert
MacArthur, stimulated a rich mathematical literature on the possible
relationships between system complexity and stability,25
Observations of ecosystem structure and dynamics, even over long
periods of time, are limited in what they can tell us; controlled manipulations of natural systems were a critical next step in developing an

164

FRAGILE DOMINION

understanding of the relationships between complexity and stability.
A major leap in understanding, therefore, came with the work of Joe
Connell and Bob Paine on the communities of marine shores.26
Connell studied competition between intertidal zone barnacle
species, carefully removing one species in order to find out the degree
to which doing so allowed the other to do better; this is what ecologists call competitive release. As I discussed briefly in the first chapter,
Paine carried this experiment a step further, demonstrating that
starfish play a critical keystone role in structuring intertidal communities. His approach involved careful analysis, logical deduction, the
formulation of hypotheses, and, most crucially, critical controlled experimentation that tested the hypotheses. His approach was a model
of the scientific method. Having first constructed an Elton-style food
web diagram for his study sites (Figure 7.2), Paine had a good understanding of who was eating whom. Furthermore, he knew that the intertidal is substructured into zones—the dominant mussels (Mytilus
califarnietnus) covered most of the surface in a narrow middle band
but were conspicuously absent above and below. The upper limit to
the band clearly was set by desiccation: mussels have to be underwater for much of the day, or they dry out and cannot survive. The
lower limit required a bit more sleuthing, but Paine knew from his
food web studies that mussels were the favorite food of the sea star
Pimster ochraceotts. Since the sea stars (starfish) are larger than their
prey, they have an even greater problem with desiccation; therefore,
their upper limit is below that for mussels, leaving a safe band where
mussels can survive, (Mussels also do well in subtidal areas, where
food is abundant and mussels grow so fast that they can get too large
for starfish to attack.)
Paine put two and two together. It is easy to determine the lower
limits of mussel beds because the particular mussel species in question
is as sessile as a tree once it becomes an adult. Thus, the mussel beds
are clearly visible, fixed features of the landscape. Starfish are a bit
more problematical for an observer; they move around continuously,
albeit at a snail-like pace, and furthermore, they do not blanket the
surface like mussels. Their upper range is therefore more variable and
more difficult to quantify. Indeed, though it seemed likely that
starfish were defining the lower limit of mussel beds,27 the evidence
was circumstantial. An experiment was needed.

On Form a-nd Function

165

FIGURE 7,2 The Food Web of Mukkaw Bay, Washington, Showing
the Flow of Energy. Modified from R, T. Paine, "Food Web Complexity and Species Diversity." American Naturalist 100 (1966): 65-75.
Illustration by Amy Bordvik.

Paine carried out the necessary controlled experiments on the
outer coast of Washington State, originally at Mukkaw Bay, and later
on the spectacularly beautiful island of Tatoosh. Laboriously, and
with the help of willing volunteers in later years, Paine removed by
hand every starfish from a part of the zone below the mussel band,
relocating the sea stars to adequate accommodations elsewhere in the
intertidal. He repeated this chore in frequent subsequent visits and
maintained areas free from starfish. As predicted, mussels began to
appear, along with various species of barnacles that were also a part of
the sea star's diet. Eventually, mussels took over the entire protected
area, eliminating the other competitors for primary space, thereby
drastically reducing local diversity; the system had been fundamentally altered by the removal of Pisa-ster,
The results of Paine's experiments were even more dramatic than
predicted. Not only did his experiments confirm that the starfish was
determining the lower bound of mussels; it also, through this activity,
was controlling the entire community structure of the zone. Removal

m

FRAGILE DOMINION

of the starfish set up a chain reaction, with cascading effects through
the food web, Paine thus dubbed Pimster a keystone predator species
because of its foundational role in maintaining structure and functioning. The implication is that the intertidal community is only as resilient as the starfish; in that aspect, evolution and self-assembly have
perhaps produced a fragile rather than a resilient system. Paine goes
on to argue, however, that the situation in intertidal food webs is
much more complicated.28 Pimster interacts strongly with mussels,
and its removal sets up a chain of direct and indirect consequences
mediated through Mytilm; its iniuence is thus easily quantified by experimental removal. Large grazers, such as mollusks and chitons, may
play a similar role as a group, determining which algal species are present, but many effects are diffuse, involving weak interactions between species that are important only in the aggregate. The grazers
form a jgmlA or functional group, concepts to which I shall return
shortly. Paine, however, argues against too quickly lumping things
into functional groups before separating out the strong interacters,
lest important information be lost.29
Paine's studies revolutionized how people examined intertidal systems and set the standard for the study of coastal ecology. His experimental approach stimulated legions of others to imitate and extend
his work.30 The notion of the keystone obviously had deep implications for the understanding of communities in general, if it were a
widespread phenomenon, and people began to look for similar influences in other systems. The most important new example, as discussed earlier, was the California sea otter (Enhydra lutem),
The sea otter was a heavily exploited species on the West Coast of
the United States, sought after for its pelts. Eventually, the depredations of humans virtually eliminated the otter from most of the coast,
restricting it to a small region near Monterey Bay. When federal regulations prohibited further killing of otters, the species began to expand its range again, with dramatic effects on the near-shore ecosystems. James Estes and John Palmisano, working in Alaska,
demonstrated that the otter was a keystone predator in the sense described by Paine, and that its removal would result in fundamental
changes in ecosystem structure and functioning.31 Conversely, the return of the otter to California coastal communities flipped things to
the way they used to be, with the cascading implications for fisheries
detailed in Chapter 1.

On Form and Function

167

The search for keystones became a major preoccupation in community studies, expanding beyond Paine's original notion of keystone
predators to include any species that served as a linchpin in its community,32 There was no simple prototype—baleen whales and elephants are keystone heavyweights, but rabbits and snails can also play
the part.33 Indeed, one of the best examples was a disease (rinderpest), whose effects on some ungulate species led to cascading effects
on other grazers and predators, on grasses and canopy species, and
hence on Htterfall, fire, and nutrient exchanges.34 Sometimes, however, it is difficult to identify a single species that fills the keystone
role, although keystone groups or guilds play the same role. Paine alluded to this in his discussion of grazing and weak interactions.35
Predatory ants, for example, form a keystone guild in mountain birch
forests, benefiting vegetation by reducing the role of herbivores.36
Broadening the keystone concept to guilds is an important generalization, extending applicability to a much wider range of ecosystems.

From Functional Groups to
the Web of Energy
The notion of the guild has been one of the central concepts in ecology since my Cornell colleague Richard Root introduced it in his
classic 1967 paper.37 The concept of the guild recognizes a ubiquitous and fundamentally important aspect of ecological communities:
their organization into functional groups of species that play similar
roles, and hence interact strongly,38
Root's work has been concerned primarily with birds and insects,
but the notion of the guild—which he adopted from the medieval
guilds of craftsmen—has much wider relevance. Indeed, the grassland
plants that populate Dave Tilman's experimental sites surely form
such assemblages, and the competitive trade-offs among strongly
competing species explain in part the stability he observed. The same
undoubtedly applies to marine fish communities and underlies the
constancy seen in total yields while individual stocks fluctuate. The
functional approach to ecological communities provides powerful
new insights that help us extract order from a morass of detail.
What are "functional groups"? In our own societies, we might immediately think, as did Root, of craft guilds. Plumbers. Carpenters.
Doctors. Teachers. Each is a set of people performing similar roles in

168

FRAGILE DOMINION

society. On the other hand, we might prefer to think of doctors, for
example, as making up a collection of guilds: internists, pathologists,
psychologists, oncologists, and so on. And each of those might be
subdivided into even more specific groups. On the other hand, we
could "lump" rather than "split," subsuming plumbers and carpenters into a broader category called "skilled craftsmen," or, even more
broadly, into the group known as "labor." Clearly, there is no single
correct way to do this. The choice of how inely to define things depends on the particular problem at hand. Furthermore, we might
choose an entirely different way of grouping people functionally—say,
by their degree of power.
We face similar decisions in dealing with the formation of groups in
ecological systems. Traditionally, following Linnaeus, species are aggregated into genera, genera into families, and so on.39 But that is a
taxonomic scheme, and it may not be the best way to organize things
to represent the functional organization of particular ecosystems. A
guild of species then becomes simply any set of species that perform
similar roles.40 So the primary producers might be defined as one
functional group, the nitrogen fixers as another, and so on.
In the earlier chapters of this book, I argued that local climatic and
other physical and chemical features of the environment determine
the broad features of vegetation and the rest of the biota, but that
there remains considerable scope for chance and historical dependency in terms of what species actually colonizes a particular habitat.
One might guess, for example, that particular kinds of habitats always
have the same functional groups but not the same species. Robert
Steneck and Megan Dethier, studying coastal marine communities,
found just that to be the case.41 They compared benthic marine algal
communities—the species found on the ocean bottom—in environments as diverse as the North Atlantic, the eastern North Pacific, and
the Caribbean. The particular species found were quite different in
the different environments, so Steneck and Dethier put things into
functional categories based on their forms. Some algae are crustose
(form crusts); these include primarily calcified coralline algae. Other
species are termed turf a^ne; these include both filamentous forms
and mkroalgae. Finally, there are the most obvious species, the large
maermlgae such as the big kelp Laminari®, Each of these functional
groups could also be subdivided further into minigroups: the crus-

On Form and, Function

169

tose algae into coralline and noncoralline, the turf species into microalgae and filaments, the macroalgae into leathery ones and corticated ones (those with an outer layer like a bark or cortex). This way
of dividing things was especially use&l, because these are the morphological features that deine what roles species play in the successional development of the benthic community. And indeed, when
Steneck and Dethier used this classification, they found the match
that was needed. Provided they knew how nutrient-rich and productive a particular region was, and how important herbivores were, they
could predict well the abundances of the various functional groups.
Which representatives of those groups were to be found was less predictable; such detail is the "noise" that can obscure the signal.42 In
complementary work, David Rafaelli and Stephen Hall, working in
the Ythan Estuary in Scotland, found that most interaction strengths
were weak, and that by organizing species into functional groups they
could obtain much deeper understanding of dynamics.43
The functional group approach helps us to understand evolutionary convergence—that is, the degree to which communities separated
by geography, but related in terms of the kinds of environments they
inhabit, come to resemble one another. That is not all it does. Since
the features chosen define the way organisms function within a system, the functional classification defines how the entire ecosystem
functions; of course, it still remains an issue to extrapolate from individual behaviors to those of whole systems, and to explain the importance of particular functional groups. Think of this challenge in terms
of the organization of human societies—the issues are the same. A
first step in understanding how societies work is to classify people according to their professions. Environment then explains a great deal:
it is not surprising that longshoremen and surfboard instructors are
found in coastal communities, and coal miners are not. But what determines how big cities wiH grow, and how many lawyers there wiE
be, and how the stability of the community is influenced by the number of lawyers? These are the essential kinds of challenges in the study
of any complex adaptive system.
Some light on these questions can be achieved by the study of food
webs. Whereas the basic approach to food web construction involves
the identification of which species eat which, ecosystem scientists
long have chronicled the flow of energy among compartments of

170

FRAGILE DOMINION

species, such as the primary producers, their consumers, and so on.44
This is the functional group approach at its most basic. Indeed, Elton
pioneered this approach and discovered some important patterns that
may be derived immediately from basic thermodynamic arguments.
When predators consume prey, a lot of energy is lost through metabolism and heat production; a good rule is that at best 10 percent of
the energy at one trophic level may be converted into biomass at the
next level, (This is why many argue that our reliance on beef cattle is
energy-inefficient: more of the sun's energy can be captured by feeding lower in the food chain.) Thus, it should be expected that the
most productivity is to be found at the bottom of the food chain (the
primary producers), and that there should be much less production—
dramatically less—at each succeeding level in the chain. As a result,
much more biomass is locked up at lower than at higher levels,
though this calculation is a bit more complicated because of widely
varying life spans. Furthermore, since predators typically are much
larger than their prey (but note that insects are smaller than the trees
they feed upon, and bacteria are smaller than the carcasses they consume), there are far fewer carnivores than herbivores, and so on. All
true.
I mentioned earlier the intriguing studies of food webs carried out
by Joel Cohen, Stuart Pimm, Peter Yodzis, and others. Cohen, in
particular, has reported fascinating commonalities found in food webs
when one lumps things into functional groups defined by trophic
level—the number of food chain steps removed from the sun's energy
source. Bob Paine and Gary Polis have taken issue with many of the
generalizations; they argue that the analyses are lawed and, more basically, that the world is more complex than simple theories would
suggest, but both still argue strongly for the search for organizing
theoretical principles married to careful data analysis.45 Among the
most powerful such principles are those that relate the lengths of food
chains to productivity: the thermodynamic arguments given above
make it clear that the length of chains is limited by the dissipation of
energy with each transfer in the chain.46 It is not surprising, for example, that there are no predators that make their living feeding on lions. Even setting aside the rather disagreeable task of capturing and
subduing the uncooperative beasts, not enough energy would be
available from a particular lion pride to support a population of lion

On Form and Function

171

eaters. (Moreover, because the generations of larger animals tend to
span greater time periods, the energy consumed is not replenished
very rapidly in the form of offspring.)
Because resource demands are so high, animals higher in the food
chain (like hurnans) need to become more catholic in their dining
habits and range over wider areas to ind food. (The comic-book super-menace Gaiactus and other interstellar mega-giants must even
travel from galaxy to galaxy to find new worlds to consume. It's not
really their fault they're so big, though comic books always make
them out to be the villains.) Big carnivores must be willing to accept
substitutes: one type of food for another, and one locale for another.
Humans have perfected this requirement to a tee. Not only are they
omnivorous and peripatetic, but they also import other environments
by transporting food and other resources from elsewhere to meet the
needs of local populations. Evolutionarily, as we shall see, importation
loosens feedback loops by eliminating the costs associated with overconsumption, thus reducing selective pressures for prudence and altruism. I return to these themes in the final two chapters.

Closing Thoughts
The structure and dynamics of any ecological community are determined in part by the physical environment and in part by accidents of
history, reinforced and frozen in by self-organization. Climate and
soil (and the influence of humans) are the principal determinants of
land communities; ocean currents and upwellings add a new dimension in the oceans. In general, such features of the physical environment ultimately determine how productive an ecosystem is, and in
particular how much of the sun's energy can be captured and used to
fuel other trophic levels; primary productivity then sets limits to the
size and complexity of the ecosystem that is built on it.47
Primary productivity alone does not tell the whole story, as we
have seen in earlier chapters. The degree of isolation of a habitat influences colonization, and hence the numbers of species to be found,
in accordance with the predictions of island biogeography theory.
Historical processes, including environmental stability, also play a
role.48 Of course, competition and other biological interactions are
part of the process of self-organization and determine the exact de-

172

FRAGILE DOMINION

tails of the local biota, but many features, such as the total diversity to
be found at, regional scales, are primarily determined by external factors, such as patterns of temperature and precipitation.
Environment determines primary productivity, and primary productivity influences diversity. But the relationship is complex.49 Lowproductivity regions have very few species. This is not surprising:
there is just not enough energy to go around. Where productivity is
higher, so is diversity, but only up to a point. When productivity is
very high, diversity begins to fall.50 That is, very high-productivity
systems are lower in diversity than are those of intermediate productivity. Theories abound for why this should be true; the most likely is
that in very productive environments, so much energy is available
that environmental heterogeneity is reduced; thus, a small number of
species can dominate everywhere.51
An increase in diversity probably also means an increase in complexity and redundancy, with profound implications for the system's
total productivity, stability, and resilience in the face of environmental
stresses like drought or El Nino events. We have already seen some
examples of this, as in Tilrnan's field experiments, or Lawton and
Naeem's Ecotron. Diversity also has well-documented effects on
other important biogeochemkal properties, such as the amount of
organic material in the soil, that are essential for the functioning of
the system.52
The fundamental challenge remains to determine how structure affects resilience.53 This is extremely difficult to assess experimentally;
work such as Paine's elucidation of the role of keystone species represents the best examples. Those studies show that environmental effects or the major effects on a single species of harvesting strategies
would have cascading effects in the ecosystems, because of the way
those systems are structured. Similar qualitative changes have also
been observed in lakes arid other systems but are not universal.54
Structure matters. Simon's watchmakers hold much of the secret.
Cascades of the sort seen in the lake and intertidal systems are much
less likely to spread in systems in which compartmentalization
reigns—that is, where species are organized into tight clusters of
those that interact strongly among themselves and more weakly with
members of other clusters.55
Understanding how the structure of an ecological system affects its
resilience is not so different from understanding how the organiza-

On Form and Function

173

tion of any system affects its dynamic properties. The movie Six Degrees of Separation was built on the theme that we live in a small
world—it takes very few steps to get from one person to another—
and that fact has implications for everything from the spread of diseases to the stability and resilience of ecosystems,56 A schookhild
with the flu can infect every other child in the classroom; those children can infect their parents; a parent travels to Washington and
meets the president, or to China for a scientific meeting, thereby potentially spreading the disease; the president meets other world leaders and potentially transfers the flu as part of internationalization;
those world leaders, as well as the scientists at the meeting in China,
may take the iu bug home with them for their families. In a very few
steps, nearly everyone could be exposed.
In this way, compartmentalization may increase connectivity, reducing the number of steps between a schookhild in Peoria and one
in Hangzhou, but it also increases the potential that perturbations—
such as disease outbreaks—will be contained. The parable of the preceding paragraph would work better for the spread of a joke or an
idea than for the spread of flu, because local outbreaks of disease lead
to local control measures. A sick child may stay home; high-risk areas
may be targets for immunization campaigns. Outbreaks often can be
localized and allowed to burn themselves out before spreading to
other locales, though obviously major pandemics escape this regional
containment. The president probably has infected few world leaders
with the flu, though he has probably transmitted many weak jokes to
them. In modular structures, local feedback processes may work effectively to suppress perturbations that upset the apple cart.57 In business organizations, compartmentalization or modularization allows
units to be closed out and replaced by others without affecting the
overall stability and persistence of the corporation. In businesses,
these are design features that may be built in to maximize adaptability. In ecosystems, to the degree that such characteristics exist, they
have emerged from Darwinian selection at lower levels.
Resilience and resistance to change are two sides of the same coin.
What is desirable in some systems (resilience) is the opponent of
modernization in others, preserving social inequities such as class systems, or inefficient economic systems.58 This chapter makes no judgment about whether resilience is good or bad but simply examines
the structural features that contribute to it. In general, these charac-

174

FRAGILE DOMINION

teristics are "a hierarchy of feedback mechanisms; the maintenance of
diversity; options for selection to act upon; and the coupling of stimulus and response in terms of space, time, and organizational
scales."59 These traits combine the general properties of any complex
adaptive system—namely, the maintenance of diversity, acted upon by
selection—with the special features associated with compartmentalization. The next chapter asks how compartmentalization might arise
naturally through self-organization and evolution; in the final chapter, I explore the implications for the management of our environment.
I end this chapter where I began. My desk is, after all, much like
the watch shop, or like some ecosystems. When things are chaotic,
nothing gets done. But every time things get out of hand, I buy a
new desk organizer, with unfilled compartments that can help me restore the flow of work and confine to dark holes the troublesome and
irrelevant papers. I have been writing this book in spurts, punctuated
by semesters full of other obligations, but its production has been resilient in the face of these interruptions because it is compartmentalized into chapters, and because the hierarchy of desk organizers keeps
all in readiness for my next assault.

8

THE ONTOGENY AND
EVOLUTION OF ECOSYSTEMS

In the words of Shelley, "Fate, Time, Occasion, Chance and
Change? To these AM things are subject but eternal Love."1 We live
in an inconstant world, and the ability to adapt to changing conditions is essential to our survival. Success in life requires flexibility and
resourcefulness in an unpredictable environment, and evolution rewards characteristics that maintain those traits. Within reason. There
is also merit in constancy and in sticking with something proven to
work. The key, as in poker, is to know when to sit tight and when to
seek new opportunities. Such decisions are repeated over and over
again in our daily lives. These range from situations mundane, such
as changing one's dinner menu, to those profound, such as changing
jobs.
No creature can completely predict its future. Humans, of course,
have elaborate devices and formulas to try to reduce uncertainty; so,
too, do all other organisms. Even bacteria have ways to determine
where conditions are better for them, and then to move there. There
are, however, inherent limits to predictability and to what is knowable.2 In any case, the cost of acquiring information may far exceed
the benefits long before the limits to knowledge become imposed.
When this happens, it becomes more efficient to let come what may,
and to go with the low. Such principles, of course, impose themselves
on our daily lives; more broadly, they influence the evolution of all biological organisms.
175

176

FRAGILE DOMINION

A case in point is the common strawberry, Fra,jj(trm virgini&na,
Some strawberry plants find themselves in high-light conditions, with
an easy source of energy, but others, hidden on the floor of the forest,
depend more on chance glimmers of light to fael the photosynthesis
needed for their growth. Given such different conditions, evolution
might have produced high-light and low-light specialist strawberries.3
Instead, it has produced individuals that can change their photosynthetic machinery to suit different environments.4
Flexibility in photosynthetic response enables plants to wait to see
what their environments are like before deciding what kinds of strawberries to be. Environments change, A plant raised in the forest understory may suddenly find itself in the open when the tree shading it
topples. Under such circumstances, it can change its biochemical and
photochemical machinery and become a high-light strawberry. This
flexibility is termed plasticity. Plasticity is important to the plant, but
it comes with costs and benefits. For a plant to alter its machinery, energy and time must be expended. The plant's only clue that things
have changed is the increased availability of light; if that clue were the
result simply of the fluctuating position of leaves due to wind movement and the daily travels of the sun, then a premature response by
the strawberry would waste energy and leave the plant unprepared to
deal with the soon-to-return low-light environment. The plant must
be able to read varying light conditions, gauge their patterns and duration, and decide whether change is for real before making a major
shift in its chemistry.
Plants deal with unpredictability at many levels, and evolution has
shaped their ways of life accordingly. There is no unique answer to
the questions posed by unpredictability, and the diversity of possible
solutions becomes translated into the diversity of nature. Deciduous
trees shed their leaves each winter, shutting down most operations
until the weather becomes more favorable; evergreens, on the other
hand, keep their foliage, protecting their leaves against the winter, for
example, by shaping them into waxy needles. Annual plants may deal
with the vagaries of the environment through dormancy, and some
mode of seed (and pollen) dispersal allows all plants to find new opportunities and to average out the unpredictabilities associated with
particular locales.

The Ontogeny and Evolution of Ecosystems

177

These challenges are faced by plants and animals alike, and solved
in similar ways. Food is not smeared like butter evenly over the face of
the earth but comes packaged in transient clumps that animals find
and consume before moving on to greener pastures. Movement is an
essential device for dealing with local unpredictability. But it is not
the only mechanism. Diapause and hibernation, the analogues of dormancy, allow animals to last through unfavorable conditions, waiting
for better times. Such patterns are also played out on shorter time
scales—animals everywhere, from the desert to the oceans, adjust
their activity patterns to the daily cycles of light and temperature,
confining their energy expenditures to the times of day when rewards
are greatest. There are trade-offs,, of course; the desert is home to a
variety of nocturnal creatures that have evolved the ability to operate
in the coolness of the dark.
Physiological and behavioral devices, including plasticity and simple averaging mechanisms, allow organisms to deal with much environmental variability, but the potential is not unlimited. Climates
change, resources come and go, and the adaptations that once were
adequate no longer suffice. Old genotypes disappear, and new ones
replace them; this is evolution at work. Indeed, over longer periods of
time, evolution can operate to maintain the very devices—especially
mutation and recombination—that allow adaptation within species.
Within populations, mutation and recombination maintain the genetic variation on which selection can act; it is the loss of this variation in small populations that poses a great threat to endangered
species, because it compromises their capacity to respond to an everchanging environment.
Certainly, diversity and heterogeneity are equally important at
higher levels of organization. Functional redundancy within groups
of organisms—for example, the plants that capture the sun's energy,
or the decomposers that return nutrients to the soil—cushions
ecosystems against major collapse in its critical functions. Nevertheless, even though evolution clearly works to maintain flexibility in
how organisms respond to changing environments and also may operate to maintain variation within populations, there are no clear
routes by which it can maintain that variation at the ecosystem level.
That is not to say that such variation does not arise—clearly, there is

178

FRAGILE DOMINION

redundancy and overlap in function among diverse organisms, providing the system a degree of resiliency. It simply means that such diversity emerges from the competitive interplay among individual organisms, rather than having been selected for the benefits that it
conveys to the ecosystem as a whole. In the eighteenth century, the
great economist Adam Smith argued that an invisible hand guides the
development of economies, so that society's best interests result from
the selfish actions of individuals. The situation is much the same in
the ontogeny (development) and evolution of ecosystems: the resiliency that emerges is the result of a reward structure at the level of
individual organisms, not at the level of the whole system. And just as
neoclassical economics has challenged the assumptions underlying
Adam Smith's confidence, so, too, is there no guarantee or even likelihood that the competitive evolutionary marketplace should optimize features at the level of the ecosystem or biosphere.

Ontogeny and Evolution
Ontogeny refers to the development of an individual organism; indeed, it is a stretch to apply it, as I do, to the development of a whole
ecosystem. But the term serves to distinguish the purely transformational changes from evolutionary processes that act on populations of
organisms and ultimately shape the rules that guide ontogeny.
Chapter 5 of this book dealt with the ontogeny of systems, and
Chapter 6 with their evolution. Indeed, it is easy to think of examples
where the two are so neatly separable. Scrabble provided a nice case
study earlier: the rules that guide the development of the game may
become modified over time to reflect more successful outcomes. The
natural evolution of games such as chess or checkers provides perhaps
better examples: as such games become popular, mutations occur,
providing a diversity of similar games for evolution to act on. Selection favors the development of certain lines, based on their popularity, and extinguishes others; historical accident exerts its usual influence. Many of the older board games still exist, in the sense that their
rules are known and chronicled in books for game buffs, who delight
in playing them; but for most players the allure of novelty soon diminishes and the reasons that game evolution proceeded as it did be-

The Ontogeny and Evolution of Ecosystems

179

come clear. The same can be seen in the evolution of field games,
such as softball, or of musical instruments and composition. Plucked
string instruments were as popular as bowed ones a few centuries ago,
but the evolutionary branch that gave us violins and violas eventually
dominated classical composition. Thus, evolution acts on the rules of
games, or the principles of composition, over long time scale/, opting
for systems that enjoy the greatest popularity.
Compared to natural systems, however, games and musical instruments and the majority of consumer products are fairly simple in
structure, because their components do not evolve. Indeed, many
games and tournaments do include a form of selection: chess, for example, one of the most complex and intricate of board games, has a
diversity of kinds of pieces, the weaker of which become eliminated
during the course of play. However, with a few arcane exceptions
(pawn promotion), even chess does not permit a process of renewal.
A few games do allow the fittest types to reproduce: the game of Risk,
for example, produced by Parker Brothers, reinforces conquering
armies with new recruits of the same type. For virtually all games,
however, there is no process, such as mutation, by which diversity is
constantly renewed.5 The games we create are thus obviously pale imitations of the complexity to be found in natural systems, in which
games exist within games, and in which the process of development is
inextricably intertwined with evolution acting at many different levels
of organization, on time scales both longer than and shorter than the
lifetime of the individual system.
In the development and lifetime of a biological organism, natural
selection is played out many times among the cells that make up the
organism. For the most part, the competitive processes at the cellular
level operate for the greater good of the organism. The immune system, for example, is a remarkably sophisticated mechanism that stimulates the reproduction of antibodies that repel attacks on the body
by foreign agents, called antigens. The antibodies, of course, have no
idea that they are working for the greater good; Adam Smith's invisible hand is indeed at work, but in ways that have been shaped by evolution operating at the level of the whole organism. Selection at the
cellular level is not always such a good thing, however. At times, the
immune system goes haywire, as any allergy sufferer or victim of au-

180

FRAGILE DOMINION

toimmune disease knows. Another familiar example, cancer, represents the unchecked growth of certain types of cells at the expense of
others, ultimately with dire consequences for the organism.
There are a number of lessons to be learned from the previous
paragraph. The development of a single organism reflects evolutionary processes operating at scales both much longer than the lifetime
of an organism and much shorter, as well as many in between. The
operation of the immune system relies on rapid scale selection and
evolution; the structure of the system has been shaped by evolution
over longer and slower scales. More generally, longer-term processes
reinforce mechanisms that enhance the fitness of organisms; in this
way, they shape the rules by which the more rapid evolutionary
processes operate, for example, by guiding the evolution of the vertebrate immune system. Those shorter-term processes, however, retain
much scope for independence and do not necessarily serve the greater
good of the organism, as illustrated by the spread of malignancies. As
one moves up the organizational scale—to the population, the community, and the ecosystem—all of these considerations remain valid,
but their relative importance changes. At the ecosystem level, for example, or for the biosphere, longer-term evolutionary processes have
at most a weak relationship to the fitness of the whole; instead, they
reiect emergence from more local processes. There are no evolved
mechanisms to deal with the foreign invaders—whether the introduced species that distort natural processes, or the native species,
such as Homo sapiens, whose growth and impacts are unrestrained.
This is why it is so important for us to understand what the natural
processes are that guide resiliency, and how to sustain them.

Self-organized Criticality
Imagine that you are among the first to arrive at what will be a very
large cocktail party. Only a few people are present; they are all having
a lively discussion, which you join. As others begin to arrive, they,
too, join the discussion, but soon it becomes too large to maintain
and breaks apart into two groups. Eventually, others show up, and
the two groups become many—some large, but the majority small.
Discussions are transient, and groups split and re-form, split and reform. No group lasts long, but the distribution of groups retains its

The Ontogeny and Evolution of Ecosystems

1 SI

character—a few large and many small—for hours, in a state of dynamic equilibrium.
Virtually all mobile organisms, from bacteria to elephants and
whales, also organize themselves into groups, and very commonly
into similarly dynamic cocktail parties. Swarms of locusts, herds of
wildebeest, and schools of fish all exhibit such patterns, arising from
continual processes of breaking and joining. The simplest of mathematical models can reproduce the observed patterns, giving rise at
times to "power law" distributions in which the frequency of groups
of a particular size declines as a power of the group size,6
This situation is reminiscent of what the physicist Per Bak termed
self-organized criticality, a notion that has been one of the most seductive ones in the study of complex adaptive systems. Bak invites
only grains of sand to his cocktail party, however, dripping them onto
a plate from a fixed position above it (Figure 8.1). Initially, the grains
of sand form a single and ever-increasing pile. As the pile gets larger,
however, it becomes less stable. Avalanches begin to occur as grains
tumble down the sides and gain adherents. Unlike the cocktail party,
the sand never forms more than one cluster, but the distribution of
avalanches itself fills out a power law distribution: there are many
small avalanches and a few large ones. The term "criticality" here is
borrowed from solid-state physics to describe a situation in which
small perturbations at one point have influence virtually everywhere
in a medium, triggering major transformations. The most familiar example of criticality is what happens to water as it is cooled, becoming
ice, or heated, becoming steam. At transitions, the material is in a
critical state,, where, for example, crystallization rapidly spreads. The
difference is that this is criticality controlled by the changing temperature; it is transient and gives way to the solid or gaseous state as the
temperature continues to change. Not so with self-organized criticality, which is a situation that sustains itself by feeding off the
avalanches it creates.
Bak, imbued with the unrestrained enthusiasm that theory can
confer, sees self-organized criticality at every turn.7 It represents, for
him, the unavoidable outcome of the self-organization of a system of
many interacting entities. Ecosystems are perfect candidates for such
theory, in Bak's view, and he draws encouragement from a glance at
the evolutionary record and at the distributions of "extinction

182

FRAGILE DOMINION

FIGURE 8.1 Creating a Sandpile, Modified from Elaine Wiesenfeld's
drawing in P. Bak, How Nature Works. Illustration by Leila Hadj-Chikh.

avalanches."8 In Bak's view, ecosystems organize themselves into critical states in which continual extinctions send shock waves through
the systems, triggering other extinctions and reorganization and driving the system to a dynamic equilibrium of turnover and replacement. Over evolutionary time, these events explain—for Bak—the existence of "punctuated equilibria," the long periods of stasis
punctuated by major change that Gould and Eldredge claim dot the
fossil record.9 Over ecological time, they are suggestive of MacArthur
and Wilson's discussion of island biota, but carried to an extreme.10
Recall that, in the theory of island biogeography, islands are viewed as
being in a dynamic balance between colonization and local extinction. This is a fairly controlled process, however, in which turnover
events involve few species. Communities are not really ever saturated,
because rates of colonization are restricted by the islands' isolation
from the mainland source of species. However, with Robert May,
now chief scientific adviser of Great Britain, MacArthur extended
these concepts to terrestrial communities that experienced much
higher colonization rates and therefore reached saturation.11 These
communities were much like Bak's sandpiles: avalanches of species replacements could be engendered by the continual dripping of species

The Ontogeny and Evolution of Ecosystems

183

onto an already full plate. There is, therefore, at least some theoretical
support for Bak's perspective.
Bak views self-organized criticality in an appropriately nonteleological way. There is no guiding force, no force of evolution driven by
what is best for the ecosystem. Curiously, Bak sees self-organized criticality as "the general, underlying theory for the Gaia hypothesis,"
dismissing opposition to Gaia as the Luddite response of reductionists.12 But Bak's view of Gaia looks less than searchingly at the maintenance of critical iows and processes and is the antithesis of the view
that the biosphere has evolved features because its inhabitants need
them.
Bak also takes pains to distinguish criticality from the edge of
chaos,13 and in particular to distance himself from the suggestion that
evolution drives systems to the edge of chaos because it is good for
them.14 The edge of chaos is, in its vulgar usage, the boundary between order and disorder—not so ordered that exploration and innovation are impossible, and not so disordered that information gained
cannot be put to good use. Most of us, to some degree, must live our
lives at that boundary, willing to take a few chances at new things, but
unwilling to throw all caution to the winds. Cellular networks in our
body, Stu Kauffman reasons, also have been selected to operate at the
edge of chaos (here meaning disorder). Why not, therefore, ecosystems? If ecosystems were at such an edge, Kauffman argues, they
would be in the optimal condition for adapting to changing environmental conditions, "Over evolutionary time, ecosystems may selftune to a transition regime between order and chaos, maximizing fitness, minimizing the average extinction rate, yielding small and large
avalanches of extinctions that ripple or crash through the ecosystem."15 There are lots of problems with this claim.
First of all, it is really an untestable concept: there is no sensible
measure of the fitness of an ecosystem, given that ecosystems do not
reproduce and that their identities are ephemeral in space and time.
Second, there is no mechanism operating at the ecosystem level to
hone its properties to any set of criteria; what happens, happens,
without top-down control. Per Bak's idea is a simple one that rejects
any guiding hand: developing ecosystems—as prototypical large, selforganizing systems—continue to grow in complexity and connectedness until they reach criticality, at which point individual species flue-

184

FRAGILE DOMINION

tuations drive cascades of variation and extinction of predictable statistical character. Here, the continual generation of novelty through
extinction cascades, and the continual loss of species through those
very extinction events creates a dynamic and self-sustaining balance.
Nowhere is there the suggestion in this that extinction rates have
been minimized—quite the contrary. Nowhere is there the suggestion that evolution has driven ecosystems to criticality for their own
good—quite the contrary. The ecosystem, in Bak's view, finds selforganized criticality the way a ball finds its resting place at the bottom
of a basin—passively, and controlled by natural laws. Bak's claim is, in
itself, an attractive hypothesis that suggests a variety of theoretical and
empirical explorations. Whether it is true or not remains an open
question; my own conclusion is that it contains a kernel of truth but
is incomplete in failing adequately to account for evolutionary forces
that operate at lower levels of organization.16
Self-organized criticality clearly is a feature of many developing systems. It describes a situation in which the effects of small disturbances
need not remain contained but may spread rapidly because systems
have reached a high degree of connectedness and correlation. When
such effects are present, there are no characteristic scales at which
events are correlated—they are correlated at all scales, giving rise to
patterns of self-similarity and/metol landscapes,17 Linda Buttel and I
found such patterns arising from our simple models of forest community development,18 and others have noted similar features emerging
from the analysis both of model outputs and data.19 Self-organized
criticality is not likely to be a universal feature, however. Where
strong external disturbances—Including the depredations of keystone
predators—are important, competitive interactions among species become localized and the interconnectedness of competitors is reduced.
Surprisingly, the same effect may result from very strong competitive
interactions, which force species to become spatially separated in their
distributions.20 When interconnectedness is reduced, disturbances are
contained—avalanches are avoided. My view is that in nature one
should see a wide range of kinds of communities—some near self-organized criticality, some as modularized as the watchmaker How's
workshop, and the great majority in between. It remains to understand why we should see this diversity, and how environmental conditions determine what we should see where. For this, we need an evolutionary perspective.

The Ontogeny and Evolution of Ecosystems

185

Evolution
Self-organized critkality is about ontogeny—that is, about the development of individual systems. Though it deals with competition, its
evolutionary component is weak at best. Ecosystems in the critical
state are characterized by high turnover and heterogeneity; they provide the variability that can foster adaptation to changing environmental conditions and, indeed, endogenously generate much of that
environmental change through cascades of collapse and rebirth.
Such features thus feed on themselves, maintaining some of the
gross properties of the system but exhibiting high turnover in
species. Whether one should view such systems as resilient is hence a
matter of perspective, determined to a large extent by how stable
biogeochemical cycling and other system processes are in the face of
perturbation.
No species can exist alone; hence, evolutionary forces must operate
to increase certain linkages. Herbivores and predators must develop
the capabilities to find and handle certain foods at the expense of others; this is called specialization. The other side of the coin is that complete specialization makes an exploiter highly susceptible to fluctuations in the availability of its resource or to the evolution of defensive
mechanisms—tough skins, thorns, or poisons, for example—that
thwart the consumer. Thus, despite the obvious advantages of specialization, there also are evolutionary pressures on species to spread the
risk, effectively diversifying their portfolios. This is called generalization. Specialization and generalization define the extremes of a spectrum. Indeed, much of evolutionary theory is about the resolution of
the trade-offs between these two powerful influences.
The push and pull that defines the degree of specialization of herbivores and predators, as well as of pollinators and parasites, is also
manifest in other types of interactions—for example, in the evolution
of the interdependence that comes with coalitions and mutualisms.
The end result is the evolution of modularity, in which species interact strongly with a limited number of other species and more weakly
with the rest of the ecological community. My conjecture, thus, is
that evolutionary forces operating at the level of individual organisms
lead to modular and hierarchical organization and move ecosystems
away from self-organized critkality. I would further conjecture that
evidence of self-organized criticality is still to be found at intermedi-

186

FRAGILE DOMINION

ate spatial scales for many systems, but we are far from a general theory as to when that should be so.
It is impossible to understand the mechanisms that have led to the
patterns we see in nature without understanding how and where evolution has operated to produce those patterns, or indeed whether it
has had any influence. Similar patterns may arise in different systems
for quite different reasons, and consideration of pattern alone tells us
little about process. The polygonal designs found on the coats of giraffes, for example, resemble structures seen on the frozen tundra or
in thin layers of luid heated from below. Only in the first case, however, has evolution played a role, guiding chemical processes in development so that the signature coat marking always appears, perhaps
the result of sexual selection to enhance attractiveness to mates. The
tundra polygons arise from a fundamentally different process and rely
on just the right environmental conditions; the development of polygons on animal coats is carefully regulated and buffered against environmental fluctuations.
Analogous comments can be made about the superficially similar
branching systems of river basins, the bronchial architecture of our
lungs, and the distinct geometries of tree species. The sprawling arborescence of a river basin has not arisen as the result of natural selection and thus has a character that clearly distinguishes it from the
other examples. The structures of bronchial branching trees—which
have evolved to improve the ability of the organism to exchange and
redistribute gases—are quite different from those of trees, which furthermore show much variation among themselves. Trees have
evolved structures not only to maximize their ability to capture light
but also to shade out competitors. Most forcefully, this illustrates that
the properties of ecological communities emerge from the selfish evolution of potential antagonists rather than from a cooperative process
among members of a monopolistic trust. What is good for the ecosystem is neither well defined nor relevant evolutionarily.

Bottoms Up
The primary unit of selection is the individual. What constitutes an
individual, of course, is a bit complicated. For some, it is the gene, for
others the whole organism, A few billion years ago, the only individu-

The Ontogeny and Evolution of Ecosystems

187

als were single cells. Because there are some advantages to becoming
larger than a single cell, a great evolutionary advance occurred when
some dividing cells stuck together, producing the first multkelled organisms. Other multicellular organisms formed simply by aggregation
of similar types of cells that did not corne from the same parent; the
cellular slime molds provide a prototypical example.21 Muiticellularity
changed the nature of the game, allowing not only increase in size
but also differentiation in function. The various cells in our body,
though initially identical, become differentiated and specialized—for
example, into heart, lungs, or skin—during the developmental
process. Because all of the cells in our body have the same genetic
heritage, it is natural to think of humans (or chimpanzees or roses) as
individual genetic units; nonetheless, there is competition among the
fragments of DNA that make up each organism, and hence there is
evolution below the level of the organism.
Even at the lowest levels of biological organization, however, there
are some hints that the definition of an individual is not so simple. As
discussed earlier, much of the genetic information that determines
the fate of a single bacterium is carried on bits of DNA called plasmids, which can be exchanged freely from bacterium to bacteriumeven from one species to another. Recall that such important properties as antibiotic resistance are typically carried on plasmids rather
than on DNA found on the bacteria's own chromosomes. Thus, a
bacterial cell without a critical plasmid is a very different organism.
What is the individual here? Is it the bacterial host, in which the plasmid is a guest? Or do host and plasmid together form an individual?
There is no single correct answer; it is all a matter of perspective and
convention. Similar problems concern tight mutualistic associations
of species, such as the lichens formed by partnerships between algae
and fungi. Is the lichen an organism, or is it best viewed as a coalition? Again, there is no single correct answer.
The complications introduced in the last paragraph might seem to
arise because they involve associations among different genetic
types—after all, the plasmid's genes are fundamentally different from
the genes found on bacterial chromosomes. However, all individuals,
including especially humans, are coalitions of large numbers of distinct genes that are united in common purpose—because they are
transmitted as a single unit during reproduction—but nonetheless in

188

FRAGILE DOMINION

competition. Indeed, because plasmids are so easily exchanged between individuals, it is easier to think of them as independent units
than it is to view our own genetic material as such; this is a distinction, however, of degree rather than of kind.
The cellular slime molds introduce a different sort of problem,
since they arise by aggregation of genetically dissimilar units. The
slime mold is composed of social amoebae, which come together to
form coalitions called slugs; these move through the environment,
gaining adherents to the cause. Eventually, the slugs stand on end,
forming fruiting bodies. Only a few cells reproduce, producing spores
that seed the next generation. The other members of the slug—stalk
cells—have sacrificed their own fitness to the greater good. Why? This
represents one of the most fascinating puzzles in evolutionary biology, but the answer can only be that the members of a slug—because
of the process by which it forms—are closely related genetically.
Cellular slime molds may represent one of the simplest examples of
apparent altruism, if not the simplest, but we surely know others. The
beehive is perhaps the most familiar, a partnership among genetically
similar but distinct genotypes. It is not so different from the slime
mold in that all females but the queen forgo reproduction for the
good of the hive. Like a multicellular organism formed by aggregation, the hive has an economy that thrives by the differentiation of
functions. Termite nests exhibit similar properties, bringing distinct
individuals together to form a functioning society. Is the beehive or
termite's nest a single organism? However we resolve this problem in
semantics, what matters is that the hive represents a coherent evolutionary unit above the level of the individual.
As we move up the ladder of complexity, not only the definitions
but also our understanding of the processes become more problematical. Ant societies are highly differentiated collectives of closely related organisms. As units, they have many of the features of single organisms because they maintain their integrity over time, but they still
represent associations of individuals in evolutionary competition. Human societies share some of the same features: they represent consortia of individuals who rely on one another. As such, there is differentiation of function—some of us are carpenters, some teachers, some
doctors—and consequent interdependence. But the members of a
human society are not as closely related as the members of a beehive

The Ontogeny and Evolution of Ecosystems

189

or an ant colony, and membership in a human society hence tends to
be more ephemeral. The human society does not have the continual
integrity to function as an evolutionary unit, though the organization
of people into societies clearly has deeply inluenced the evolution of
human culture.22
I prefer to view evolution from the bottom up, starting from the
individual cell. This is an unabashedly reductionistic perspective, but
it mirrors what has happened over evolutionary time. Single cells,
through a variety of processes, became organized into multicellular
organisms, allowing advantages of size and differentiation of function. Multicellularity arose many times independently, and in a variety
of different ways. This suggests that it must be a pretty good idea. In
turn, multicellular organisms, like bees, have become organized into
superorganisms, like hives, that represent natural evolutionary units.
In diploid organisms such as humans, coalitions also form. These
tend to be more transient and hence not proper evolutionary units,
though they are profoundly important in influencing the evolutionary process. The tighter the genetic rektedness, the stronger the evolutionary force. Hence, families develop strong bonds, and many of
our most fundamental behavioral tendencies can be traced to the
preservation and protection of the family unit. Religious groups and
nations obviously represent somewhat looser assemblages but still involve collections of individuals who are more closely related to each
other than they are to humanity at large. In this lies the explanation
for many attitudes and practices, including racism and xenophobia,
that superficially seem to benefit the group at the expense of others.
Rektedness is fundamental, because altruistic behavior toward relatives enhances the propagation of shared genes. Benefiting a relative
benefits oneself, or at least benefits one's genes. But genetic relatedness is not the only way to gain such payback. Coalitions are perhaps
most tightly held together when they involve family members, but
nonrelated individuals also can form stable, long-term partnerships.
These may be held together by rapid reinforcement through reciprocal altruism or through the development of societies with standards
of conduct and accepted systems for penalizing those who violate the
rules of behavior. Such systems of governance have coevolved with
genetically based features but surely reflect a form of evolution above
the level of the individual.23 Their evolutionary resilience takes the

190

FRAGILE DOMINION

form of a resistance to change that freezes the bad in with the good,
retaining especially forms of discrimination and intolerance that have
evolved because they restrain deviation from the norm and keep in
check those who would wander. They also, however, maintain cultural practices that enable societies to function effectively.
Such evolutionary trends have become so ingrained that they control behavior even when the direct reward and punishment loops are
removed. Herbert Simon argues that this explains what would otherwise be a puzzle: why workers in big companies work harder than
would seem to be justified by the direct costs and benefits involved.24
The key element in the evolution of traits such as altruism, or more
generally selfless behavior for the greater good, is a tight feedback
loop that rewards such behavior. As the last example shows, the feedback loop does not always have to exist, but it must have been a presence at least during the initial evolution, when it became established
and frozen in. Such feedback can come through relatedness, reciprocal altruism, binding agreements—or simply through spatial or temporal localization. As discussed earlier, cooperative behavior can
evolve much more easily if individuals interact primarily with near
neighbors. In these cases, explicit or implicit memory is present, feedback loops are tightened, and cooperation is rewarded. Unfortunately, the same can be said about spiteful behavior, which also
evolves much more easily when individuals interact only with near
neighbors, as in the case of allelopathy discussed earlier. The reason is
the same: if interactions are local, the reward structure is direct.
Given that the localization of interactions speeds evolution, it is
not surprising that selection also influences the degree of localization.
If individuals can gain an advantage from cooperation, but only with
near neighbors, those individuals who interact only with their nearest
neighbors and cooperate with them will gain a selective advantage.
Evolution thus favors the development of strong family groups as
well as of hierarchically organized societies—the small worlds of
Watts and Strogatz discussed in the last chapter.
Of course, there are some opposing trends: very tight interactions
increase competition and may otherwise disfavor the weaker individuals in asymmetric associations. What we should expect to observe in
nature is therefore a balancing of these influences and intermediate
degrees of clustering and association; this is, indeed, what we see, at a
variety of levels. Wildebeest in herds, or fish in schools, are attracted

The Ontogeny and Evolution of Ecosystems

l?l

to other individuals from a distance, but they are repelled at close
quarters, keeping some minimal distance from others. Similarly,
members of human groups bond together for communal activities
but retain the need for some privacy and personal space.
The advantages of clustering are that individuals join together to
form collectives for mutual benefit. An individual collective, like a
multicellular organism, achieves certain advantages of size—protection against natural enemies, access to mates, ease of finding resources, and the ability to benefit from differentiation of function
among the members of the group. More developed societies have
fewer jacks-of-all-trades and more specialists. They can afford, support, and profit from a wealth of specialized professions—performers,
insurance salesmen, investment brokers, and psychiatrists—that could
not be sustained in less differentiated societies. No visible hand specifies exactly how many types there will be, and how many of each type,
but the invisible hand of the marketplace encourages diversification
and determines community structure.
Similarly, natural communities develop patterns of differentiation
and specialization that reflect their ecological and evolutionary stability. In temperate climes, environmental variability is a constant challenge, and evolution has favored plasticity and other devices that allow survival under a variety of conditions; this suggests stronger
selection for generalists (jacks-of-all-trades) than in the more constant
and stable tropics. Tropical forests, for example, tend to have a higher
diversity of types, specialists that can exist only under a more restricted set of conditions. No visible hand specifies exactly how many
types there will be, and how many of each type, but the invisible hand
of the ecological marketplace encourages diversification and determines community structure.

Coda
The structure and functioning of ecological communities, and of the
entire biosphere, reflect the complex interplay between developmental (ontogenetic) and evolutionary processes occurring at a wide spectrum of scales. A perspective drawn from one scale alone is bound to
mislead; to understand and explain observed trends, we must be able
to integrate the effects of a rich panoply of influences.

192

FRAGILE DOMINION

Many large, self-organizing systems naturally attain a state of selfsustaining criticality in which continual collapses and innovation
reach a dynamic balance; the archetypal model is the sandpile, unceasingly refreshed with new grains of sand dripped from above. The theorist Per Bak and others, inspired by the simplicity of the sandpile
model and the paucity of assumptions that underlie it, view selforganized criticality as necessarily a very general phenomenon. In
particular, they argue that ecosystems should organize themselves
into critical states, and that such forces underlie observed patterns of
extinction and punctuated equilibrium.
There is undoubtedly much truth in this view, but it is too simple.
In particular, it ignores the role of selection at the diversity of levels
on which it occurs. Self-organized criticality implies an uncertain environment for all species; what resiliency occurs is manifest only in
broad statistical features, such as the mean numbers of species to be
found in an ecosystem, or the rates of extinction. Whether this is
good for the ecosystem—an essentially meaningless concept—it is
bad news for individual genotypes, which would Ind themselves in a
world uncertain beyond bound. Organisms are constantly challenged
by environmental uncertainty but have evolved a remarkable diversity
of mechanisms to reduce it, or at least to minimize its consequences.
These include behavioral and physiological plasticity; averaging
mechanisms such as dispersal, dormancy, and iteroparity (multiple reproduction over a lifetime); and a variety of schemes for gaining information about the environment and learning to utilize it. On somewhat longer time scales, evolution has operated on the rules of the
game themselves, determining mutation rates and endorsing sex and
recombination as ways to maintain genetic flexibility in the face of a
changing environment. The remarkable ability of some viruses and
bacteria to change rapidly and elude the immune system or medical
practice is a particularly frustrating reminder; evolution clearly favors
groups of pathogens that remain moving targets for antagonists.
Thus, environmental fluctuation—at least at a broad range of scales—
rather than being just a force for extinction, has been a force for adaptation and diversification.
Evolutionary pressures to reduce the consequences of uncertainty
do not stop at the level of the single species. Mutualisms and other
tight linkages among small numbers of species evolve to provide the

The Ontogeny und Evolution of Ecosystems

193

participants buffering against environmental vagaries. Ecosystems
thus become assembled not into sandpiles but into modularly organized webs of interaction in which clusters of interacting species to
some extent insulate themselves from the collapses of other clusters.
Individual clusters, since they interact little with one another, naturally exhibit some features of convergent evolution, finding ways- to
capture the sun's energy, transform it, and return it eventually to the
environment through a chain of trophic exchanges. Thus, functional
redundancy arises naturally. These features reduce the potential for
catastrophic avalanches of extinction, to some extent restricting such
cascades to the individual clusters and providing the substitute species
to replace those displaced. Thus, a natural form of resiliency emerges
from the evolution of the system's members, not from selection operating at the level of the whole system. The same trends are evident in
any free-market economy, as Adam Smith argued.
The preceding paragraphs lay out two powerful and contrasting
theories for the evolution and organization of ecosystems. In one,
self-organized criticality, systems assemble themselves into an attracting state that is robust to external influence in its most superficial features but highly inconstant in terms of its membership. According to
the other theory, the evolutionary view, variation and selection operating at levels below that of the ecosystem lead to modularity, heterogeneity, and diversity, perforce providing a system resiliency that
emerges from the buffering of individual species and groups of
species to change. Neither view is entirely correct; neither is entirely
wrong. The exciting challenge in the study of complex adaptive systems in general, and ecosystems in particular, is to determine how
these forces interact across a range of scales of space and time.

This page intentionally left blank

9

WHERE DO WE GO
FROM HERE?
Complexity ond the Commons

Over hundreds of millions of years of change, evolution has infused
complexity and diversity into the design of organisms and the structure of the web of life. As complexity emerged, so, too, did the multiplicity of levels at which evolution could act, thereby creating and
shaping individual behaviors, ecological communities, and human societies. Ecosystems have evolved some degree of resiliency in the face
of environmental change, but what resiliency exists has emerged from
selection acting on the components of the system, not from forces
acting at the level of the entire ecosystem. There are no guarantees,
and the potential for disaster is real, as exemplified by the desertification of previously productive areas, global pandemics of disease, and
the collapse of marine fisheries.
Evolution operates most forcefully when feedback loops are tight.
This occurs most naturally when individuals interact primarily with a
small subset of the universe, realizing on realistic time scales the costs
and benefits of their actions. In this way, coalitions and mutualisms
form, building modularity that confers some resiliency to ecological
systems. Evolution also builds diversity, reinforcing mutalism, recombination, and processes at higher levels of organization that allow ge~
nomic lines of descent to adapt to an ever-changing environment.
Modularity itself helps maintain heterogeneity by building barriers to

in

196

FRAGILE DOMINION

invasion, thereby sustaining local assemblages and mutualism. There
are, in the nature and history of the evolutionary process, deep
lessons for how we must manage our natural resources—maintaining
diversity and modularity and recognizing that we are part of a complex adaptive system called the biosphere. We each operate daily in
ways that are most strongly influenced by our own perceived benefits.
We are more likely to keep our houses free of our trash than our communities, more likely to maintain our community's environment than
our nation's, more likely to show concern for our nation's environment than the globe's. We are also more likely to worry about what
things look like now than what they will look like in ten years, much
less one hundred years, and the future beyond that is so distant as to
be hardly a factor in influencing our behavior. In economic parlance,
we heavily discount the future. Thus, in both space and time, the immediate takes precedence over the distant. We live in a global commons but exhibit patterns of behavior that reflect, in Garrett Hardin's
term, the Tragedy of the Commons.1 Recycling programs work to
some extent because they make us feel good about ourselves, and to
some extent because they are associated with rewards and penalties.
Few individuals act in the way they do because they are convinced
that their individual behaviors make much difference; they usually
don't. But collective actions may make a great deal of difference. People vote in elections; if no one did, democracies would be in a great
deal of trouble in choosing leaders. So it is possible, at least in theory,
to convince people that individual actions are worth taking in support
of communal governance.
The implications of this are that it is relatively easy to get neighborhood associations together to worry about zoning and shopping
malls and the decay of the local environment, and that it is possible to
convince people of the importance of having laws that restrict local
pollution. As problems become broader in scale, however, the feedback loops become looser, the motivation becomes less, and the challenges for environmental action become greater. Achieving sustainability requires us to preserve the same options for future generations
that are available to us now, but it is human nature to discount the
importance of the future in relation to our needs and pleasures today.
Similarly, environmental protection has been somewhat successful in
dealing with local and regional pollution, but much less so when the

Where Do We Go from Here?

197

threats are more global and hence the rewards for restraint are spread
out over many people. The payback to any individual or corporation
or nation lessens when the scale broadens. Hence, the incentives for
cooperation are reduced, and the temptations to cheat on any agreement are increased.
Evidence of this phenomenon is to be found in the relationship of
environmental quality to the wealth of nations. Gene Grossman and
Alan Krueger, economists at Princeton, have shown that if one compares nations according to their per capita incomes, a rather complicated relationship emerges for many measures of environmental quality; with increasing income, there is more environmental degradation
up to a point, after which environmental quality improves as income
increases.2 This relationship applies to a variety of measures, including
sanitation, water quality, suspended particulates, carbon monoxide,
sulfur dioxide, and nitrous oxides, and it has a variety of explanations.3 The increasing degradation that one sees with increasing income at low income levels is undoubtedly associated simply with increased industrialization, but the environmental improvement with
higher income levels is due to more subtle factors. Wealthier nations
may indeed be in a better position to turn their attention to environmental quality. That may lead to such measures as developing less
polluting alternatives to conventional practice, but it may also lead to
the export of pollution, for example, by establishing factories in other
nations or simply by purchasing goods that have been produced elsewhere. It is easy for us to be concerned about pollution from industrial sources if the pollution occurs in our own backyards; it is more
difficult if we do not have to deal personally with the consequences of
the pollution we support.
In the days since Rachel Carson alerted us to the problems of a decaying environment, we have come a long way in dealing with its
degradation,4 Laws have been enacted, and occasionally enforced, to
deal with the most obvipus forms of deterioration, especially air and
water pollution in our local environments. These are situations where
the signal is very clear, and where cause and effect are often easily
linked. In such cases, we can detect the problem early, diagnose the
solution, and introduce legislation to get straight to the source. That
leaves a class of problems, however, that are much more refractory.
Global climate change and the loss of biodiversity, for example, repre-

191

FRAGILE DOMINION

sent threats of a magnitude as great as any that have attracted public
attention, but their effects take much longer to detect, and the causes
are multiple and much less easily held culpable. It takes time to recognize the signal ia the midst of noise, and the risk exists that irreversible changes will occur before actions can be taken. In the case of
local pollution or neighborhood development, the homeostatic
mechanisms are more effective: evidence of decay is quickly recognized and spurs actions that may correct the situation.
This is the Tragedy of the Commons. Environmental groups urge
us to "think globally, and act locally," but until people also think locally, their motivation to act responsibly is weak. Making the payoffs
for behavior in the common good nearer and clearer increases the
chances of success. Sound and responsible environmental management demands equitable and sustainable stewardship of common resources. It requires recognizing that the biosphere is a highly complex adaptive system and learning how to harmonize human activities
with the rest of that system. Through this program of action, we can
harness the forces of evolution and self-organization for the common
good. To do otherwise would be both to miss an opportunity and to
run counter to natural forces of irresistible power.5

The Eight Commandments of
Environmental Management
Given the biblical references earlier, I planned to end this treatise
with ten commandments of environmental management. At the end
of the day, however, I find that things are simpler than I thought. I
did not need ten; the eight that follow summarize the essential management lessons emerging from our examination of the development
and evolution of the biosphere. Even these overlap and intergrade
with one another, but they provide a framework for sound practice.
1. Reduce uncertainty. This commandment may perhaps seem so
obvious that it barely deserves mention. Yet our shocking ignorance
of many of the most fundamental features of the world around us is
the result in large part of an inadequate global commitment to acquiring the essential knowledge. Strangely, we seem willing to spend
more money to search for life on other planets than to study diversity
on our own. Not only are the vast majority of species still unknown
scientifically, but we also do not have a very good fix on how many

Where Do We Go from Here?

1W

species there are. Knowledgeable estimates range from a few million
to as many as 100 million,6 with the general consensus between 10
and 20 million.7 New species are being discovered all the time, from
the tropical rain forests to the hydrothermal depths of the oceans, but
species also are disappearing far faster than they can be identified.
Furthermore, knowing what is present is only a first step in understanding how ecosystems function and in elucidating the importance
of biological diversity to that functioning.
There is more than one way to reduce uncertainty. Monitoring and
scientific investigations, of course, provide the core. Information so
garnered informs policy debates, especially when it is shared with the
public and its representatives. Another strategy, however, is to spread
risks by broadening the scales at which we rely on the ecosystem for
services. We have seen how evolution fosters the development of a diversity of mechanisms—including, for example, dispersal and dormancy, perenniality and iteroparity, plasticity and omnivory—by
which individual genotypes may average over a range of environmental conditions. We also know that investment advisers urge their
clients to diversify their stock portfolios; indeed, those who have the
least confidence in their ability to predict or the least tolerance for
variation should diversify the most. So, too, must the world's people
reduce the effects of uncertainty by minimizing reliance on particular
sources of energy or particular stocks of fish. The ability to do so is
constrained by economic substitutability and fungibility—the potential, for example, to encourage consumers to shift from scarce natural
resources to plentiful ones. There is, nonetheless, considerable scope
for diversification, which is an imperative for survival.
The formation of family groups,'communities, and societies is another device for protecting ourselves against environmental vagaries;
such groupings increase the flow of information and provide insurance against individual misfortunes. Trade has the potential to extend
those benefits within and among regions, from the cattle markets of
India8 to the global community of nations.9 Trade, for example, allows the inter-regional averaging of years of famine and plenty, transferring excess production in some areas to others where it is more
needed.
2, Expect surprise. I borrow here a page from the book of Crawford "Buzz" Rolling, the University of Florida scientist who has done
more than any other ecologist to help develop the science of adaptive

200

FRAGILE DOMINION

management.10 Adaptive management is maintaining flexibility in
management structures and adjusting rules and regimes on the basis
of monitoring and other sources of new data. It puts a premium, of
course, on information, not just about the current status of a system
but also about the likely consequences of alternative strategies for
management or exploitation of a resource. Animals face such problems regularly, for example, in deciding the value of continuing to
forage in a particular habitat. When a good habitat is found, there obviously is merit in sticking with it. Fidelity to a productive site provides a reliable source of nourishment; it also provides excellent information about local quality. The lip side of the coin, however, is that
staying for too long in one place, or with one strategy, reduces knowledge about what is going on elsewhere. This is a serious problem:
since competitive advantage translates into evolutionary success,
there is a continual need for organisms to acquire information about
the world beyond. Hence, the strategy of staying put can be improved by at least occasional exploratory forays to learn about conditions in other places. Fishermen, who must decide when to explore
new fishing grounds, are prototypical examples of animals that face
this trade-off, but we each confront similar issues in all aspects of our
daily lives. In the case of environmental management, this necessity
argues for adaptive probing—that is, for some continual exploration
of alternative management strategies, even when current strategies
seem to be working adequately.
Surprise is nothing more than the manifestation of the ineluctable
core of uncertainty that Ralph Gomory has identified as key to distinguishing the knowable from the unknowable,11 There is much that we
know, and much that we do not know. The first commandment of
environmental management argues that we should transfer as much
as we can from the latter category to the former; the second commandment requires that we recognize that there are limits to knowledge and predictability, and that management must be appropriate to
the essential element of uncertainty. Sometimes that may mean building flexible response systems so that the effects of unpredictable
changes are reduced in their impact; other times it may mean finding
mechanisms to build in resiliency to reduce the likelihood of qualitative shifts in services. Ultimately, of course, there may be unpredictable changes of such magnitude that no amount of preparation

Where Do We Go from Here?

201

can help a great deal. Coupled models of the ocean and atmosphere,
for example, suggest that the climate system could flip dramatically, in
a period of a few years or less, between a relatively warm climate and a
glacial one.12 Wallace Broecker and his colleagues suggested in 1985
that such a flip could account for the spectacularly rapid transition
from the warmer Allerod period to the glacial Younger Dryas 11,000
years ago.13 The potential for such dramatic shifts argues above all for
minimizing human activities that might engender them, as well as for
taking whatever limited measures may be feasible to buffer humanity
against the potentially catastrophic consequences.
Adaptive management is easier said than done. Fisheries have utilized such schemes for decades—setting quotas based on present information and revising them on the basis of new facts. But it is not always the case, even in fisheries, that the needed information is
acquired rapidly enough to be useful. Indeed, the delays inherent in
implementing new strategies based on old information can potentially
destabilize a regulatory scheme. In the case of global change and biodiversity loss, this problem is exaggerated, because the time scale on
which information is accumulating about the loss of ecosystem services is longer than the scale needed to implement changes. In situations such as this, there is therefore a strong argument for the invocation of precautionary principles where possible, even though this may
involve economic costs that engender vigorous opposition.14 An example might be the establishment of refuge areas, where fishing or
hunting is not allowed. More generally, it means erring on the side of
underexploitation of resources.
3. Maintain heterogeneity. Natural selection acts on the variability in a population; without heterogeneity, there is nothing for it to
do. The resiliency of any complex adaptive system is embodied in its
diversity and in the capacity for adaptive change among system components. Multiple crops and multiple varieties in agriculture, for example, have been introduced as devices to guard against massive failures and disease outbreaks, which are far more likely to occur in
homogeneous environments.
The capability of any ecological system to respond to new environmental challenges is to be found in the maintenance of biological diversity, in all its forms. As we lose species, we lose the diversity and resiliency of ecosystems. As we lose tropical rain forests, wetlands, and

202

FRAGILE DOMINION

other habitats, we lose not just species but the diversity of ecosystem
types that sustains the functioning of the biosphere.
Natural ecosystems are dynamic arenas in which variability and
change at local scales maintain diversity at broader ones. The vast majority of plant species are locally ephemeral and rely for their survival
on the transient windows of opportunity provided by frequent and
stochastic local disturbances, such as those caused by fire, weather,
waves, and windthrows. Thus, management efforts to reduce the effects of such influences weaken the capacity of the system to respond.
If there is balance in nature, it is to be found only at the broadest
scales of space, time, and organizational complexity.
4. Sustain modularity. The parable of the two watchmakers illustrates a point that holds deep lessons for management, whether of
corporations or of the biosphere; in modular structures, there is
buffering against cascades of disaster. Per Bak argues that complex
systems naturally achieve self-organized criticality.15 As we saw in the
last chapter, however, complex adaptive systems witness evolutionary
forces toward modularization and compartmentalization that buffer
systems against such cascades. Still, increasing trends toward globalization make the world a smaller place, and weaken modularization.16
Especially dramatic effects may be seen in the interconnectedness of
international financial markets and in the emergence and reemergence of global pandemics of disease. Diseases such as AIDS, for example, may well have been contained within small, insulated populations a few decades ago; today few populations remain isolated, and
the interconnectedness of peoples facilitates rapid spread. Modularity
has broken down, compromising and threatening the resiliency of
humanity.
5. Preserve redundancy. The maintenance of heterogeneity and
modularity, of course, helps maintain redundancy of function. Redundancy and heterogeneity are hand and glove; much redundancy is
reflected, for example, in the heterogeneity within functional groups
of species performing similar ecological roles. Redundancy, however,
can also exist in the absence of heterogeneity: it provides the Ehrfichs'
extra rivets, those system components whose value becomes clear
only when other parts are lost. Like the rivets, it is their identity of
function that characterizes species redundancy, not the individuality
of the actors. Redundancy is the immediate source of replacement of

Where Do We Go from Here ?

203

lost functions; heterogeneity provides the material for adaptive responses over longer time scales. Furthermore, the heterogeneity
within a functional group, as discussed earlier, reduces the functional
susceptibility to specific threats. The essential element to understanding the importance of redundancy is to elucidate the functional substitutability of one species for another, the ecological complement to
economic substitutability. Current research on the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem function is rapidly illuminating this
central issue, but we have much to learn,
6. Tighten feedback loops. One of the central lessons emerging
from our examination of the evolution of interactions between organisms is that tight reward and punishment loops are essential for any
adaptive change. Unfortunately, those feedback loops are weak or absent in regard to the utilization of common resources, as well as for
problems of global extent. Where many individuals exploit the same
resource, or contribute to the same problem, they may not see their
own individual actions as relevant; more important, given that evolution shapes organisms to operate selfishly, or at best in the selfinterest of their genes, the benefits to individuals in restraining their
own consumption or exploitation patterns are faint in the case of
common resources.
To encourage behavior in the common good, we must tighten cost
and benefit feedback loops. Economists urge reliance on the market
to solve problems, but the market can work properly only when pricing reflects the true value of a good, including the social costs. Fish
populations belong to the world at large; there is thus little motivation for an individual fisherman to limit catch. An uncaught fish is a
lost opportunity. The mobile nature offish populations makes ownership a difficult concept, but it is worth comparing the situation to the
preservation of fugacious species in Africa, where the transfer of certain property rights in charismatic endangered species to local human
populations has fostered conservation.17 Privatization and the development of ecotourism have given a value to these animals that tightens feedback loops and provides people with a motive for preservation.18 This does not mean that privatization is without its risks.
Assigning property rights to some individuals may thereby deny them
to others, in extreme cases creating destitutes19 as well as fomenting
rebellion.20 Moreover, privatization does not guarantee conservation

204

FRAGILE DOMINION

if economic discount rates are such that it pays to overexploit now
rather than to preserve for the future.21 On balance, however, the potential benefits are great if the system is devised wisely and fairly.
Graciela Chichilnisky and Geoffrey Heal, two economists at Columbia University, have powerfully demonstrated through economic
arguments how privatization can help the markets to "get the price
right" and thereby encourage conservation measures,22 Heal highlights the work of the Conservation Corporation, based in South
Africa, which has returned huge areas in Africa to their original ecological status in order to increase their value for ecotourism and hunting.23 Land that was worth less than $100 per hectare when used for
agriculture can increase in value by as much as an order of magnitude,
providing strong incentive for protection. Chichilnisky and Heal, in
fundamentally important work, have also demonstrated how New
York City realized billions of dollars in economic benefits by sustaining the Catskills watershed as a water filtration system, rather than destroying it completely and building a new filtration plant.24
Tightening feedback loops leads to empowerment, giving people
incentives for environmentally beneficial behavior. The return to local
control of the Mudialy wetlands near Calcutta not only improved
fishery productivity but also provided a harvest of wood.25 Similarly,
overpopulation is a problem primarily in areas where women have no
power and few options but to stay home and produce children to
provide the "extra hands" needed to help with the work of the family,
With education and liberalization of social systems comes empowerment; in more developed nations, women are forces in the workplace,
and population growth is a disappearing problem.
Tightening feedback loops also means getting the prices right. To
find ways to charge properly for the exploitation of common resources, we must make intelligent use of appropriate taxes on pollution, including, for example, the use of carbon taxes to reduce harmful releases into the environment. Air and water, like fish populations,
are common property resources whose use as receptacles for effluents
is never adequately paid for by those who release materials into them.
Finally, perverse subsidies that harm the environment must be eliminated and replaced by reward schemes that encourage good environmental practices. These include reforestation, which can have dramatic effects on restoring balance to the carbon cycle, as well as

Where Do We Go from Here?

205

exploration and innovation in technologies that conserve energy and
reduce pollution.
7. Build Trust. Global problems require global solutions, but
much can be learned from successful strategies for dealing with local
and regional problems. As we have seen throughout this book, evolution works most effectively when individuals interact most with their
near neighbors. Through the experiences gained by repeated interactions, trust can develop, and strategies such as reciprocal altruism may
be favored. This can be extended to regional cooperatives, such as
that involving 15,000 farmers sharing the waters of the Biver Tieria,
near Valencia, Spain. A local tribunal, which has met on Thursday
mornings for centuries to hear complaints about cheating, has kept
this system operational for 550 years.26 The key is that the community is still small enough for trust to be maintained.27 The River Tieria
tribunal occupies a middle ground between complete privatization
and complete centralization.28 At the global level, such trust is missing; through centuries of conflict and competition, the same forces
that build trust within cultures pit one against another.
Yet treaties exist, and nations by and large meet their obligations.29
Trust develops, reinforced by the weight of the community of nations. As we know from many examples throughout history, the control mechanisms are weak and do not effectively restrain renegade nations. Yet they can work, however tenuously.
International agreements have had mixed success in achieving environmental goals. Among the most successful has been the Montreal
Protocol, the accord that is the basis for the removal of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other ozone-depleting substances from the environment.30 The Montreal Protocol has involved nearly every country
in the world and was brilliantly designed to be robust in the face of
occasional cheaters. There is a stable body of trust, increasing the
likelihood that the accord will achieve its central goals. The protocol
is a model example of environmental cooperation; unfortunately, recent efforts to imitate it in the areas of global change and biodiversity
have not enjoyed comparable success. Furthermore, years of international efforts to regulate whaling and other fisheries have also provided a mixed bag: the nations have failed to develop the necessary
trust, and some have been unwilling to suppress their own interests
for the greater good.

206

FRAGILE DOMINION

One can cajole and censure recalcitrant states, but world opinion is
in general an ineffective mechanism to get nations to do what they
don't want to do. Where one nation can influence another's decisions, it is in general because of enforceable or implied compacts,
most generally involving a range of issues. These are, in essence, what
maintains trust. There are other mechanisms, however, until now
poorly exploited. Developing nations see their own resources, such as
rain forests, in a different light than do the more developed countries.
For indigenous peoples, land has value in terms of meeting the immediate needs of an expanding population; for others, it provides insurance against global problems much further down the road. Different
cultures discount the future at different rates, and various theories exist for how they should do so. At the core of resolving conflicting
views, however, must be a balancing of intergenerational equity and
intragenerational equity.31 If we in the developed world have an interest in encouraging developing nations to conserve their vanishing resources toward a sustainable future, then we must not only help them
to meet their immediate needs in other ways but also provide them
with incentives—such as aiding the development of ecotourism, or
the exchange of their debts for nature preservation—to tighten the
reward loop and make conservation practice a benefit for the local
and national decisionraakers.32 More generally, wherever the interests
of different nation-states are involved, we must find ways for all people and nations to realize their own self-interest in the common
good.33
8. Do Unto Others as You Would Have Them Do Unto You.
The great rabbi Hillel, when taunted by a skeptic to expound all of
the principles of Jewish law while he perched on one foot, said,
"Whatever is hateful unto thee, do it not unto thy fellow: this is the
whole Torah; the rest is explanation."34 This, the so-called Golden
Rule, can be found in one form or another in the teachings of most
religions. Its essential good sense provides the foundation on which
societies are built, independent of the role of religion in those societies. Societies can survive only when there is action for the collective
good, whether maintained by reciprocal altruism, binding agreements, systems of law, or international compacts. Building trust and
environmental security is not an easy task, but it provides the only
path to sustaining our fragile dominion over the Earth's resources.

NOTES

Chapter One
1. Primeval light existed on day one and apparently sufficed for some photosynthesis, though the sun did not make its appearance until day four. Joseph
H. Hertz, The Pentateuch and Haftorah$> 2nd ed. (London: Soncino Press,
1963), 2-4.
2. Hertz, The Pentateuch and Ha.ftont.hs, 27,
3. Paul R. EhrMch and Simon A. Levin, "Biodiversity: What It Is and Why
We Need It," in Linda Koebner, Jane E. S. Sokolow, Francesco T. Grifo, and
Sharon Simpson, eds., Scientists on Biodiversity (New York: American Museum
of Natural History, 1998), 20-23; Jennifer Hughes, Gretchen C. DaMy, and
Paul R. Ehrlich, "Population Diversity: Its Extent and Evolution," Science 278
(1997): 689-692.
4. Ian Turner, "Singapore: A Case Study for Tropical Rainforest Fragmentation and Biodiversity Loss," in Takuya Abe, Simon A. Levin, and MasaMko
Higashi, eds., M0diver$ity: An Ecological Perspective (New York: Springer,
1997), 249-258,
5. Gretchen C. Daily, ed., Nature's Services: Societal Dependence on Natural
Ecosystems (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1997).
6. Margery L. Oldfield, The Value of Conserving Genetic Resources (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Parks Service, 1984).
7. Ibid.
8. Sandra Postel and Stephen Carpenter, "Freshwater Ecosystems Services,"
in Daily, Nature's Services, 195-214.
9. L. R. Oldeman, V. van Engelen, and J. Pulles, "The Extent of HumanInduced Soil Degradation, Annex 5," in L. R. Oldeman, R.T.A. Hakkeling,
and Wim G. Sombroek, eds,5 World Map of the Status of Human-Induced Soil
Degradation: An Explanatory Note (Wageningen: International Reference and
207

208

Notes

Information Center, 1990); D. Pimentel, C. Harvey, et al., "Environmental
and Economic Costs of Soil Erosion and Conservation Benefits," Science
267(1995): 1117-1123,
10. Norman Myers, "The World's Forests and Their Ecosystem Services,"
in Daily, Nature's Services, 215-235.
11. Ibid.; W. Magrath and P. Arens, The Costs of Soil Erosion on Java: A
Natural Resource Accounting Approach (Washington, B.C.: World Bank,
1989).
12. Aldo Leopold, Round, River (New York: Ballantyne Books, 1970),
190.
13. Paul R, Ehrlich and Anne H. Ehrlich, Extinction: The Causes and
Consequences of the Disappearance of Species (New York: Random House,
1981), xii-xiii.
14. Murray Gell-Mann, The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the Complex (New York: W. H. Freeman and Co., 1994).
15. Simon A. Levin, "Ecosystems and the Biosphere as Complex Adaptive
Systems," Ecosystems 1 (1995): 431-436.
16. Gell-Mann, The Quark and the Jaguar, 16.
17. John Holland, Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity
(Reading, Mass.: Addison Wesley, 1995).
18. Ibid., 10-12.
19. W. Brian Arthur, Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the
Economy (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1994).

Chapter Two
1. Lawrence B. Slobodkin, "The Strategy of Evolution," American Scientist 52 (1964): 342-357'.
2. Francois Jacob, "Evolution and Tinkering," Science 196 (1977):
1161-1166.
3. James E. Lovelock, and Lynn Margulis, "Atmospheric Homeostasis by
and for the Biosphere: The Gaia Hypothesis," Tettu$26 (1974): 2-9.
4. David Abram, "The Mechanical and the Organic: On the Impact of
Metaphor in Science," in Stephen H, Schneider and Penelope J. Boston,
eds., Scientists on Gaia (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1991), 66-76,
5. James E. Lovelock, "Gaia as Seen Through the Atmosphere," Atmospheric Environment 6 (1972): 579-580.
6. Paul Ehrlich, "Coevolution and Its Applicability to the Gaia Hypothesis," in Schneider and Boston, Scientists on Gaia 19—22.
7. Ibid.
8. Schneider and Boston, Preface to Scientists on Ga-ia, xiii-xv.

Notts

2W

9. Lynn Margulis and Gregory Hinkle, "The Biota and Gaia: 150 Years of
Support for Environmental Science," in Schneider and Boston, Scientists on
Gaia, 11-18.
10. William J. Burroughs, Weather Cycles: Real or Imaginary (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992),
11. Lovelock and Margulis, "Atmospheric Homeostasis by and for the
Biosphere."
12. Ehrlich, "Coevolution and Its Applicability to the Gaia Hypothesis."
13. Richard C. Lewontin, "Adaptation," Enciclopedia Eina»di Turin 1
(1977): 198-214.
14. Paul Davies, The Runaway Universe (New York: Harper & Row,
1978), 185.
15. Robert B. Hargraves, "Precambrian Geologic History," Science 193
(1976): 363-371; J. Graham Cogley and Ann Henderson-Sellers, "The Origin and Earliest State of the Earth's Hydrosphere," Reviews of Geophysics 22
(1984): 131-175.
16. Brian Henderson-Sellers, Ann Henderson-Sellers, S. Mary P, Benbow,
and Kendal McGuffie, "Earth—The Water Planet: A Lucky Coincidence?"
in Schneider and Boston, Scientists on Ga-ia, 80—89.
17. Ehrlich, "Coevolution and Its Applicability to the Gaia Hypothesis";
Timothy M. Lenton, "Gaia and Natural Selection," Nature 394 (1998):
439-447.
18. James E. Lovelock, "Gaia as Seen Through the Atmosphere," in Peter
Westbroek and Elizabeth W. dejong, eds., Biomineralization and Biological
Metal Accumulation (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1983), 15-25; Andrew J. Watson
and James E. Lovelock, "Biological Homeostasis of the Global Environment: The Parable of Daisyworld," TtUus3S% (1983): 284-289.
19. Lenton, "Gaia and Natural Selection."
20. Luigi L. Cavalli-Sforza and Marcus W. Feldman, Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1981).

Chapter Three
1. Stephen Jay Gould, Wonderful Life (New York: Norton, 1989), 45-52.
2. F. Herbert Bormann and G. Eugene Likens, Pattern and Process in a
Forested Ecosystem (New York: Springer, 1979).
3. Stephen R. Carpenter and James F. Kitchell, eds., The Trophic Cascade
in Lakes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993); Robert T, Paine,
Marine Rocky Shores and Commttnity Ecology: An Experimentalist's Perspective (Oldendorf/Luhe, Germany: Ecology Institute, 1994); David Tilman,

210

Notes

Plant Strategies and the Dynamics and Structure of Plant Communities,
Monographs in Population Biology, vol. 26 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1988); David Tilman and John A. Downing, "Biodiversity and
Stability in Grasslands," Nature 367 (1994): 363-365.
4. Per Bak and Kan Chen, "Self-organized Criticality," Scientific American 2641 (1995): 46-54.
5. For a power law distribution of earthquake intensity, the frequency of
earthquakes of a given intensity is proportional to a negative power of intensity. Power laws are explored in more detail in later chapters.
6. Stuart Kaufinan, The Origins of Order (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1993). See also note 14, chapter 8.
7. Stuart Kauffinan, At Home in the Universe (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995),
8. Per Bak, How Nature Works (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1996).

Chapter Four
1. Francois Jacob, The Possible and the Actual (New York: Pantheon,
1982).
2. Ray HUborn and Marc Mangel, The Ecological Detective: Confronting
Models with Data (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1997).
3. "Adam Smith" [George J. W. Goodman], The Money Game (New
York: Vintage, 1976), 136.
4. W, Brian Arthur, "Positive Feedbacks in the Economy," Scientific
American (February 1990): 90-92.
5. Paul David, "Clio and the Economics of QWERTY," American Economic-ReviewProceedings75 (1986): 332-337.
6. Stuart Kauffinan and Simon A. Levin, "Towards a General Theory of
Adaptive Walks on Rugged Landscapes," Journal of Theoretical Biology 1281
(1987): 11-45.
7. Jacob, The Possible and the Actual; Francois Jacob, "Evolution and Tinkering," Science 196 (1977): 1161-1166.
8. William M, Wheeler, Ants: Their Structure, Development, and Behavior
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1910).
9. Daniel H. Janzen, "Coevolution of Mutualism Between Ants and Acacias in Central America," Evolution 20 (1966): 249-275.
10. Jared Diamond and Ted J. Case, "Overview: Introductions, Extinctions, Exterminations and Invasions," in Jared Diamond and Ted J, Case,
eds., Community Ecology (New York: Harper & Row, 1986), 65-79.
11.1.A.E. Atkinson, "Effects of Rodents on Islands," in P. J. Moors, ed.,
Conservation of Island Land Birds (Cambridge: International Council for
Bird Preservation, 1985), 35-81.

Notes

211

12. Diamond and Case, "Overview."
13. Jacob, "Evolution and Tinkering,"
14. Lawrence B. Slobodkin, "The Strategy of Evolution," American Scientist 52 (1964): 342-357.
15. Leslie R. Holdridge, "Determination of World Plant Formations from
Simple Climatic Data," Science 105 (1947): 367-368.
16. Stuart L. Pimm, Pood Webs (New York: Chapman & Hall, 1982).
17. Joel E. Cohen, Food Webs and Niche Space, Monographs in Population Biology, vol. 11 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1978).
18. Gary A. Polis, "Complex Trophic Interaction in Deserts: An Empirical Critique of Food-web Theory," American Naturalist 138 (1991):
123-155.
19. Gordon H. Orians and Otto T. Solbrig, Convergent Evolution in
Warm Deserts (Stroudsburg, Perm.: Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, 1977).
20. Andreas F. W. Schimper, Plant Geography upon a Physiological Basis
(Oxford: Oxford University Press/Clarendon Press, 1903).
21. See, for example, Martin Cody, "Structural Niches in Plant Communities,'* in Diamond and Case, Community Ecology, 381-405.

Chapter Five
1. Sherwin Cariquist, Island Life: A Natural History of Islands of the
World (Garden City, N.Y.: Natural History Press, 1965).
2. Robert H. MacArthur and Edward O. Wilson, The Theory of Island
Biqgeqgraphy, Monographs in Population Biology 1, vol. 1 (Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1967).
3. Daniel Simberloff and Edward O. Wilson, "Experimental Zoogeography of Islands: The Colonization of Empty Islands," Ecology 50 (1969):
278-296,
4. Willem M. Doctors van Leeuwen, "Krakatau's New Flora," Proceedings
of the fourth Pacific Science Congress (Batavia), part 2 (1929): 56-61.
5. Colin S. Reynolds, "Successional Development, Energetics, and Diversity in Planktonic Communities," in Takuya Abe, Simon A. Levin, and
Masahiko Higashi, eds., Biodiversity: An Ecological Perspective (New York:
Springer, 1997), 167-202.
6. Martin S. Nowak, Robert M. May, and Roy M. Anderson, "The Evolutionary Dynamics of HIV Quasispecies and the Development of Immunodenciency Disease," AIDS 4 (1990): 1095-1103; Stephen M. WoHnsky et
al., "Adaptive Evolution of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Type 1 During the Natural Course of Infection," Science 272 (1996): 537-542; Simon
A, Levin, Bryan Grenfell, Alan Hastings, and Alan S. Perelson, "Mathemati-

212

Notes

cal and Computational Challenges in Population Biology and Ecosystem
Science," Science 275 (1997): 334-343.
7. Roland H, Lamberson, Baity R. Noon, Curt Voss, and Kevin S. McKelvey, "Reserve Design for Territorial Species: The Effects of Patch Size
and Spacing on the Viability of the Northern Spotted Owl," Conservation
Biology 8 (1994): 185-195; Barry R. Noon and Kevin S. McKelvey, "Management of the Spotted Owl: A Case Study in Conservation Biology," Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 27 (1996): 135-162,
8. Simon A, Levin and Stephen W, Pacala, "Theories of Simplification and
Scaling of Spatially Distributed Processes," in David Tilman and Peter
Kareiva, eds,, Spatial Ecology: The Role ofSpa-ce in Population Dynamics and
Interspecific Interactions (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1997),
271-296; Stephen W, Pacala and Simon A, Levin, "Biologically Generated
Spatial Pattern and the Coexistence of Competing Species," in Tilman and
Kareiva, Spatial Ecology, 204-232; Benjamin M. Bolker, Stephen W, Pacala,
and Simon A. Levin, "Moment Methods for Stochastic Processes in Continuous Space and Time," in Ulf Dieckmann and J.A.J, (Hans) Metz, eds., Proceedings of eLow-Dimensiona.l "Dynamics of Spatial Ecological Systems,s November 14-16,1996, Laxenburg, Austria (in press).
9. The voter model and the contact process are variants on models that
have played important roles in physics, allowing the elucidation of fundamental principles. The Ising model, which actually was first proposed by the physicist Herbert Lenz but bears the name of his student Ernst Ising, was introduced to explain and explore the properties of magnets. When a permanent
magnet is heated, it loses magnetization. The Lenz-Ising model imagines tiny
magnets on a regular lattice, each with a "spin" that is either up or down, A
spin may flip from up to down, or vice versa, according to criteria that depend
(thermodynamically) on the spins of neighbors. From these simple local rules
of interaction, macroscopic or bulk phenomena—such as the loss of a magnet's properties as it is heated—emerge. Lenz-Ising materials are special cases
of "spin-glasses," disordered magnetic materials made up of large numbers of
interacting magnetic dipoles. Models of this sort have found explicit application in a variety of fields beyond physics—for example, the "N-K" models of
Kauffman and Levin as they relate to the theory of coevolution (Stuart Kauffman and Simon A. Levin, "Towards a General Theory of Adaptive Walks on
Rugged Landscapes," Journal of Theoretical Biotyy 1281 [1987]: 11-45).
10. Simon A. Levin, "The Problem of Pattern and Scale in Ecology,"
Ecology-73 (1992): 1943-1967.
11. Gordon H. Orians and Otto T. Solbrig, Convergent Evolution in
Warm Deserts (Stroudsburg, Penn.: Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, 1977).

Notes

213

12. Joel E. Cohen, Food Webs and Niche Space, Monographs in Population Biology, vol. 11 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1978);
Stuart L. Pimm, Food Webs (New York: Chapman & Hall, 1982); Gary A.
Polis, "Complex Trophic Interaction in Deserts: An Empirical Critique of
Food-Web Theory," American Naturalist 138 (1991): 123-155.
13. Pimm, FooA Web^ Peter Yodzis, "The Structure of Assembled Communmcs," Journal of Theoretical Biology 92 (1981): 103-117; George Sugihara, Niche Hierarchy; Structure, Organization, and Assembly in Natural
Communities (Ph.D. diss., Princeton University, 1982); James A. Drake,
Some Theoretical and Empirical Explorations of Structure in Food Webs
(Ph.D. diss., Purdue University, 1985).
14. David Tilman, David Wedin, and Johannes Knops, "Productivity and
Sustainability Influenced by Biodiversity in Grassland Ecosystems," Nature
379 (1996): 718-720; David Tilman, Johannes Knops, David Wedin, Peter
Reich, Mark Ritchie, and Evan Siemann, "The Influence of Functional Diversity and Composition on Ecosystem Processes," Science 277 (1997):
1300-1302.
15. National Research Council (NRC), Ocean Studies Board, Sustaining
Marine Fisheries (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1999).
16. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Review of the State of
World Fishery Resources: Marine Fisheries, Circular 920 FIRM/C920 (Rome:
FAO, 1997); NRC, Sustaining Marine Fisheries; Curl Safina, "The World's
Imperiled Fish Stocks," Scientific American 273 (1995): 46-53.
17. Vito Volterra, "Variazioni e fluttuazioni del numero d'individui in
specie animale conviventi," Memorie della Reale Accademia Nazionale dei
Lincei (set. 6) 2 (1926): 31-113, translated in Royal N. Chapman, Animal
Ecology (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1931); Edward H. Kerner, "A Statistical
Mechanics of Interacting Biological Species," Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 19 (1957): 121-146; Egbert G. Leigh Jr., "On the Relation Between
the Productivity, Biomass, Diversity, and Stability of a Community," Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 53 (1965): 777-783; Egbert G.
Leigh Jr., "The Ecological Role of Volterra's Equations," in Murray Gerstenhaber, cd., Some Mathematical Problems in Biology (Providence: American Mathematical Society 1968), 1-61.
18. Daniel Janzen, personal communication, April 1998.
19. W. Thomas Edmondson, "Sixty years of Lake Washington: a curriculum vitae." Lake and Reserv. Manag, 10 (1994): 75-84.
20. F. Herbert Bormann and G. Eugene Likens, Pattern and Process in a
Forested Ecosystem (New York: Springer, 1979).

214

Notes

21. Henry H, Shugart, A Theory of Forest Dynamics (New York: Springer,
1984); Stephen W, Pacala, Charles D. Canham, and John A. Silander, "Forest Models Defined by Field Measurements: I. The Design of a Northeastern Forest Simulator," Canadian Journal of Forest Research 23 (1993):
1980-1988.
22. Pacala, Canham, and Silander, "Forest Models Defined by Field Measurements"; Benjamin M. Bolker, Stephen W, Pacala, Fakhri A. Bazzaz,
Charles D. Canham, and Simon A. Levin, "Species Diversity and Ecosystem
Response to Carbon Dioxide Fertilization: Conclusions from a Temperate
Forest Model," Global Change Biology 1 (1995): 373-381.
23. Ralph E. Gomory, "The Known, the Unknown, and the Unknowable," Scientific American 272(6) (1995): 120,
24. John Holland, Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity
(Reading, Mass.: Addison Wesley, 1995).
25. Ibid.
26. Simon A. Levin and Robert T. Paine, "Disturbance, Patch Formation,
and Community Structure," Proceedings of the National Academy of Science
71 (1974): 2744-2747; Robert T. Paine and Simon A. Levin, "Intertidal
Landscapes: Disturbance and the Dynamics of Pattern," Ecological MonojrojjfeSl (1981): 145-178.
27. Alexander S. Watt, "Pattern and Process in the Plant Community,"
Journal of Ecology m (1947): 1-22.

Chapter Six
1. See, for example, Jonathan Weiner's wonderful book The Beak of the
Finch: A Story of Evolution in Our Time (New York: Knopf, 1994).
2. William B. Provine, Sewall Wright and Evolutionary Biology (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1986).
3. Sewall Wright, "The Roles of Mutation, Inbreeding, Crossbreeding,
and Selection in Evolution," Proceedings of the Sixth International Congress
of Genetics 1 (1932): 356-366.
4. Francois Jacob, "Evolution and Tinkering," Science 196 (1977):
1161-1166.
5. Stuart Kauffinan and Simon A. Levin, "Towards a General Theory of
Adaptive Walks on Rugged Landscapes," Journal of Theoretical Biology 1281
(1987): 11-45.
6. In this effort, we had a great deal of help from my student Danny
Grunbaum, who did the programming and provided valuable feedback.
7. All of these techniques are directed toward finding the optima—that is,
the largest or smallest values—of some function, hence the term "optimiza-

Notes

215

rion." This i% one of the most important problems in applied mathematics,
because of its wide applicability. Ways to minimize costs or maximize benefits from some process are obviously widespread in applications from business to the military. The optimization process, like the evolutionary process,
involves search on a landscape. A (single-valued) function translates independent variables, such as the amount of a product produced, into a dependent
variable, for example, profit. The independent variables, typically many, are
spread over some space where the search takes place; the dependent variable
assigns a value, essentially a fitness, to each point in that high-dimensional
space. In principle, we may think of the dependent variable as defining a
landscape floating above the space of independent variables. In practice, as
with Wright's metaphor, it is impossible for us to visualize such a landscape
easily if there are more than two independent variables. Many conventional
methods require that one conduct the search by computing slopes on the
landscape in various directions and (in the case of a maximization problem)
moving in the direction of steepest slope. In a high-dimensional space, this
can be computationally very expensive, because there are so many different
directions. In contrast, so-called direct methods are popular because they do
not involve computation of slopes but use other ways of guiding search. Direct methods include Dantzig's simplex method, as well as the closely related
Nelder-Mead method, both of which are built on the use of geometric figures. Stochastic optimization, a very efficient direct approach, mimics evolution. It works by randomly sampling from the neighborhood of a point in
the space of independent variables, moving to another point if, for example,
a better value of the dependent variable is discovered. The modifier "stochastic" refers to the fact that neighbors are sampled randomly.
8. Shu Lin and Brian W. Kernighan, "An Effective Heuristic Algorithm
for the Traveling-Salesman Problem," Operations Research 21 (1973):
498-516.
9. Provine, SewM Wright,
10. In the theory of mathematical optimization, this is sometimes called
simulated annealing, which borrows from concepts in statistical physics.
11. Sewell Wright, "Evolution in Mendelian Populations," Genetics 16
(1931): 97-159.
12. Provine, Sewall Wright, 283-285, 310-311,484.
13. John Maynard Smith, "The Theory of Games and the Evolution of
Animal Conflicts, Journal ofTheoretical Biology 47 (1974): 209-221; John
Maynard Smith, Evolution and the Theory of Games (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1982).
14. H.B.D. Kettlewell, "The Phenomenon of Industrial Melanism in the
Lepidoptera," Annual Review of Entomology 6 (1961): 245-262.

214

Notes

15. William L. Brown and Edward O. Wilson, "Character Displacement,"
Systematic Zoology 5 (1956): 49-64.
16. David Lack, Darwin's Pinches (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1947).
17. B, Rosemary Grant and Peter R. Grant, Evolutionary Dynamics of a,
Natural Population: The Large Cactus Finch of the Galapagos (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989).
18. Dolph Schluter, Trevor D. Price, and Peter R. Grant, "Ecological
Character Displacement in Darwin's Finches," Science 227 (1985):
1056-1059.
19. Joseph H. Connell, "Diversity and the Coevolution of Competitors,
or the Ghost of Competition Past," O»to35 (1980): 131-138.
20. Richard C. Lewontin, "Adaptation," Encidopedia Einaudi Turin 1
(1977): 198-214.
21. Edward O. Wilson, "The Species Equilibrium," in Brookhaven National Laboratory Biology Department, ed., Diversity »n4 Stability in Ecological Systems, vol. 22 (Upton, N.Y.: BNL Biology Department, 1969),
38-47.
22. Robert E. Ricklefs, Ecology (New York: Chiron Press, 1973).
23. Mark Newman, personal communication, 1998.
24. Ann P. Kinzig and John Harte, "Selection of Microorganisms in a
Spatially Heterogeneous Environment, and Implications for Plant Access to
Nitrogen," Journal of Ecology (1998): 841-853.
25. Garrett Hardin, "The Tragedy of the Commons,** Science 162
(1968): 1243-1248.
26. Samuel Butler, Life and Habit (London: Triibner Co., 1878).
27. William D. Hamilton, "The Genetkal Evolution of Social Behavior,"
Journal of Theoretical Biology 7 (1964): 1-52.
28. Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1976).
29. Robert Axelrod, Evolution of Cooperation (New York: Bask Books,
1984).
30. John H. Miller, "The Coevolution of Automata in the Repeated Prisoner's Dilemma,'* Journal of Economic Behavior 29 (1996): 87-112.
31. Martin A. Nowak and Robert M, May, "Evolutionary Games and
Spatial Chaos," Nature 359 (1992): 826-829; Richard T. Durrett and Simon A. Levin, "The Importance of Being Discrete and (Spatial)," Theoretical Population Biottyy 46 (1994): 363-394.
32. Durrett and Levin, "The Importance of Being Discrete and (Spatial)."

Notes

m

33. John Tyler Bonner, Life Cycles (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1993).
34. Ibid., 3.
35. See, for example, Stephen J. Gould and Richard C. Lewontin, "The
Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm; A Critique of the
Adaptationist Programme," Proceedings of the Royal Society of London (ser. B
205) (1979): 581-598.
36. Calaway H. Dodson, Robert L. Dressier, Harold G. Hills, Ralph M.
Adams, and Noras H. Williams, "Biologically Active Compounds in Orchid
Fragrances," Science 164 (1969); 1243-1249.
37. Robert L. Dressier, "Pollination by Euglossine Bees," Evolution 22
(1968): 202-210.
38. Bruce R. Levin and Richard E. Lenski, "Coevolution in Bacteria and
Their Viruses and Plasmids," in Douglas J, Futuyma and Montgomery
SlatMn, eds., Coevolution (Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer Associates, 1983),
99-127.
39. Lin Chao, The Population of CoUeinqgenic Bacteria: A Model for the
Evolution of Allelopathy (Ph.D. diss., University of Massachusetts, 1979);
Lin Chao and Bruce R, Levin, "Structured Habitats and the Evolution of
Antkompetitor Toxins in Bacteria," Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science 78 (1981): 6324-6328.
40. C. H. Mullcr, "The Role of Chemical Inhibition (Allelopathy) in
Vegetational Composition," Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club 93 (1966):
332-351.
41. Paul R. Ehrlich and Peter H. Raven, "Butterflies and Plants: A Study
in Coevoluaon," Evolution 18 (1964): 586-608.
42. David Sloan Wilson, The Natural Selection of Populations and Communities (Menlo Park, Calif.: Benjamin/Cummings, 1980).
43. W. Eichler, "Some Rules in Ectoparasitism," Annals and Magazine of
Natural History 12 (1948): 588-598; Daniel R, Brooks and Charles Mitter,
"Phylogenetics and Coevolution," in Quentin Wheeler and Meredith Blackwell, eds., Fungus/Insect Relationships: Perspectives in Ecology and Evolution
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1983).
44. Douglas J. Futuyma, "Evolutionary Interactions Among Herbivorous
Insects and Plants," in Futuyma and SlatMn, Coevolutim, 207-231.
45. Tibor Jermy, "Insect-Host-Plant Relationship—Coevolution or Sequential Evolution?" Symposia Biolqgica Hungarica 16 (1976): 109-113.
46. Lawrence E. Gilbert, "Butterfly-Plant Coevolution: Has Passiflora
AAenopoda Won the Selectional Race with Heliconine Butterflies?" Science
172 (1971): 585-586.

218

Notes

47. Lawrence B. Slobodkin, The Growth and Regulation of Animal Populations (New York: Holt, Reinhart and Winston, 1961); Vero C. WynneEdwards, Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behavior (Edinburgh:
Oliver and Boyd, 1962); Vero C, Wynne-Edwards, "Intergroup Selection in
the Evolution of Social Systems," Nature 100 (1963): 623-628; Vero C,
Wynne-Edwards, "Population Control in Animals," Scientific American 211
(1964): 68-74.
48. Eric Klopfer, "Evolution of Intermediate Exploitation Bates in Exploiter-Victim Systems" (Ph.D. diss., University of Wisconsin at Madison,
1997).
49. Kinzig and Harte, "Selection of Microorganisms in a Spatially Heterogeneous Environment."
50. Nowak and May, "Evolutionary Games and Spatial Chaos"; Durrett
and Levin, "The Importance of Being Discrete and (Spatial)."
51. Robert H. Whittaker, Communities and Ecosystems, 2nd ed. (New
York: Macmillan, 1970).

Chapter Seven
1. National Research Council, Ocean Studies Board, Sustaining Marine
Fisheries (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1999).
2. Cedar Creek is one of the long-term experimental research sites sponsored by the National Science Foundation as part of an effort to understand
the structure and functioning of diverse ecosystems.
3. David Tilman and John A. Downing, "Biodiversity and Stability in
Grasslands," Nature 367 (1994): 363-365.
4. See, for example, David A. Wardle, Olle Zackrisson, Greger Hdmberg,
and Christiane Gallet, "The Influence of Island Areas on Ecosystem Properties," Science 277 (1997): 1296-1299; David U. Hooper and Peter M. Vitousek, "The Effects of Plant Composition and Diversity on Ecosystem
Processes," Science 277 (1997): 1302-1305; Jill McGrady-Stced, Patricia
M. Harris, and Peter J, Morin, "Biodiversity Regulates Ecosystem Predictability,'5 Nature 390 (1997): 162-165.
5. Shahid Naeem, Lindsey J. Thompson, Sharon P. Lawler, John H. Lawton, and Richard M. Woodfin, "Declining Biodiversity Can Alter the Performance of Ecosystems," Nature 368 (1994): 734-737; Shahid Naeem, Lindsey J. Thompson, Sharon P. Lawler, John H. Lawton, and Richard M.
Woodfin, "Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning: Empirical Evidence
from Experimental Microcosms," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, London B 347(1995): 249-262.
6. Tilman and Downing, "Biodiversity and Stability in Grasslands."

Notes

219

7. Daniel F, Doak, David Bigger, Elaine K. Harding, Michelle A. Marvicr,
Rachel E. O'Malky, and Diane Thomson, "The Statistical Inevitability of
Stability-Diversity Relationships in Community Ecology," American Naturalist 151 (1998): 264-276.
8. J. Leps, J. Osbornova-Kosinova, and Marcel Rejmanek, "Community
Stability, Complexity, and Species Life-History Strategies," Yegetatio 50
(1982): 53-63; C. W. MacGiUivray, }, P. Grime, and the Integrated Screening Programme Team, "Testing Predictions of the Resistance and Resilience
of Vegetation Subjected to Extreme Events," Functional Ecology 9 (1995):
640-649; J. P. Grime, "Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function: The Debate
Deepens," Science 277 (1997): 1260-1261,
9. B. R» Trenbath, "Neighbour Effects in the Genus Avena II: Comparison of Weed Species," Journal of Applied Ecology 12 (1975); 189-200;
Michael A. Huston, Oecologia, 110 (1997): 449-460.
10. Grime, "Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function"; David Tilman, Johannes Knops, David Wedin, Peter Reich, Mark Ritchie, and Evan Siemann,
"The Influence of Functional Diversity and Composition on Ecosystem
Processes," Science 277 (1997): 1300-1302.
11. Grime, "Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function."
12. Robert V. O'Neill, Donald L. DeAngelis, Jack B. Waide, and Timothy F. H. Allen, A Hierarchical Concept of Ecosystemss Monographs in Population Biology, vol. 23 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1986).
13. Arthur Koestier, The Ghost in the Machine (New York: Macmillan,
1967); Arthur Koestier, "Beyond Atomism and Holism: The Concept of the
Holon," in Arthur Koestier and John R, Smythies, eds., Beyond Reductionism (London: Hutchinson 1969), 192-232.
14. Robert T. Paine, "Food Webs: Linkages, Interaction Strength, and
Community Infrastructure," Journal of Animal Ecology 49 (1980):
667-685.
15. Koestier, The Ghost in the Machine; E. G. Leigh and T.E. Rowell,
"The evolution of mutualism and other forms of harmony at various levels
of biological organization," Ecolqgie26 (1995): 131-158,
16. Herbert A. Simon, "The Architecture of Complexity," Proceedings of
the American Philosophical Society 106 (1962): 467-482; see also Herbert A.
Simon, The Science of Artificial Life (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1969).
17. Herbert A. Simon, personal communication, August 1998.
18. O'Neill et al., A Hierarchical Concept of Ecosystems.
19. Stephen A. Forbes, Ecological Investigations of Stephen Alfred Forbes
(1977; reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1977).
20. The subject is indebted to Stuart Pimm for discovering this work, to
Joel Cohen for making it more broadly available, and to Claudia Jacobi for

220

Notes

translating it; Lorenzo Camerano, "Dell'equilibrio dei viventi merce la reciproca distruzione" (On the equilibrium of living beings by means of reciprocal destruction), Atti della, Reale Accademia delle Scienze di Torino 15
(1880): 393-414; Joel E, Cohen, "Lorenzo Camerano's Contribution to
Early Food Web Theory," in Simon A. Levin, ed., Frontiers in Mathematical
Biolojy, vol. 100 (Heidelberg: Springer, 1994), 351-359.
21. Camerano, "Dell'equilibrio dei viventi merce la reciproca distruzione."
22. Charles Elton, Animal Ecology (New York: MacmUlan, 1927).
23. Raymond L. Lindeman, "The Tropic-Dynamic Aspect of Ecology,"
Ecology 23 (1942): 399H113.
24. One of Elton's other major contributions, long before others recognized its importance, was the global threat to biodiversity caused by the
transportation and introduction of such species from places where they belonged to places where they didn't; Charles S. Elton, The Ecology of Invasions
by Animals and Plants (London: Methuen & Co., 1958).
25. Robert M. May, Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosystems (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1973).
26. Joseph H. Connell, "Effect of Competition, Predation by Thais
LapilluS) and Other Factors on Natural Populations of the Barnacle Balanus
Ralanoidess" Ecological Monographs 31 (1961): 61-104; Joseph H. Connell,
"The Influence of Interspecific Competition and Other Factors on the Distribution of the Barnacle Cbthamalus Stellatus" Ecology 42 (1961):
710-723; Robert T. Paine, "Food Web Complexity and Species Diversity,"
American Naturalist 100 (1966): 65-75.
27. Oscar H. Paris, "Some Quantitative Aspects by Muricid Snails on
Mussels in Washington Sound," Veli$er2 (1960): 41-47.
28. Paine, "Food Webs."
29. Robert T. Paine, Marine Rocky Shores and Community Ecology: An
Experimentalist's Perspective (Oldendorf/Luhe, Germany: Ecology Institute,
1994).
30. Jane Lubchenco, "Plant Species Diversity in a Marine Intertidal Community: Importance of Herbivore Food Preference and Algal Competitive
Abilities," American Naturalist 112 (1978): 23-39; Bruce A. Menge, "Organization of the New England Rocky Intertidal Community: Role of Predation, Competition, and Environmental Heterogeneity," Ecological Monographs 46 (1976): 355-393; Bruce A. Menge, "Indirect Effects in Marine
Intertidal Interaction Webs: Patterns and Importance,** Ecological Monographs 65 (1995): 21-74; Paul K. Dayton, "The Structure and Regulation
of Some South American Kelp Communities," Ecological Monographs 55
(1985): 447-468, See also Simon A. Levin and Robert T. Paine, "Distur-

Notes

Ml

bancc, Patch Formation, and Community Structure," Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 71 (1974): 2744-2747; Robert T. Paine and Simon A, Levin, *!ntertidal Landscapes: Disturbance and the Dynamics of
Pattern," Ecological Monographs 51 (1981): 145-178.
31.]. A, Estes and J. F. Palmisano, "Sea Otters: Their R01e in Structuring
Near-shore Communities," Science 185 (1974): 1058-1060.
32. Paine, Marine Rocky Shores anA Community Ecology.
33. Mary E, Power et al., "Challenges in the Quest for Keystones," BioScience 46 (1996): 609-620.
34. Anthony R. E. Sinclair, "The Eruption of the Ruminants," in Anthony R, E. Sinclair and M. Norton-Griffiths, eds., Seren^eti: Dynamics ofttn
Ecosystem (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979), 82-103; Samuel J.
McNaughton, "The Propagation of Disturbance in Savannas Through Food
Webs," Journal of Vegetation Science 3 (1992): 301-314.
35. Paine, Marine Rocky Shores and Community Ecology.
36. Kari J. Laine and Pekka Niemela, "The Influence of Ants on the Survival of Mountain Birches During an Oporinia Autumnata (LepiAoftrem,
Geometridae) Outbreak," Owo%w47 (1980): 37-42,
37. Richard B. Root, "The Niche Exploitation Pattern of the Blue-gray
Gnatcatcher," Ecological Monographs 37 (1967): 317-350.
38. There is a strong confluence of views in the approaches of Paine and
Root, perhaps tracing back in part to their days together at the University of
Michigan. Root was a precocious undergraduate at Michigan while Paine
was completing his doctoral work with Fred Smith; Michigan was then in its
heyday, perhaps the leading place to study ecology at that time. Root and
Paine have been among my closest friends and colleagues for thirty years,
and my own perspectives have been heavily influenced by their insights.
39. Lumping and splitting represent a fundamental dichotomy of views
even in this endeavor.
40. Indeed, there is no reason to restrict ourselves to species. For some
purposes, it may be most sensible to lump together, for example, the juvenile
stages of a number of fish species as one functional group, and the adult
stages as another, because of similarities in feeding habits.
41. Robert S. Steneck and Megan N. Dethier, "A Functional Group Approach to the Structure of Algal-Dominated Communities," Oikos 69
(1994): 476-498.
42. M. E. Hay, "Species as 'noise' in community ecology: do seaweeds
block our view of the kelp forest?," Trends in Ecology & Evolution 9 (1994):
414-416.
43. David Rafraelli and Stephen J. Hall, "Compartments and Predation in
an Estuarine Food Web," Journal of Animal Ecology 61 (1992): 551-560;

222

Notes

D. G. Rafiaelli and S. J. HaE, "Assessing the Relative Importance of Trophic
Links in Pood Webs," in Gary A. Polis and Kirk O. WinemiJler, eds., Pood
Webs: Integration of Patterns and Dynamics (New York: Chapman & Hall,
1996), 185-191,
44. Howard T. Odum, "Trophic Structure and Productivity of Silver
Springs, Florida,** Ecological Monographs 27 (1957): 55-112.
45. Robert T. Paine, "On Food Webs: Road Maps of Interactions or Grist
for Theoretical Development?" Ecology 69 (1988): 1648-1654; Gary A. Polls, "Complex Trophic Interaction in Deserts: An Empirical Critique of
Food-Web Theory," American Naturalist 138 (1991): 123-155; Gary A.
Poiis, "Food Webs, Trophic Cascades, and Community Structure," Australian Journal of Ecology 19 (1994): 121-136.
46. Stuart L. Pimm, food Webs (New York: Chapman & Hall, 1982); Stuart Pimm, John Lawton, and Joel Cohen, "Food Web Patterns and Their
Consequences," Nature 350 (1991): 669-674.
47. Pimm, Food Webs.
48. Robert H. MacArthur, "Patterns of Communities in the Tropics," Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 1 (1969): 19-30; Dolph Schluter and
Robert E. Ricklefs, "Species Diversity: An Introduction to the Problem,** in
Robert E. Ricklefs and Dolph Schluter, eds., Species Diversity in Ecological
Communities: Historical and Geographical Perspectives (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1993), 1-10.
49. Recall, too, that studies such as Tilman's show that there are reciprocal influences of diversity on productivity. We are just beginning to understand these effects, which represent an important part of understanding the
correlations described in this paragraph.
50. Michael L, Rosenzweig and Zvika Abramsky, "How Are Diversity and
Productivity Related?" in Ricklefs and Schluter, Species Diversity in Ecological
Communities,
51. This would seem to have implications for economic markets as well,
but to my knowledge, the connections have not yet been explored.
52. John J. Ewel, Maria J. Mazzarino, and Cory W. Berish, "Tropical Soil
Fertility Changes Under Monocultures and Successional Communities of
Different Structure," Ecological Applications 1 (1991): 289-302; Peter M.
Vitousek and David U. Hooper, "Biological Diversity and Terrestrial
Ecosystem Biogeochemistry," in E. D. Schulze and H. A. Mooney, eds. Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function (New York: Springer, 1994), 3-14.
53. Crawford (Buzz) S. Hotting, "Resilience and Stability of Ecological
Systems," Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 4 (1973): 1-23.
54. Stephen R. Carpenter and James F. KitcheM, eds., The Trophic Cascade
in Lakes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).

Notes

223

55. Paine, "Food Webs"; Robert M. May, "Will a Large Complex System
Be StableP Nature 238 (1972): 413-414; Roy E, Hotnick and Michael L,
McKinney, "Ecosystem Organization and Extinction Dynamics," Palstios 8
(1993): 202-212.
56. Duncan J. Watts and Steven H. Strogatz, "Collective Dynamics of
'Small-World' Networks," Nature 393 (1998): 440-442.
57. Bad jokes, perhaps unfortunately, typically have small effects and
hence are not contained.
58. Simon A. Levin et al., "Resilience in Natural and Socioeconomic Systems," Environment emd Developmental Economics 3 (1998): 225-236.
59. Carpenter and Kitchell, The Trophic Cascade in Lakes.

Chapter Eight
1. Percy Bysshe Shelley, Promethem Unbound (1819).
2. Ralph E. Gomory, "The Known, the Unknown, and the Unknowable," Scientific American 276 (1995): 120.
3. For a discussion of leaf forms in variable environments, see Thomas
Givnish, "On the Adaptive Significance of Leaf Form," in O. T. Solbrig et
al, eds., Topics in Plant Pofnd&tion Molqgy (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1979), 375-407.
4. Brian F. Cfaabot and Jean Fincher Chabot, "Effects of Light and Temperature on Leaf Anatomy and Photosynthesis in Fmjfaria. Vivginismn? Qecolqgiit 26 (1977): 363-377; Louis J. Gross, "Photosynthetk Dynamics in
Varying Light Environments: A Model and Its Applications to Whole Leaf
Carbon Gain," Ecology 63 (1982): 84-93.
5. An exception is the game Extinction: The Game of Ecology, the creation of my colleague Steve Hubbell (2nd ed., Burlington, N.C.: Carolina
Biological Supply, 1978),
6. Shay Gueron and Simon A. Levin, "The Dynamics of Group Formation," Mathematical Moacimces 128 (1995): 243-264.
7. Per Bak, How Nature Works (New York: Springer, 1996).
8. But see a strong dissent by the distinguished paleontologist David
Raup, "A Breakthrough Book?" Complexity 2 (1997): 30-32.
9. Stephen Jay Gould and Niks Ektredge, "Punctuated Equilibria: The
Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsidered," Petleobiolqgy 3 (1977):
115-151,
10. Robert H. MacArthur and Edward O. Wilson, The Theory of Island
Mioffw/ritplay, Monographs in Population Biology, vol. 1 (Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1967).

214

Notes

11. Robert M. May and Robert H. MacArthur, "Niche Overlap as a
Function of Environmental Variability," Proceedings of the National Academy
of Science, USA 69 (1972): 1109-1113.
12. Bak, How Nature Works, 155.
13. Stuart A. Kauffman, At Home in the Universe (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1995). See also Stuart A. Kauffman, The Origins of Order
(New York; Oxford University Press, 1993); C. J. Langton, ed., Artificial
Life, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, vol. 6 (Redwood City, Calif.: Addison Wesley, 1989).
14. Kauffman (At Home in the Universe) argues that "[t]he reason complex systems exist on, or in the ordered regime near, the edge of chaos is because evolution takes them there" (90). Kauffman does not make a clear distinction between self-organized criticality and the edge of chaos, a quite
different concept technically.
15. Ibid., 235.
16. Bak and Sneppen do introduce a competitive mechanism that represents a form of evolution, but it is drastically oversimplified. Per Bak and
Kim Sneppen, "Punctuated Equilibrium and Criticality in a Simple Model of
Evolution," Physical Review Letters 71 (1993): 4083-4086. See also Per
Bak, Henrik Flyvbjerg, and Kim Sneppen, "Can We Model Darwin?" New
Scientist 14 (1994): 36-39; Kim Sneppen, Per Bak, Henrik Flyvbjerg, and
Mogens H0th Jensen, "Evolution as a Self-organized Critical Phenomenon," Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA 92 (1995):
5209-5213.
17. B. B. Mandelbrot, Fra.cta.ls: form, chance, and dimension (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman & Co., 1977).
18. Simon A. Levin and Linda Buttel, Measures of Pa-tchiness in Ecological
Systems (Ithaca, N.Y.: Ecosystems Research Center, Cornell University,
1997); Simon A. Levin, "The Problem of Pattern and Scale in Ecology,"
Ecology 73 (1992): 1943-1967,
19. Bak and Sneppen, "Punctuated Equilibrium and Criticality in a Simple Model of Evolution"; Ricardo V. Sole and Susanna C. Manrubia, "Are
Rainforests Self-organized in a Critical State?" Journal of Theoretical Biology
173 (1995): 31-40; K. Moloney and Simon A. Levin, "The Effects of Disturbance Architecture on Landscape-Level Population Dynamics," Ecology
772 (1996): 375-394.
20. Stephen W. Pacala and Simon A. Levin, "Biologically Generated Spatial Pattern and the Coexistence of Competing Species," in David Tilman
and Peter Kareiva, eds., Spatial Ecology; The Role of Space in Population Dynamics and Interspecific Interactions (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1997), 204-232.

Nous

225

21. John T. Bonner, Life Cycles (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1993).
22. Luigi L. Cavalii-Sforza and Marcus J. Feldman, Cultural Transmission and Evolution, Monographs in Population Biology (Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1981),
23. Ibid.
24. Herbert A. Simon, "Organizations and Markets," Journal of Economic Perspectives 5 (1991): 25-44.

Chapter Nine
1. Garrett Hardin, "The Tragedy of the Commons," Science 162 (1968);
1243-1248.
2. Gene M, Grossman and Alan B. Krueger, "Environmental Impacts of a
North American Free Trade Agreement," in Peter Garber, ed., The U.S.Mexico Free Trade Agreement (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press 1993),
165-177,
3. Kenneth Arrow et al., "Economic Growth, Carrying Capacity, and the
Environment," Science 268 (1995): 520-521.
4. Rachel Carson, Silent Spring (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962).
5. A case in point involves our efforts to manage disease through the use
of antibiotics: the stronger our efforts have been, the stronger have been the
selective forces for the evolution of new strains of organisms containing resistance to those antibiotics.
6. Edward O. Wilson, The Diversity of Life (London: Penguin Press,
1992).
7. Robert M. May, "How Many Species Inhabit the Earth?" Scientific
American 267 (1992): 42-48; Robert M. May, "Biological Diversity: Differences Between Land and Sea," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 343 (1994): 105-111.
8. Partha Dasgupta, An Inquiry into Well-being and Destitution (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1993).
9. Scott Barrett, "The Problem of Global Environmental Protection,"
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 6 (1990): 68-79; Simon A. Levin et al.,
"Resilience in Natural and Socioeconomic Systems,** Environment and Developmental Economics 3 (1998): 225-236.
10. Crawford S. Rolling, ed., Adaptive Environmental Assessment and
Management (New York: Wiley, 1978). Much of Boiling's work on adaptive
management was developed when he was at the University of British Columbia, and later as director of the International Institute for Applied Sys-

226

Notes

terns Analysis (IIASA) in Laxenburg, Austria, In this, he had the collaboration of many distinguished colleagues, most notably Carl Walters, Ray
Hilborn, Don Ludwig, the late Mike Fiering, and my old mentor, George
Dantzig.
11. Ralph E. Gomory, "The Known, the Unknown, and the Unknowable," Scientific American 272 (1995): 120.
12. Syukuro Manabe and Ronald J. Stouffer, "Two Sable Equilibria of a
Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Model," Journal of Climate 1: 841-866.
13. Wallace S. Broeker, Dorothy M. Peteet, and David Rind, "Does the
Ocean-Atmosphere System Have More Than One Stable Mode of Operation?" Nature BIS (1985); 21-26.
14. William D. Nordhaus, Managing the Global Commons: The Economics
of Climate Change (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1994).
15. Per Bak, How Nature Works (New York: Springer, 1996).
16. D. J, Watts and S. H. Strogatz, "Collective Dynamics of 'SmallWorld* Networks," Nature 393 (1998): 440-442.
17. Ian Player, The White Rhino Saga (New York: Stein and Day, 1973).
18. Graciela Chichilnisky and Geoffrey Heal, "Economic Returns from
the Biosphere," Nature 391 (1998): 629-630.
19. Dasgupta, An Inquiry into Well-being and Destitution.
20. Matt Ridley and Bobbi S. Low, "Can Selfishness Save the Environment?" Atlantic Monthly (September 1993): 76-84.
21. Ibid.; Colin W. Clark, "The Economics of Overexploitation," Science
181 (1973): 630-634.
22. Chichilnisky and Geoffrey Heal, "Economic Returns from the Biosphere."
23. Geoffrey M. Heal, "Markets and SustainabiEty,** in Richard B. Stewart, ed., Environmental Governance (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1999).
24. Chichilnisky and Heal, "Economic Returns from the Biosphere."
25. Charlie Pye-Smith and Grazia Feyerabend, with Richard Sandbrook,
The Wealth of Communities (London: Earthscan, 1994); Levin et al., "Resilience in Natural and Socioeconomk Systems." For informative and complementary perspectives on property rights and human societies, see Fikret
Berkes, "Social Systems, Ecological Systems, and Property Rights," in Susan
S. Hanna, Carl Folke, and Karl-Goran Maler, eds., Rights to Nature (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1998), 87-107; and Fikret Berkes and Carl
Folke, eds., Linking Social and Ecological Systems; Management Practices ana
Social Mechanisms for Building Resilience (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
26. Ridley and Low, "Can Selfishness Save the Environment.*"

Notes

W

27. Elinor Ostxom, Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions
for Collective Action (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990); Elinor Ostxom, Crafting Institutions for Self-governing Irrigation Systems (San
Francisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies Press, 1992).
28. Ridley and Low, "Can Selfishness Save the Environment?"
29. Abram Chayes and Antonia H. Chayes, The New Sovereignty (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1995); Levin et al., "Resilience in
Natural and Socioeconomic Systems."
30. Scott Barrett, "The Problem of Global Environmental Protection,"
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 6 (1990): 68-79; Levin et al., "Resilience
in Natural and Socioeconomic Systems,"
31. Robert M. Solow, "Sustainability: An Economist's Perspective," Eighteenth ], Sewa-rd Johnson Lecture in Marine Policy (Woods Hole, Mass.: Marine Policy Center, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, 1991).
32. Debt-fsr-nature swaps are a brilliant scheme of buying at discounts the
unpaid debts of impoverished nations and forgiving them in exchange for
the preservation of land in an undeveloped status. They were the brainchild
of the conservation biologist Thomas Lovejoy.
33. See, for example, Mark W. Branson, "Social Dimensions of Boundaries: Balancing Cooperation and Self-interest," in Richard L. Knight and
Peter B. Landres, eds,, Stewardship Across Boundaries (Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1998), 65-86; and other related papers.
34. Joseph Herman Hertz, The Pentateuch and Huftamhs, 2nd ed. (London: Soncino Press, 1963), 563.

This page intentionally left blank

GLOSSARY

abiotic Not biotic
adaptation The evolution of traits through natural selection; also, a trait that
has arisen through natural selection, based on differential fitness
adaptive landscape A pictorial representation of the relationship between
fitness and genotype, or between fitness and the genetic composition of a
population; developed by Sewall Wright
adaptive probing A management device, characterized by exploration of diverse strategies, to improve information about alternatives
aggregation Lumping diverse objects together into a single category
allele A form or realization of a gene
allelopathy A competitive device involving the production of chemicals to
harm others
altruist An individual that performs an activity at the apparent sacrifice of its
immediate benefit
aniino acid Building block for proteins and other polypeptides; composed of
an amino acid group and a carboxylic acid group
anthropic principle The notion that, if life can exist only under a limited
range of conditions, the world in which we exist must satisfy those conditions; hence, there is an observer bias
apostatic selection Natural selection on prey characteristics as a result of
predators switching from rare to common types of prey
artificial selection Genetic change within populations caused by the actions
of breeders
aspect diversity The diversity within a population for any morphological
characteristics, such as color or wing patterns
autotrophic Photosynthetic, or otherwise able to manufacture food from inorganic materials
bacteriocin Chemical produced by bacteria to poison other bacteria
bell curve The symmetric distributional curve characteristic of the normal
distribution

22»

230

Glossary

biodiversity The diversity of biological types at all levels of organization,
including heterogeneity within and among populations
biological diversity See biodiversity
biomass The total weight of an individual, a population, or a collection of
populations
biosphere The Earth as a system, including its biological, physical, and
chemical dimensions
biota The totality of organisms within a particular region; the flora and
fauna together
birth rate Number of births per unit of time
cellular automata Simplified mathematical models of spatial interactions,
in which sites or cells on a landscape are assigned a particular state, which
changes according to specific rules conditioned on the states of neighboring cells
cellular slime mold Various fungi whose vegetative structures are aggregations of amoeboid cells
chaos Complex dynamical behavior characterized by lack of dominant periodicity, and by great sensitivity to initial conditions
character displacement The evolutionary divergence of similar traits
among coexisting competitors
chromosome The site of genes; linear structure within cell nucleus providing the location of the DNA
climax The end result of succession within ecological communities
coevolution The evolution of two interacting species, under mutual influence on one another
coexistence The existence of two or more species together within the same
habitat
colicinogenic Producing colicin, a bacterial poison
commensalism The condition of two organisms living together without
harming one another
community The collection of organisms and populations of various
species within a particular habitat
community respiration Transformation of oxygen into carbon dioxide
and other products of oxidation by all the plants in a community
competitive exclusion The elimination of one or more of a set of competing species, through the effects of competition
competitive release The numerical increase in abundance of a species due
to the elimination of a competitor
competitor An individual or species that competes for resources with another

Glossary

231

complex adaptive system A system composed of a heterogeneous assemblage of types, in which structure and functioning emerge from the balance between the constant production of diversity, due to various forces,
and the winnowing of that diversity through a selection process mediated
by local interactions
complexity Technically, an interconnected network of components that
cannot be described by a few rules; generally manifest in structure, order
and functioning emerging from the interactions among diverse parts
conservation biology The science and practice of preservation of species
and habitats
constancy Not changing over time
contact process A particular form of an interacting particle system in
which sites may be occupied or not by one of a variety of types
convergent evolution The evolution of similar features among noninteracting populations in different habitats, in response to similar environmental conditions and challenges
correlation Statistical measure of relatedness of events
correlation length The distance or time beyond which events are not related
criticaltty The condition describing the transition between qualitatively
different states, such as solid/liquid or liquid/gas
crastose algae Thin and crusty algae
crypsis Camouiage patterns that allow organisms to conceal themselves
against backgrounds
cybernetic Relating to a control process
Daisyworld A greatly simplified model (developed by Lovelock and collaborators) for how some homeostatk properties of the biosphere might
have evolved
death rate Number of deaths per unit of time
debt-for-nature swap A device, the creation of Thomas Lovejoy, in which
debts incurred by developing nations are bought at a discount, and then
forgiven in exchange for agreements from those nations to preserve natural areas
denitrincation The conversion of nitrate into nitrogen gases
dependent variable A quantity that depends upon other variables, that is,
is a function of independent variables
development The progression of an organism from birth to adult; also,
the economic growth and exploitation of a region
diffuse coevolutjon Coevolution among a number of species, no two of
which interact strongly

232

Glossary

diploid Genetic system in which each individual inherits chromosomes in
pairs, one from each parent
direct methods Optimization methods that do not depend on computation of slopes
diversity Variety
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid, whose various forms provide the alphabet
underlying the genetic code; the fundamental building blocks of genes
ecosystem The integrated system involving the biological, physical, and
chemical components of a habitat or region
ecotone The transition zone between two distinct Mnds of ecological communities
Ecotron An experimental facility at Silwood Park, England, for the controlled study of ecological interactions
edge of chaos Technically, the state describing the transition of a system to
chaos; used more loosely by some <as equivalent to self-organized criticality, or even more loosely as the boundary between stultifying sameness
and energizing turbulence
egoist An individual whose behavior benefits itself
embryogenesis The development of an organism from birth to embryo
emergence The development of properties in a self-organizing system, as
the outgrowth of interactions between components
endemic A species that is unique to a particular area
endogenous Arising from within
equilibrium A sustained constant state in a mathematical model
etiology The cause of a disease
euphoric zone Upper layer in water bodies, defined by where photosynthesis exceeds respiration
evolution Change in the distribution of characteristics within a population, and of the distribution of populations, through the actions of natural
selection, environmental change, mutation and recombination, chance
factors, and other mechanisms
evolutionarily stable strategy A strategy that, once established in a community, cannot be displaced
exogenous Arising from without
extinction The permanent disappearance of a species from a habitat, or
from the biosphere
extrinsic See exogenous
Farenholz's rule The rule that parasite speciation patterns often conform
to the speciation patterns of their hosts
fauna The totality of animals or types of animals within a particular region

Glossary

233

feedback Influence on a system component mediated by changes induced
by that component
feedback loop A chain of influence of any length, in which a system component is influenced indirectly by changes it has induced
fitness The measure of the survival and reproductive success of an organism, or of a type of organism
flora The totality of plants or types of plants within a particular region
flow Movement from one place to another
flushing rate The rate at which liquids that enter a region are removed
from it
food web The network of feeding relationships among the species in a region
fractal A self-similar structure whose geometrical and topological features
are recapitulated in miniature on finer and finer scales
frequency dependence The influence of the distribution of types within a
population on the fitnesses and evolution of all types
function A mathematical relationship between variables; also, ecologically
synonornous with purpose or role
functional group A group of species performing similar functions within
an ecosystem
fundamental biota The totality of species that could exist within a region
fundamental niche The range of conditions under which a species could
exist
fundamental theorem of natural selection Sir Ronald Fisher's mathematical statement that the rate of change of a character under the influence of natural selection is proportional to the selection coefficient, and to
the additive portion of genetic variation
Gaia The hypothesis of James Lovelock and Lynn Margulis that the biosphere is a homeostatic, cybernetic system in which the biota plays a fundamental role in regulating physical and chemical processes
game theory The theory describing the interactions between diverse
strategies for playing various games; especially the search for optimal
strategies
gene The fundamental unit of natural selection
genetic code The rules that translate the information encoded in genes
into the production of amino acids and that therefore determine heredity
genetic variation The genetically based variation within a population
genotype A genetic type; that is, a type of organism as determined by its
genetic characteristics
guild A group of species exhibiting similar strategies for resource acquisition within a community

234

Glossary

habitat The environment in which an organism, population, or community exists
haplo-diploid The genetic system in which one sex arises from unfertilized eggs so that, for example, males are haploid and females are diploid
haploid The genetic system in which individuals receive only a single copy
of each gene, hence from a single parent
heterogeneous Comprising dissimilar types
hierarchical organization Arranged or classified according to rank
hierarchy Hierarchical organization
holon A subset of a system involving components that interact relatively
strongly among themselves, and relatively weakly with others
holothurian Sea cucumber
homeostasis The maintenance of constant state
homogeneous Comprising similar types
horizontal transfer The transfer of genetic material from one organism to
another, exclusive of the hereditary process
host An organism that houses and provides nutrients to another, especially
through a parasitic process
Hymenoptera Order of insects including the bees, ants, and wasps
independent variable A quantity that varies freely and upon which other
variables depend
individualistic The notion that species are distributed on the landscape individually in terms of their relation to the environment and cannot be
grouped easily into distinct characteristic communities of species with
common distributions
industrial melanism The appearance of dark coloration among moths in
sooty industrial areas as the result of natural selection for crypsis
interacting particle systems Stochastic cellular automata; in particular,
spatial stochastic process models
intrinsic See endogenous
invertebrate Lacking a backbone
invisible hand The notion of the economist Adam Smith that efficient utilization of resources arises from a free market of individuals pursuing their
own selfish agendas
island biogeography The theory developed by Robert MacArthur and
Edward Wilson to describe the mechanisms and patterns characterizing
the assembly of island biotas
Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma (IPD) A game in which Prisoner's Dilemma
is played repeatedly, with memory
iteroparity Reproducing multiple times in a lifetime

Glossary

235

JABOWA The original forest growth simulator, developed by Daniel
Botkin and his colleagues
keystone predator A top predator species whose removal from a community would engender qualitative changes in community organization
keystone species Any species whose removal from a community would engender qualitative changes in community organization
Law of Large Numbers The mathematical principle, developed by Jacob
Bernoulli, that the most likely fraction of independent trials that will exhibit a given behavior is the same as the probability of that behavior on a
given trial, and that the probability of observing a given amount of deviation from that expectation decreases toward zero as the number of trials
increases without bound
lichen A mutualistic association of a fungus and an alga
life zone Vegetation zone as specified by environmental characteristics
such as climate and moisture
limnology The scientific study of lakes, ponds, and streams
linear programming A set of mathematical methods for finding the optima of linear functions under linear constraints
lognormal A statistical distribution in which the logarithm of the quantity
of interest has a normal distribution
macroalgae Large algae, such as kelps
macroscopic On the broadest scale of a distribution or a process
mesoscopic On the medium scale of a distribution or a process
meta-agent Aggregate of agents
meta-community An ensemble of communities
meta-population An ensemble of populations, generally of a single species
microenvironment A subset of the environment, for example, one characterized by particular kinds of resources or soil properties
microscopic On the smallest scale of a distribution or a process
model A mathematical or physical simplification of a system
mutation The spontaneous change of a gene from one form to another
mutualism The reciprocally beneficial interactions between mutualists
mutualist An individual or species whose actions benefit an individual or
individuals of another species
myeorrhfeae Soil fungi that form mutualistic associations with plants, attaching to roots and transforming minerals into forms usable by the plants
myxoma A virus that is pathogenic to certain rabbit populations; used as a
pest control device in Australia and Europe
natural selection The process that translates differential success in survival
and reproduction into evolutionary change; Herbert Spencer termed it
the "survival of the fittest"

236

Glossary

negative feedback Feedback that tends to counteract a process
niche The role of a species within its community
NIMBY Acronym for "not in my back yard"
nitrification The oxidation of ammonia to produce nitrates that plants can
easily assimilate
nitrogen cycle The cycling of nitrogen through the processes of nitrogen
fkation, nitrification, and denitrification
nitrogen fixation The conversion of gaseous nitrogen into other compounds, such as ammonium and ammonia, making it available for oxidation for energy or assimilation by some organisms
nonlinear Disproportionate in cause and effect
normal distribution A statistical distribution of a specific symmetric nature, representing the outcomes of a large number of basic random
processes
ontogeny The sequence of stages in the development of an organism from
birth to adult
opportunistic A species that exploits transient environmental opportunities
Qptimality Condition of being best
optimization The search for the best solution among alternatives, or the
extreme value of a variable or function
parasite An individual or species that exploits another individual (host) or
individuals, especially of a different species
parasitoid An insect that lays its eggs in a host species, and whose larva eats
the host
path dependency The dependence of the outcome of a dynamical process
on historical events
pathogen An organism that causes disease
pattern formation The emergence of large-scale patterns from local
processes and interactions
percolation Mathematical theory of spread on cellular landscapes
periodic Characterized by repetition of patterns in fixed intervals of space
or time
phase transition Transformation of a substance or a system from one form
to a qualitatively different one
photic zone The upper zone of a body of water, as defined by the depth to
which sunlight can penetrate
photosynthesis Conversion of light energy into chemical energy and synthesis of organic compounds into inorganic compounds, by green plants
phytoplankton Tiny drifting plants, especially algae, of the upper layer of
water bodies
plankton Tiny drifting organisms of the upper layer of water bodies
plasmid Extrachromosomal circular DMA

Glossary

237

population The totality of organisms of a species within a particular region
population genetics The study of genetic changes within a population
positive feedback Feedback that tends to reinforce a process
power law A relationship between two variables such that one is proportional to a power of the other
predator An animal that hunts and kills others for food
prey An animal that is hunted or killed for food by another
primary production The assimilation of sunlight energy by plants
primary productivity The rate of assimilation of sunlight energy by plants
primary succession The sequence of species colonizing an area after a
novel disturbance, such as a lava flow
Prisoner's Dilemma A prototypical game theory problem involving two
prisoners held in isolation; illustrative of the difficulties in achieving cooperative behavior
privatization The transfer of property rights to individuals and corporations
protein Large chain of amino acids
realized biota The assemblage of species found within a particular region
realized niche The range of conditions under which a species is found
recessive Forms of genes (alkies) that have no effect unless inherited from
both parents
reciprocal altruism Mutually beneficial behavior in which an individual
helps another because of expected reciprocal behavior
recombination The genetic reshuffling of material within an organism due
to the crossing (over) of chromosomes and reassortment of genes
residence time The average time material spends in a system
resiliency Capability to resist qualitative shirts in behavior or characteristics
resistance The ability of a host to sustain itself against a parasite, or of a
bacterium to sustain itself against an antibiotic
scale Extent or grain
schema Building block for discovering rules; an internal model of the real
world
schemata Plural of schema
selerophylls Plants with hard leaves
sea star Starfish
search image The mental image a predator uses in searching for a prey
secondary succession The sequence of species recolonizing space after a
common disturbance, such as a treefall or a fire
selection See natural selection

238

Glossary

self-organization The development of structure and functioning on the
basis of local interactions
self-organized critkality The tendency of large complex systems to selforganize to a self-maintaining critical state
shifting balance tiheory A fundamental theory, developed by Sewall
Wright, of evolutionary change over heterogeneous environments
simplex method Method developed by George Bernard Dantzig for solving linear programming problems
simulated annealing Optimization methods that simulate the physical
process of annealing by allowing the occasional acceptance of less attractive solutions or values
simulator A computer model that simulates some process
SORTIE A forest growth simulator developed by Stephen Pacala and his
colleagues
speciation The process by which new species are formed
species-area curve The relationship between the area of a region and the
number of species found there
stability The tendency to return to normative behavior, such as an equilibrium or limit cycle in a mathematical model
stochastic Governed by chance and unpredictability
stochastic cellular automata Cellular automata in which rates are stochastic
stochastic optimization A class of mathematical optimization tools that
rely in part on the random generation of new variants of existing forms
succession The sequence of species colonizing a region, especially following a disturbance
superorganism The concept of the ecological community, the ecosystem,
or the biosphere as an ecological and evolutionary unit
susceptibility A measure of the propensity of a host to succumb to a parasite, or of a bacterium to succumb to an antibiotic
sustainable stewardship Economic development of a region in ways that
cart be sustained
tight coevolutfon Coevolution among a number of species that interact
strongly
tit for tat A strategy for cooperative behavior in which an individual, at
each stage, plays the strategy last played by another against it
Tragedy of the Commons The notion, explicated by Garrett Hardin, that
though we live in a Commons, individuals will practice selfish behaviors
that are not in the common good and lead to overexploitation of resources
trait A characteristic of an organism

Glossary

W

trait group Notion introduced by David Sloan Wilson of a group of individuals that share a common trait
traveling salesman problem Classic problem in operations research of
finding the shortest path a traveling salesman could follow in order to visit
each of a set of geographically distributed cities
triage An allocation system for medical or conservation practice that provides full treatment for individuals, species, or habitats of highest priority
and none for those of lowest priority
trophic level Number of steps energy must take from the sun to reach a
particular species, through a chain of consumption of one species by another
tropMc pyramid The conceptualization of the trophic web in which
higher trophic levels capture less energy
tropMe web The network of energy flow in a community; see aha food web
turf algae Algae that exhibit dense growth form
turnover rate The rate of species replacement in an island or other habitat
uncorrelated Independent
uptake Assimilation of nutrients from the environment
vector An organism or species that carries the agents of disease from one
host organism to another
vertebrate Possessing a backbone
virulence Measure of the degree of pathogenicity of a parasite, or of the
population level (titer) it can reach in a host organism
voter model A particular form of an interacting particle system in which
every site is occupied by a specific type, whose identity changes according
to rules conditioned on the states of neighboring cells
zooplankton Tiny drifting animals, especially fish larvae and invertebrates,
of the upper layer of water bodies

This page intentionally left blank

INDEX

Abram, David, 24

Acacia tree, 68
Acid precipitation, 109
Adaptation, 18-19, 20, 68
Adaptive landscape, 121-129,141
Adaptive management, 199-201,
225(nlO)
Adaptive probing, 200
Africa, 204
fugacious species in, 203
Aggregation, 13
AIDS, 90, 202
Alaska
sea otter in, 166
Algae, 142,168-169
Allelopathy, 150
Altruism, 17, 34, 144-147, 189-190
evolution of, 35-38
and local interactions, 147-150,
190
Amino acids, 124
Amoebae, 147,188
Anemia
and gene resistance, 22
Animals
and coalitions, 143-144
See dlso under specific animals
Anthropic principle, 32
and gaia, 29-30
Antibiotic resistance, 20, 21, 49,
225(n5)
Ants, 68, 145, 188

Apostatic selection, 136
Aquatic systems, 88
Arthur, Brian, 14, 66, 67,114
Artificial selection, 18
Aspect diversity, 135—136
Atmosphere, 24
Australia, 86
rabbit pests in, 151-152
Axelrod, Robert, 145-146
Axtell, Robert, 113-114
Bacteria, 20-21, 49, 150,153
Bacteriocin, 150
Bak, Per, 54-55,113, 181-184, 192,
202, 224{nl6)
Barnacles, 134-135, 164
Beak size, 137-138, 139
Beehives, 143-144, 188-189
Bees, 145, 149
Behavior, human
evolution of, 17
Bible
and biodiversity, concern for, 3-4,
207(n5)
Bindloe Island, 137
Biodiversity
and ecosystem process, 158-162
evolution of, 117-156
loss of, 1-11, 197-198
measurement of, 77
Biological diversity. See Biodiversity
Biomass, 10

241

242
Biosphere, 2
and evolution, 23-25
Biota, 24
realized and fundamental, 59
Birds, 131,133,136
Birth rate, 98-99
Bison betularia, 136
Bonner, John Tyler, 147
Bormann, Herbert, 53,109
Botkin, Daniel, 97,109
Briand, Frederic, 78
Broecker, Wallace, 201
Butler, Samuel, 144
Buttel, Linda, 100,102, 184
Butterflies, 154
Calcutta
Mudialy wetlands, 204
California, 113
Death Valley, 62
Monterey Bay, 166
sea otter in, 9,166
Camerano, Lorenzo, 163
Canham, Charles, 110
Carbon cycle, 204-205
Caribbean, 168
Carlquist, Sherwin, 82
Carpenter, Stephen, 7,53
Carson, Rachel, 197
CAS. See Complex adaptive system
Catskills, 204
Cedar Creek, 160-161, 218(n2)
Cellular slime molds, 147-148
Chance, 18,44
Chao, Lin, 150
Character displacement, 137-138
CMchiMsky, Graciela, 204
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 205
Choke, 18
Chromosomes, 21
See a,ko Genes
Clements, Frederic, 71
Climate change, global, 2,61-62,
197-198,201

Index
Clustering, 190-191,193
Coalitions, 36,143-144
Coevolution, 22
and parasite-host interactions,
150-154
and plant-herbivore interactions,
153-154
and plant-insect interactions, 154
and predator-prey interactions,
154-155
See also Evolution
Coexistence, 33
Cohen, Joel, 78, 79,170,219(n20)
Colicinogenk, 150
Commensalism, 151-152
Communities, ecological, 11,46-48,
59,70-72, 88,144,199
See a-lso Meta-communities
Community respiration, 160
Competition, 129-137,138
Competitive exclusion, 54
Competitive release, 164
Complex adaptive system (CAS), 2,
12-15
Complexity, 162-167
Components, 52
Connecticut
forests of, 88
Green Mountain Forest, 111
Connell, Joseph, 138,164
Conservation biology, 51
Conservation Corporation, 204
Constancy, 149, 175
Contact process, 93,94,96-99,
100,212(n9)
Convergent evolution, 79
Coral reefs, 76
Correlation length, 103
Correlations, 3, 59-62,103
Criticality, 54-55
Critical state, 181
Crypsis, 136
Cultural evolution, 38
Cybernetics, 30

Index
Daily, Gretcheo, 6
Daisyworfd, 32-33
Dantzig, George Bernard, 125,
215(n7), 226(nlO)
Daphne Major, 137
Darwin, Charles, 4,18, 32,163
and adaptation, 141
and finches, 137
and islands, biology of, 81, 82,
120
David, Paul, 67
Davics, Paul, 29
DawMns, Richard, 145
Death rate, 98-99
Death Valley, California, 62
Debt-for-nature swaps, 227(n32)
Degradation
and income levels, 197
Denitrification, 11
Desert conditions, 61-62
Design, 18-19
Dethier, Megan, 168-169
Developing nations, 206, 227(n32)
Diffuse coevolution, 152
Diseases, 23, 89,90,202
management of, 225(n5)
See also under specific diseases
Disturbance, 76
and forests, 87-88
and intertidaJ regions, 89,113
Diversification, 199
Diversity
and productivity, 172, 222(n49)
Diversity enhancement, 138—144
DNA, 21
Downing, John, 161
Durlauf, Steven, 114
Durrett, Richard, 93,100,104
E. coli, 150
Earthquakes, 55
Ecological assembly, 46-48, 81-82,
101-104,117-120
and evolution, 48-51

243

See also Ecosystem organization;
Self-organization
Ecological degradation, 2
Ecological Detective, lfe(Hilborn
and Mangel), 60
Ecological Scrabble, 118-119
Ecological studies, 4—5
Ecological Thmter and the
Evolutionary Play
(Hutchinson), 115
Ecosystem, 6-7
process, 158-162
structure and functioning, 51-53,
157-174
Ecosystem organization, 104-106
models and experiments,
107-114
See also Ecological assembly; selforganization
Ecotones, 71
Ecotourism, 203
Ecotron, 160, 161,172
Edge of chaos, 55,183, 224(nl4)
Ehrlich, Anne, 8-9, 202
Ehrlich, Paul, 8-9,28,202
Eldredge, Niles, 182
Elton, Charles, 163,170,220(n24)
Embryogenesis, 104
Emergent processes, 52
Empowerment, 204
Endemics, 5
Energy conservation, 205
Enhancement of diversity, 138-144
Enhydret luteu$. See Sea otter
Environment, local
and patterns, 43-46
See also Local interactions
Environmental change, 2
Environmental management,
198-206,22S(nS)
Environmental protection, 196-197
Epstein, Joshua, 113-114
Equilibrium
and island biology, 81-82

244

Index

Estes, James, 10, 166
Eula-ema, 149
Europe
rabbit pests in, 151
Evolution,4-5, 33,185-191
of altruism, 35-38
of biodiversity, 117-156
and the biosphere, 23-25
cultural, 38
and ecological assembly, 48-51
and forests, 49-51
and genes, 121-123
of human behavior, 17
and islands, 120-123
and ontogeny, 178-180
and optimization, 126-129
and resiliency, 53-55
of sexual reproduction, 22-23
transformational, 28-29
See also Coevolution
Evolutionarily stable strategies, 131
Exotic species, 48, 68-69
_SUBSee nko Species
Exploration, 205
Extinction, 5-6, 55
and island biology, 81-82
Extinction: Game of Ecology,
223(nS)
Family groups, 199
Farenholz's rule, 153
Farm ecology, 78
Feedback loops, 2, 36, 142-143,
154,190,195-196
and environmental management,
203-205
Fenner, Frank, 152
Fiering, Mike, 226(nlO)
Fiji
rodent introduction in, 68-69
Finches, 120,137-138,139
Fisher, Sir Ronald, 121-122, 126,
133
Flexibility, 175

Florida Keys, 85
Flows, 13, 77-78
on landscapes, 123-126
Flushing rate, 84
Food webs, 78-79, 105-106, 163,
165, 169-171
Food Wefe(Pimm), 78
Forbes, Stephen, 163
Forests, 76, 104
biology of, 87-88
clear-cutting, 109
and evolution, 49-51, 120-121
growth simulation, 109-112
and JABOWA, 109-110
and SORTIE, 110-112
Fra^arin virginiana, 176
Franklin, Jerry, 86
Frequency dependence, 128—129
Freshwater system, 7
Fugacious species, 203
See also Species
Functional groups, 11, 167—169,
221(n40)
Fundamental biota, 59
Fundamental niche, 58-59
Fundamental theorem of natural
selection, 126
Fungi, 142
Futuyma, Douglas, 154
G. forth, 137-138
G. fuli^inosa., 137
G. Magnirostris, 137
Gaia, 24-25, 31,183
and anthropic principle, 29-30
and homeostasis, 28-29
Galapagos Islands, 120,137,139
Game theory, 34-35,117-120,
145-146,178-179, 223(n5)
Genes, 17, 20-23,144-145,
189-190
and altruism, 36—37
and evolution, 121-123
See also Population genetics

Index
Genetic defects, 21
Genotypes, 123
Geospiz», 137
Gleason, Henry, 71
Global warming, 201
See also Climate change, global
Golden Rule, 206
Gomory, Ralph, 200
Gould, Stephen Jay, 43,182
Grant, Peter, 120, 137
Grant, Rosemary, 120, 137
Grasses, 160
Grasslands, 88,112
Greenhouse gases, 109
Green Mountain Forest, 111
Grossman, Gene, 197
Ground finches, 137
Group-oriented action, 17
Grunbaum, Danny, 214(n6)
Guild, 167
Haddock, 159
Haldane, J. B. S., 121-122,144
Hall, Stephen, 169
Hamilton, William, 145
Haplodiploids, 37,145
Hardin, Garrett, 143, 196
Hartejohn, 143,147, 155
Hartvipen, Gregg, 35
Hawaii
species introduction in, 47, 69,
86-87
Hawaiian Islands, 86
Heal, Geoffrey, 204
Heliconid butterflies, 154
Herbivore
See Plant-herbivore interactions
Herds, 44-^5
Heterogeneity, 13, 201-202
Hidden Order (Holland), 13
Hierarchical organization, 13
Hilborn, Ray, 60, 226(nlO)
Hillel, 206
History, 44

245

and species, 47-48
HIV, 90
Holdridge, Leslie R., 69-70
Holland, John, 13,77,112
Hailing, Crawford "Buzz," 111,
199-200,225(nlO)
Holons, 162
Holothwria-ns, 163
Homeostasis, 8, 52-53
and Gaia, 28-29
and natural selection, 30-33
Homo sapiens, 180
Horizontal transfer, 21
How Adaptation Builets Complexity
(Holland), 111
Hubbard Brook Experimental
Forest, 109
Hubbard Brook Watershed, 53
Hubbell, Stephen, 99-101, 102,
105,223(n5)
Human societies, 188-189
Hutchinson, G. Evelyn, 58-59,
82-83,109, 115
Hymenoptera, 37, 145
Hymenopteran wasps, 144
IBP (International Biological
Program), 108
Iceland, 86
Income levels
and degradation, 197
Individualistically distributed

species, 71
Individuals, definition of, 186-188
Indonesia
soil loss in, 7
Industrial melanism, 136
Infectious diseases, 89, 90
See also Diseases
Influenza virus, 23
Insects
See Plant-insect interactions
Interacting particle systems. See
Stochastic cellular automata

246

Index

International agreements, 205
International Biological Program,
S«IBP
Intertidal regions, 9-10, 53, 89,
109,112-113,164-166
and competition, 134-135
Invisible hand, 178,179
Ising, Ernst, 212(n9)
Ising model, 212(n9)
Island biogeography, 83,87,90,153
See »ko MacArthur-Wilson theory
Island chains, 120
Island Life (Cariquist), 82
Islands, 60-61, 89,90
biology of, 81-87
and evolution, 120-123
See also under specific islands
Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma (IPD),
145-146
Iwasa, Yoh, 133
Jacob, Francois, 19, 30, 58-59,68,
123
Jacobi, Claudia, 219(n20)
Janzen, Daniel, 109
Jasper BMge Reserve, 97
Java
Krakatoa, 85
soil loss in, 7
Kareiva, Peter, 86
Kaufl&nan, Stuart, 55,123-124,
127,183,212(n9),
224{nl4)
Kerner, Ed, 107
Kettlewell, H. B. D., 136
Keystone species, 9-10,164,
166-167,172
See also Species
Kinzig,Ann, 143,147,155
Klopfer, Eric, 155
Koesrier, Arthur, 162
Krakatoa, 85-86
Krueger, Alan, 197

Lack, David, 137
Lake Washington, 109
Lamberson, Roland, 97
Landscapes
Eows on, 123-126
Law of Large Numbers, 63-64
Lawton, John, 160,162,172
Leeuwen, Willem M. Doctors van,
86
Leigh, Egbert, 107,162
Lenz, Herbert, 212(n9)
Lenz-Ising model, 212(n9)
Leopold, Aldo, 8
Levin, Bruce, 150
Levin, Simon A,, 212(n9)
Lewontin, Richard, 28
Lichens, 142
Life and Habit (Butler), 144
Life Cycfe(Bonner), 147
Life zones, 63, 69-70
Likens, Eugene, 53,109
Limnoiogist, 84
Linear programming, 125
Linnaeus, Carl, 4,13,168
Lions, 170-171
Local diversity
and species-area curves, 99-101
Local interactions
and altruism, 147-150,190
Set etlso Environment, local
Locusts, 144
Lognorrnal distribution, 105
Los Hermanos, 137
Lovejoy, Thomas, 227(n32)
Lovelock, James, 24-25,28, 32
Ludwig, Don, 226(nlO)
Lumping, 168,221(n39), 221(n40)
MacArthur, Robert, 82-85,86,
107-108,163,182
MacArthur-Wilson theory, 83-87
Magnets, 212(n9)
Malaria
and gene resistance, 22

Index
Mangel, Marc, 60
Mangrove islands, 85
Marchena Island, 137
Margulis, Lynn, 24-25,28
Marine communities, 72, 88
Marine fisheries, 106,159
and adaptive management, 201
May, Robert, 105
Medicine
and ecosystems, 6-7
Mesoscales, 70-72
Meta-communities, 119
and islands, 120
See ako Communities, ecological
Microenvironments, 129
Midway
species introduction in, 69
Miller, John, 146
Modularization, 202
Moloney, Kirk, 97
Monitoring, 199
Monterey Bay, 166
Montreal Protocol, 205
Mooney, Harold, 97
Moths, 136
Mount Saint Helens, 86
Mudialy wetlands, 204
Mukkaw Bay, 165
Multicellular organisms, 189
Multigene traits, 21
Mussels, 10,89,164-166
Mutation, 4,20-23
Mutualism, 68,141,148-149,
192-193
Mycorrhizae, 142
Mycorrhizal associations, 142,148
Mytilus c&lifornwnm. See Mussels
Myxomatosis, 151-154
Myxotna virus, 49
Naeem, Shahid, 160,162,172
National Science Foundation,
218(n2)
Natural resources
management of, 196

247

Natural selection, 18-19
and genes, 23
and homeostasis, 30-33
Nature Conservancy, 5
Nature preservation, 206,
227(n32)
Nature's Services (Daily), 6, 7
Negative feedback, 140
Nelder-Mead method, 215(n7)
New York City
and Catskills, 204
New Zealand, 86
Niches, 58-59,74-75
NIMBY, 2
Nitrification, 11
Nitrogen cycle, 10-11
Nitrogen ixation, 10-11
"N-K" models, 212(n9)
Nonlinearity, 13,14,43
Noon, Barry, 97
North America
acid precipitation in, 109
North Atlantic, 168
North Pacific, 168
Northwest Atlantic
haddock, 159
Oceans, 45,72
O'Neill, Robert, 108
Ontogeny, 178-180
Optimality, 67
Optimization, 125,214-215(n7)
and evolution, 126-129
Optimization (mathematical),
215(nlO)
Orchids, 149
Oregon
sea otter in, 9
Oryctoltyjus cuniculm. See Rabbits
Ozone-depleting substances, 205
Pacala, Stephen, 110
Paine, Robert, 9-10, 53,89,109,
113,164-167,170,172,
221(n38)

248

Index

Paknisano, John, 10,166
Parasite-host interactions,
150-154
Parasite species, 89,90
See a-lso Species
Passifiora, 154
Patch formation, 113
Path dependency, 14
Pathogen, mutation in, 21
Pattern formation, 139-140
Patterns, 41-46, 57
Peppered moths, 136
Percolation theory, 98
Pesticide resistance, 48-49
Pest species, 48,49, 89
See (tbo Species
Phase transition, 54
Photosynthesis, 10
Phytoplankton, 3
Pimm, Stuart, 78,170,219(n20)
Piaster ochraceous. See Sea stars
Planktonic communities, 88,144
Plant communities, 71
Plant-herbivore interactions,
153-154
Plant-insect interactions, 154
Plant morphology, 79
Plants, 142
and plasticity, 176
and pollinators, 148-149
and prediction, 176-177
See also Vegetation
Plasmids, 21-22
Plasticity, 176,177
Polis, Gary, 170
Pollinators, 148-149
Pollution, 196-197,205
Polypeptide chains, 124
Population genetics, 121
See nko Genes
Possible and the Actual, The (Jacob),
58
Postel, Sandra, 7
Power law, 55,21G(nS)

Predator-prey interactions, 136,
153,154-155,170
Prediction, 59,175-176
Preservation, nature, 206,227
(n32)
Preston, Frank, 105
Prey, See Predator-prey interactions
Prices, 204
Primary production, 72
Primary succession, 85
Prisoner's Dilemma, 34, 35, 145
Privatization, 203-204
Productivity
and diversity, 172, 222(n49)
Proteins, 124
Provine, William, 121
Prudent predation, 154-155
Rabbits, 49,151-152
Racism, 33
Rafadli, David, 169
Rapoport, Anatol, 146
Raunkiaer, Christen, 62
Realized biota, 59
Realized niche, 58-59
Reciprocal altruism, 34, 35-36,
143,205
See also Altruism
Recolonization, 48
Recombination, 4,22-23
Recycling programs, 196
Redundancy, 202-203
Reforestation, 204-205
Regional cooperatives, 205
Resiliency, 88,162-167,172-173
and evolution, 53-55
Resistance, 173
Riddefs, Robert, 141
River Tieria, 205
Rivet model, 8-9, 202
Rodents, 68-69
Root, Richard, 167,221(n38)
Roughgarden, Joan, 113
Rowell, Thelma, 162

Index
Samoa
rodent introduction in, 68-69
Sandpiic model, 181,182,192
San Juan Islands, 113
Santa Cruz Island, 137
Scales, 25-28,49, 63-69, 74
and environmental protection,
196-197
Schindier, David, 53,109
Schistosomiasis, 152
Schlutcr, Dolph, 138
Schools (animal), 44
Scientific investigation, 199
Sea cucumbers, 163
Sea otter, 9, 166
Search images, 136
Sea stars, 9-10, 164-166
Secondary succession, 76, 88
Selection, 4
See eUso Natural selection
Self-interest, 148
Selfish Gene, The (Dawkins), 145
Self-organization, 12
and patterns, 43-46
See also Ecological assembly;
Ecosystem organization
Self-organized criticality, 180-184,
192, 224(nl4)
Serengeti
wildebeest herds in, 44-45
Sex, 21-23
Sexual reproduction
evolution of, 22-23
Shifting balance theory, 128
Shubik, Martin, 35
Silander, John, 110
Silwood Park, 160-161
Simberloff, Daniel, 82, 85, 86
Simon, Herbert, 162-163, 172,
190
Simplex method, 215(n7)
Simulated annealing, 215(nlO)
Simulation techniques
and forest growth, 109-112

Z49

Singapore
species loss in, 5-6
Single cells, 189
Single gene mutation, 21
Six Decrees of Separation, 173
Slobodkin, Lawrence, 19, 82, 83,112
Slugs, 147-148, 188
Small-world networks, 173
Smith, Adam, 178, 179,193
Smith, Fred, 221(n38)
Smith, John Maynard, 131
Sneppen, Kim, 224(nl6)
Societies, 188-189, 199
Soil degradation, 7
Soil loss, 7
South Africa
Conservation Corporation, 204
Space, 44
Spain
River Tieria, 205
Speciation, 55, 89-90
Species
classification, 62
distribution of, 46-48, 70-72,
73-79
and functional groups, 168-169
introduction of, 47, 68-69,
86-87,220(n24)
number of, 198-199
See also Exotic species; Fugacious
species; Keystone Species;
Parasite species; Pest species;
Species loss
Species-area curves
and local diversity, 99-101
Species-area relationships, 90-92
Species loss
cumulative effects of, 9
in Singapore, 5-6
Splitting, 168, 221(n39)
Spotted owl, 97
Stanhoped, 149
Starfish. See Sea stars
Statistical mechanical theories, 107

250

Index

Steneck, Robert, 168-169
Stochastic cellular automata, 93-99
Stochastic optimization, 125,
215(n7)
Strawberries, 176
Strogatz, Steven, 190
Subsidies, 204-205
Succession, 81-82
Sugarscapes, 113-114
Superorganisms, 70-72
Surtscy island, 86
Symbiosis, See Mutualism
Tatoosh Island, 135,165
Technological innovation, 205
Termites, 144,188
Theoretical Population Biology, 108
Theory of coevolution, 212(n9)
Theory of Island Eiogeograpby
(MacArthur and Wilson), 83
Tight coevolution, 152
Tilman, David, 53, 106, 159-160,
161, 167, 172, 222(n49)
Tinkering, 19, 30, 68, 81
Trade, 199
Tragedy of the Commons, 104,
196,198
Trait group, 152
Traits, 20-23
Transformational evolution, 28-29
Traveling salesman problem,
125
Treaties, 205
Triage, 51
Tribal conflict, 33
Trophic level, 170
Trophic pyramid, 10
Trophic webs, 78
Trust, 205-206
Turner, Ian, 5-6
United Nations, 36

Valencia, Spain
River Tieria, 205
Variation, 18, 25-26
Vegetation, 44, 62, 88
classification, 69-70
Set also Plants
Vines, 154
Viruses, 151-154
Volcanic lava flow, 48
Volterra, Vito, 107
Voter model, 93-96, 212(n9)
Walters, Carl, 226(nlO)
Washington
Lake Washington, 109
Mount Saint Helens, 86
Mukkaw Bay, 165
Outer coast, 89, 165
sea otter in, 9
Tatoosh Island, 135
Wasps, 144, 145
Watchmakers, Koestler's parable of,
162-163,172, 202
Watson, Andrew, 32
Watt, Alexanders., 113
Watts, Duncan, 190
Weather cycles, 25-26
West Coast
sea otter, 166
Whittaker, Robert, 70
Wildebeest herds, 44-45
Wilson, David Sloan, 152
Wilson, Edward, 82, 83-85, 86,
182
Women
and empowerment, 204
Wright, Sewall, 121-122, 126-128,
133
Wu, Jianguo, 97
Yodzis, Peter, 170
Ythan Estuary, 169

