About Pearson


Pearson is the world’s learning company, with presence across 70 countries worldwide. Our unique insights and world-class expertise comes from a long history of working closely with renowned teachers, authors and thought leaders, as a result of which, we have emerged as the preferred choice for millions of teachers and learners across the world.

We believe learning opens up opportunities, creates fulfilling careers and hence better lives. We hence collaborate with the best of minds to deliver you class-leading products, spread across the Higher Education and Test Preparation spectrum.

Superior learning experience and improved outcomes are at the heart of everything we do. This product is the result of one such effort.

Your feedback plays a critical role in the evolution of our products and you can contact us – reachus@pearson.com. We look forward to it.





Fundamentals of Ecology and Environment


Fourth edition




Pranav Kumar


Former faculty,

Department of Biotechnology,

Jamia Millia Islamia,

New Delhi, India


Usha Mina


Professor,

School of Environmental Sciences,

Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU),

New Delhi, India





Contents


Chapter 1

The Environment

1.1 Physical environment

Soil

Weathering and soil formation

Soil composition

Soil profile

Soil erosion

Air and Atmosphere

Light

Temperature

Temperature and vegetation

1.2 Adaptation to the physical environment

Plant’s adaptation to water stress

Animal’s adaptation to thermal stress

Relationship between body size and environmental temperature

1.3 Metabolic rate and size of animals

1.4 Shelford’s law of tolerance

1.5 Species concept

Ecotype and Ecads

Chapter 2

Ecosystem Ecology

2.1 Ecosystem components

2.2 Productivity

Patterns in primary productivity

Relationship between productivity and biomass

Measuring primary productivity

Oxygen emission method

Radioactive tracer method

Harvest analysis method

2.3 Energy flow

Universal energy flow model

Concept of the trophic level

2.3.1 Food chains

2.3.2 Ecological efficiencies

2.3.3 Ecological pyramid

2.4 Nutrient cycling

General model of nutrient cycling

Carbon cycle

Nitrogen cycle

Phosphorus cycle

Sulfur cycle

Decomposition

2.5 Ecosystem services

2.6 Control of trophic structure: top-down versus bottom-up control

2.7 Types of ecosystems

2.7.1 Aquatic ecosystem

Variation in light and temperature in aquatic ecosystem

Primary productivity in aquatic ecosystems

Marine ecosystems

Hot hydrothermal vents

Coral reefs ecosystem

Estuary

Freshwater ecosystem

Lake

Thermal stratification

Seasonal changes in water temperature

Nutrient inputs and cycling

River

Wetlands

2.7.2 Terrestrial ecosystem

Forest ecosystem

Deforestation

Afforestation

Social forestry

Grassland ecosystem

Desert ecosystem

Types of deserts

Desertification

2.8 Biomes

Biome distribution

Biome types

Tundra biome

Desert biome

Tropical grassland (or Savanna biome)

Temperate grasslands

Tropical rainforests

Temperate deciduous forest biome

Taiga biome

Chaparral biome

Chapter 3

Population Ecology

3.1 Population characteristics

Population density

Natality

Mortality

Dispersion

Age structure and Age pyramids

Dispersal

3.2 Population growth

Exponential growth

Logistic growth

3.3 Life table: Age-specific mortality and survival

3.4 Population regulation

3.5 Concept of metapopulation

3.6 Life history

Life history trade-offs

r- and K-selection

Grime’s triangle of life history strategies

3.7 Home range and Territory

Chapter 4

Community Ecology

4.1 Community structure

4.1.1 Species composition

4.1.2 Species diversity

4.1.3 Diversity index

4.1.4 Species-area curve

4.1.5 Disturbance and species diversity

4.2 Community interactions

4.3 Community: Functional classification

4.4 Diversity-Stability-Complexity relationships

Diversity and stability

Complexity and stability

4.5 Plant communities

4.6 Community gradient and boundaries

4.7 Equilibrium theory of island biogeography

4.8 Ecological interdependence and interactions

4.9 Lotka-Volterra model

4.10 Ecological niche

Ecological compression

4.11 Effect of competition

Competitive exclusion principle

Competitive exclusion and coexistence

Resource partitioning

Character displacement

4.12 Ecological succession

Pattern of succession

Species diversity and succession

Types of ecological succession

Chapter 5

Biodiversity

5.1 Levels of biodiversity

5.2 Gradients and Magnitude of biodiversity

Gradients of biodiversity

Magnitude of biodiversity

Biodiversity of India

5.3 Uses of biodiversity

5.4 Threats to biodiversity

5.5 Extinction of species

5.6 IUCN Red List categories and criteria

5.7 Conservation of biodiversity

Biodiversity Hotspots

Flagship and Umbrella species

5.8 Protected Areas of India

National parks

Wildlife sanctuary

Conservation reserves and Community reserves

Marine protected areas

Biosphere reserves

Sacred groves

5.9 Biodiversity conservation: International and National efforts

International conservation strategies

Convention on Biological diversity

CITES

World Heritage Convention (WHC)

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals

International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture

Convention on Wetlands (Ramsar Convention)

International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC)

National conservation strategies

Biological Diversity Act

Wildlife (Protection) Act

Project Tiger and Project Elephant

National Wildlife Action Plan

Forest Conservation Act

5.10 Biogeographic classification of India

Chapter 6

Pollution

6.1 Air pollution

6.1.1 Composition of air

6.1.2 Sources of air pollution

6.1.3 Types of air pollutants

6.1.4 Criteria air pollutants

Carbon monoxide

Ozone

Oxides of nitrogen

Particulate matter

Oxides of sulfur

Lead

6.1.5 Effects of air pollution

Effect on human health

Effect on plants

Loss of biodiversity

Acid rain

Eutrophication

Ozone depletion

Greenhouse effect and Global warming

Climate change

6.1.6 Air quality standards

Ambient Air Quality Standards in India

WHO air quality guidelines

Air Quality Index

National Air Quality Monitoring Programme

6.1.7 Indoor air pollution

6.1.8 Acid rain

6.1.9 Control of air pollution

6.1.10 Noise pollution

6.2 Water pollution

6.2.1 Causes of water pollution

6.2.2 Types of water pollutants

6.2.3 Indicators of water pollution

6.2.4 Groundwater pollution

6.2.5 Water quality indicators

6.2.6 Water quality standards

6.2.7 Effects of water pollution

6.2.8 Control of water pollution

6.2.9 Wastewater treatment

6.2.10 Bioaccumulation, bioconcentration and biomagnification

6.3 Soil pollution

6.4 Solid waste management

Hazardous waste treatment

Solid waste management

6.5 Bioremediation

Bioremediation strategies

Advantages of bioremediation

Phytoremediation

6.6 Bioindicator

Well-studied

6.7 Environmental Impact Assessment

Chapter 7

Climate Change

7.1 Climate change

Climate change and Global warming

Climate change: Evidence

7.2 Greenhouse effect

Greenhouse gases

Global-warming potential of greenhouse gases

Increase in greenhouse gas concentrations

7.3 Global warming

7.4 Climate change: Impacts

7.5 Responding to climate change

7.6 Earth Summit

Rio Conventions

Kyoto protocol

Doha Amendment

Copenhagen Accord

Paris Agreement

7.7 Stratospheric ozone

Stratospheric ozone formation

Stratospheric ozone depletion

Ozone depletion potential

Antarctic ozone hole

Arctic ozone hole

Montreal Protocol

Progess after Montreal Protocol

7.8 Environmental Laws in India

Forest and Biodiversity

Environment and Pollution

7.9 Environmental footprints

Carbon footprint

Nitrogen footprint

Water footprint

Ecological footprint

Index





Pranav Kumar

Former faculty,

Department of Biotechnology,

Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI),

New Delhi, India



Usha Mina

Professor,

School of Environmental Sciences,

Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU),

New Delhi, India

Fundamentals of Ecology and Environment

Although the author and publisher have made every effort to ensure that the information in this book was correct at the time of editing and printing, the author and publisher do not assume and hereby disclaim any liability to any party for any loss or age arising out of the use of this book caused by errors or omissions, whether such errors or omissions result from negligence, accident or any other cause. Further, names, pictures, images, characters, businesses, places, events and incidents are either the products of the author’s imagination or used in a fictitious manner. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead or actual events is purely coincidental and do not intend to hurt sentiments of any individual, community, sect or religion.

In case of binding mistake, misprints or missing pages etc., the publisher’s entire liability and your exclusive remedy is replacement of this book within reasonable time of purchase by similar edition/reprint of the book.





Preface


Fundamentals of Ecology and Environment covers the basic concepts, ideas, major findings and current challenges. As knowledge and best practice in the ecology are constantly changing, the fundamentals are written in a sharply focused manner without overwhelming or excessive details. This book provides a balanced introduction to all major areas of the subject. It is designed to promote understanding of the basic principles and concepts of a subject rather than memorization of details.

We feel that understanding ecology and environment as a whole is far more important than merely identifying separate components of a natural community. With this in mind, the readers will come to understand some basic and underlying concepts, and we trust that, through an understanding and appreciation of these concepts, the overall environmental picture of the Earth will be more fully realized and admired for what it is.

Although the chapters of this book can be read independently of one another, they are arranged in a logical sequence. Our intention is to highlight only the essentials that are most relevant to understanding ecology and environment. The most significant feature of this book is its clear, up-to-date, accurate explanations of mechanisms, rather than the mere description of facts and events. This book has been conceived, designed and written in a manner to meet the aspirations of graduate and postgraduate students. We have tried to maintain a balance between describing the classic works and recent advances in ecology.

Each page is carefully laid out to place related text, figures and tables near one another, minimizing the need for page turning while reading a topic. Sincere efforts have been made to support textual clarifications and explanations with the help of figures and tables to make learning easy and convincing.

This book is intended to go beyond the traditional helping books. This book is divided into four parts – basic ecology (the environment, ecosystem ecology, population ecology and community ecology), biodiversity, pollution and climate change. It is organized to provide an even, logical flow of concepts and to provide clear illustrations of the major ecological and environmental issues. It is our hope that this book will be utilized intensively by students and ecologists to gain a basic understanding of ecology.

This book is the result of the combined efforts of several persons. Several diligent and hardworking minds have come together to bring out this book in this complete form. During the prolonged period of writing this book, several of our students, took the time to read most of the chapters and make careful comments on them. For that we thank them. This book is a team effort, and producing it would be impossible without the outstanding people of Pathfinder Publication. We acknowledge all the individuals whose special efforts went into this book. We wish to thanks especially to our students for their numerous comments and suggestions.

Pranav Kumar

Usha Mina





Ecology as a science


Ecology is the scientific study of the relationships between organisms and their environment. These relationships are complex, varied, and hierarchical. The word ‘ecology’ was first coined by the German biologist Ernst Haeckel in 1869. It is derived from the Greek words ‘oikos’ (meaning ‘house’ or ‘dwelling place’) and ‘logos’ (meaning ‘the study of’). Haeckel defined ecology as ‘the study of the natural environment, including the relations of organisms to one another and to their surroundings.’

Ecology is the scientific study of the relationships between living organisms and their environments, the interactions among organisms, and the patterns and causes of the abundance and distribution of organisms in nature. It is the science that attempts to answer questions about how nature works.





Ecology is an interdisciplinary science


Ecology, as a unifying science, is integrating the knowledge of life on our planet. It has changed from a basic science to applied science. It has become an essential science in learning how life survives and grows. Several questions such as why do animals live in groups, what determines the distribution of a species, how does organism interact with biotic and abiotic components, behavioural aspects of animals often drive us to look into this subject. Ecology is not just biology but an interdisciplinary science that deals with the totality of living organisms and their relationship with the environment. Different kinds of physical, chemical and biological processes occurring within ecological systems involve complex interactions among different components of the system. To study these interactions, ecologists must involve other sciences like physiology, biochemistry, genetics, geology, hydrology and meteorology. Ecology has evolved into a more experimental rather than philosophical subject. With increasing of scientific information, this science also incorporates complex mathematical modeling and algorithms—making it a truly interdisciplinary field.





Chapter 1


The Environment


Organisms and their environments are dynamic and interdependent. The term ‘environment’ etymologically means surroundings. It includes everything (biotic as well as abiotic) that surrounds an organism. Any factor, abiotic or biotic, that influences living organisms is called environmental factor (or ecological factor or ecofactor). Abiotic factors include factors such as temperature, sunlight levels, pH, salinity and soil composition. In contrast, biotic factors encompass producers, consumers and decomposers.





1.1 Physical environment


Soil


Soil constitutes the uppermost weathered layer of the Earth’s crust. It is a mixture of weathered mineral rock particles, organic matter (i.e. both living and dead), water and air. Soil is a biologically active matrix and home of diverse organisms. The scientific discipline dedicated to the study of soil is known as pedology.





Weathering and soil formation


The process of soil formation includes the formation of unconsolidated materials by the weathering process and the soil profile development. Weathering refers to the physical disintegration and chemical decomposition of the rocks and minerals contained in them. Physical disintegration breaks down rock into smaller fragments and eventually into sand and silt particles that are commonly made up of individual minerals. Simultaneously, the minerals decompose chemically, releasing soluble materials and synthesizing new minerals. New minerals form either by minor chemical alterations or by a complete chemical breakdown of the original mineral and resynthesis of new minerals. Based on the location of soil mineral particles formation and deposition, the soils are classified as residual soil and transported soil. If the soil mineral particles have been formed in place from the bedrock below, it is called residual soil. If the soil mineral particles have been carried from some other location by wind, water, gravity or ice then it is termed as transported soil. The transported soil can be classified into colluvium (transported by gravity), alluvium (transported by the movement of water), glacial soil (transported by the movement of glaciers) and eolian soil (transported by wind).





Soil composition


The soil is composed of mineral particles, organic matters, air and water. Mineral particles in the soil include sand (0.05–2.0 mm), silt (0.002–0.05 mm) and clay (<0.002 mm). The relative proportions of sand, silt, and clay in a soil are referred as soil texture. The soil is also composed of organic matter which includes living biomass, detritus and humus. Humus is an amorphous and a colloidal mixture of complex organic substances. It is made up of humic and non-humic substances. Non-humic substances include carbohydrates, proteins, lignins, lipids, organic acids etc. Humic substances are stable end products derived from the decomposition of plant and animal residues. It comprises about 80 to 90% of the soil organic matter and characterized by dark-colored amorphous substance. The elemental analysis of humic substances reveals that they are primarily composed of carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur. The three fractions of humic substances are fulvic acid, humic acid and humin. These sub-divisions are arbitrarily based on the solubility of each fraction in water at different pH. Humins are not soluble in water at any pH. Humic acids are insoluble in water under acidic conditions but are soluble in water under alkaline conditions. Fulvic acids are a mixture of weak aliphatic and aromatic organic acids which are soluble in water at all pH.



Soil air is the mixture of gases that are present in soil pores that are not filled with water. Oxygen and carbon dioxide are important constituents, and their concentration in the soil affects many processes (e.g. nitrification and denitrification).

Soil water can contribute up to 30% of soil volume, and is essential for the activity and physiological functioning of organisms in the soil. The water content in soil depends on soil type. The water-holding capacity of soil is described in terms of field capacity. It represents the soil profile’s ability to retain water after the process of internal drainage has ceased. It is usually measured about two days after an infiltration event. The water holding capacity of a soil depends on soil texture, structure, organic matter content and arrangement of soil pores. Clay soil or soils with a high humus content have a large field capacity.

The water stored in the soil is taken up by the plant roots or evaporated from the topsoil (the topmost mineral horizon which is rich in humus) into the atmosphere. If no additional water is supplied to the soil, it gradually dries out. The dryer the soil becomes, the more tightly the remaining water is retained and the more difficult it is for the plant roots to extract it. At a certain stage, the uptake of water is not sufficient to meet the plant’s needs. The amount of water soil contains at which plants wilt beyond recovery is called the permanent wilting percentage.





Box 1.1 Groundwater




Water stored in the open spaces within rocks and unconsolidated sediments is termed ground-water. The presence and flow of groundwater depend on two key factors: porosity and permeability. Porosity describes the amount of open space within unconsolidated sediment or rock capable of holding underground water. Permeability, on the other hand, describes how these open spaces are configured and interconnected, determining the ease with which water can flow from one pore to the next.

Groundwater exists wherever there is porosity. However, whether groundwater can flow in significant quantities depends on the permeability of the material. An aquifer is a body of rock or unconsolidated sediment with sufficient permeability to allow water to flow through it. Unconsolidated materials like gravel, sand, and even silt make relatively good aquifers. In contrast, an aquitard is a body that does not permit a significant amount of water to pass through, such as clay. These terms are used in relative sense, not in absolute term.



The amount of water held by the soil between field capacity and the permanent wilting point is the plant available water or water that is available for uptake by plants. According to the nature of interaction between soil particles and water molecules, soil water may be classified into the following types:

Hygroscopic water: Water present as a thin film around soil particles and remains firmly attached is called the hygroscopic water. It is not utilized by plants hence it is unavailable to plants.

Capillary water: Water present in thin and narrow capillaries formed by soil particles and widely utilized by plants. The water present in soil, which can be utilized by plants is called chresard (available water).

Gravitational water: Water percolates deep into the soil due to the gravitational force of the Earth that constitutes groundwater. It is not available to plants.

Chemically bound water: Water present in the form of hydrated oxides of iron, aluminium, silicon, etc. is described as chemically bound water and is not available to plants.





Soil profile


Over time, the localized physical, chemical and biological processes in the regolith (the layer of unconsolidated solid material above the bedrock) lead to the development of observable layers in the soil, called horizons. Each horizon differs in physical, chemical and biological characteristics. Together, the horizons in a particular location give each soil a distinctive soil profile (i.e. sequence of horizons from the surface down). It is evident when a vertical cut is made through the soil. Since the separations between each horizon are rarely distinct, these horizons described actually form a continuum in the soil profile.

A typical soil profile consists of four horizons, denoted by capital letters (O, A, B, C). However, there may be some variation between different classification systems. One of the four major horizons is the organic horizon (O), while the others are mineral horizons (A, B, and C). These horizons are listed from top to bottom within the soil profile, with the O horizon located at the soil surface, where organic matter accumulates.

O (O stands for organic matter), made up of large amounts of organic material in varying stages of decomposition.

A (referred as topsoil), the topmost mineral horizons, rich in humus and dark in color.

B (referred as subsoil) little organic material and chemical composition are largely that of the underlying rock; also referred to as illuviated horizon (or the zone of accumulation) since minerals from above tend to concentrate here. The B horizon may be divided into B1, B2 and B3 types

C (referred as parent rock), made up of weakly weathered parent material sit on unaltered bedrock (R).

In older, well-developed soils, the E horizon (E stand for eluviation) occurs between the A and B horizons. It represents a zone of maximum leaching of minerals or eluviation where minerals and organic matter have been leached out, leaving behind a distinct layer composed largely of silicates. It is typically found in older soils, particularly in regions with moderate to high rainfall or where the leaching process has been particularly active over time.



In soil science, eluviation is the transport of soil material from upper horizons of soil to lower horizons by downward precipitation of water across soil horizons, and accumulation of this material (illuvial deposit) in lower horizons is called illuviation. A soil horizon formed due to eluviation is an eluvial horizon.





Figure 1.1 The soil profile is a vertical section of the soil that depicts distinct observable layers called horizons. The soil profile extends from the soil surface to the parent rock material i.e. bedrock.



The soil profile and the relative thickness of the horizons are generally characteristic for different climate, the type of vegetative cover and different topographical situations. For example, in grassland soil humification is rapid, but mineralization is slow. In forest soil litter and root decay slowly. Hence humus layer is narrow, but mineralization is rapid so B horizon is broad.





Soil erosion


Soil erosion is a process of detachment of soil particles, their transportation from one place to another and deposition elsewhere through water, wind, gravity, snow and other forces. Soil erosion involves three steps:

Detachment of soil particles from the main soil body.



Their transportation.



Their deposition at another places.





The major factors which cause soil erosion are rainfall, vegetation destruction, freezing and thawing, water flow and wind velocity. Numerous factors affect soil erosion depending upon the local conditions with regard to physical, chemical and biological nature of the soil. The major factors affecting the soil erosion are climate, topography, physical, chemical and biological characteristics of the soil, vegetation cover and land use.





Box 1.2 Earth




Earth is a terrestrial planet in the solar system, consisting of the Sun and everything bound to it by gravity, including the planets, moons, asteroids, comets, and meteoroids. The Earth can be divided into two equal halves, each known as a hemisphere. The northern hemisphere is located north of the equator, while the southern hemisphere is south of the equator. The Earth rotates around its axis, which is an imaginary line passing through its center and the north and south poles. This rotational movement is referred to as the Earth’s rotation. Additionally, the Earth also orbits or revolves around the Sun, which is termed a revolution.

The interior of the Earth is divided into three major sections: the crust, mantle, and core.

The crust, the outermost layer, varies in depth from 5–60 km. There are two different types of crust: the thin oceanic crust that underlies the ocean basins and the thicker continental crust that underlies the continents. These two types of crust are composed of different rocks. The thin oceanic crust is primarily made up of basalt, while the thicker continental crust is primarily composed of granite. Beneath the crust is the mantle, a thick, dense layer of rock approximately 2,300 km thick. The core of the Earth primarily consists of iron and nickel, and it is divided into two distinct regions: a solid inner core and a molten outer core. Despite its higher temperature compared to the outer core, the inner core remains solid due to the tremendous pressure exerted by the overlying rocks. This pressure keeps the iron-nickel alloy in a solid state even under such extreme temperatures. The core is the Earth’s source of internal heat due to the presence of radioactive materials. This internal heat is instrumental in driving various geophysical processes, such as mantle convection and plate tectonics.

The Earth can also be broken down into two main physical layers- lithosphere and asthenosphere. The lithosphere is the outermost physical layer of the Earth. It is made of crust and the upper layers of the mantle. The oceanic lithosphere is denser than the continental lithosphere. The lithosphere is not continuous. Instead, it is broken into several tectonic plates (large movable segments of the lithosphere). There are seven major plates. The asthenosphere is the layer below the lithosphere. It is made of hot, solid rock that is mechanically weak. This means that the asthenosphere can flow and move over time. The movement of the asthenosphere drives the movement of the tectonic plates.

Plate tectonics and plate boundary

Plate tectonics is the study of the movement and interactions of the tectonic plates of the Earth. The tectonic plates float on the mobile layer beneath them called the asthenosphere. The heat produced in the interior of the Earth is thought to be the driving force behind plate tectonics. The heat from the interior of the Earth creates convection currents in the molten asthenosphere that drive the motion of tectonic plates.

A plate boundary is where two plates meet and move relative to each other. The tectonic plates slowly and constantly move. The movement of the tectonic plates is the primary force that causes the majority of features and activity on the Earth’s surface. There are three types of plate boundaries: convergent, divergent, and transform.

Convergent boundaries, sometimes called destructive boundaries, are places where two or more tectonic plates have a net movement toward each other. When plates of different densities converge, the denser plate sinks beneath the less dense plate, a process called subduction. The entire region is known as a subduction zone. Deep trenches are features often formed where tectonic plates are being subducted.

Divergent boundaries, sometimes called constructive boundaries, are places where two or more plates have a net movement away from each other. They can occur within a continental plate or an oceanic plate. Along these boundaries, magma rises from deep within the Earth and erupts to form new crust on the lithosphere. Most divergent plate boundaries are underwater and form submarine mountain ranges called oceanic spreading ridges.

A transform boundary, sometimes called a strike-slip or conservative boundary, is where the plates slide past each other. They can move in either a dextral fashion with the side opposite moving toward the right or a sinistral fashion with the side opposite moving toward the left. As the plates rub against each other, huge stresses can cause portions of the rock to break, resulting in earthquakes. Places where these breaks occur are called faults.



Figure 1.2 When two tectonic plates meet, we get a plate boundary. There are three major types of plate boundaries, 1. When two plates come together, it is known as a convergent boundary divergent. 2. A boundary occurs when two tectonic plates move away from each other. 3. Two plates sliding past each other forms a transform plate boundary.





Air and Atmosphere


Air consists of a mixture of gases that forms the atmosphere, which surrounds or envelopes a celestial body and is held in place by its gravitational field. The atmosphere is most dense at the surface of the Earth because gravity pulls the molecules of gas toward the center of the Earth. The atmosphere is vertically divided into four general layers:





Troposphere


More than 80 percent of the mass of the Earth’s atmosphere and virtually all of the water vapour, clouds and precipitation occur in the troposphere. The troposphere extends from the Earth’s surface to an altitude that varies from 8 to 18 km depending on latitude and season. At the poles, the troposphere may extend up to about 8 km, while at the equator it is about 18 km. In the troposphere, temperature typically decreases with altitude by an average of about 6.5°C km–1 (the rate at which the air temperature decreases with height is called the temperature lapse rate). The top of the troposphere is called the tropopause which forms the boundary between the troposphere and the stratosphere. The height of the tropopause varies. It is normally found at higher elevations over equatorial regions, and it decreases in elevation as we travel poleward. Generally, the tropopause is higher in summer and lower in winter at all latitudes.





Stratosphere


This layer starts from tropopause and goes up to 50 km. A thin ozone layer is present at the height of 15 to 30 km. The troposphere and stratosphere together account for about 99.9 percent of the mass of the atmosphere. Collectively, the troposphere and the stratosphere are known as lower atmosphere. The top of the stratosphere is called the stratopause which forms the boundary between the stratosphere and the mesosphere.





Mesosphere


This layer starts from about 50 km above the Earth’s surface and goes up to 85 km. The boundary between the mesosphere and the thermosphere (a layer above mesosphere) is called the mesopause. As we move up in the mesosphere, the temperature gets colder. The top of the mesosphere is the coldest part of Earth’s atmosphere (the temperature is around –90°C).





Thermosphere


It extends from about 85 km to about 600 km in the atmosphere. Within the thermosphere, temperature rises continually and goes beyond 1000°C. Within the thermosphere, there is a relatively dense band of charged particles called the ionosphere. The outermost layer of our atmosphere is exosphere. It extends from the top of the thermosphere up to 10,000 km. The boundary between thermosphere and exosphere is called the thermopause.



Figure 1.3 Atmospheric stratification. Based on temperature, Earth’s atmosphere is divided into four main layers – troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere and thermosphere – moving upward from the Earth surface. The lowest region of the atmosphere, the troposphere, extends from the Earth surface to an altitude that varies from 8 to 18 km. The regions of the atmosphere above the troposphere are the stratosphere (up to ~50 km), the mesosphere (~50 to ~85 km) and the thermo-sphere (~85 to ~600 km). The atmosphere above 600 km is called exosphere (the outermost layer of Earth’s atmosphere).



Table 1.1 Composition of clean, dry air





The most commonly used units for expressing the concentration of atmospheric gases are ppm or ppb. For example, an ozone concentration of 10 ppm indicates that there are 10 ozone molecules for every one million air molecules.

ppm to percent

1% = 1/100

1 ppm = 1/1000000

So, 1 ppm = 0.0001%





Atmospheric pressure


Atmospheric pressure (or air pressure) is a measure of the force exerted by the mass of the atmosphere on the surface at a given location. Just as water pressure is caused by the weight of water, atmospheric pressure is caused by the weight of air. Atmospheric pressure is highest at sea level and decreases with altitude. Atmospheric pressure is measured with an instrument called a barometer. Because we measure atmospheric pressure with a barometer, atmospheric pressure is also referred to as barometric pressure. The SI unit of pressure is the pascal (Pa), where 1 pascal is the force of 1 newton acting on a surface of 1 square meter. The standard atmospheric pressure at sea level is 101.3 kilopascals (1013.25 millibar), often referred to as 1 atmosphere.

A difference in horizontal air pressure produces a horizontal pressure gradient force. This force is always directed from higher pressure toward lower pressure and is responsible for causing air to move and the wind to blow. The instrument that measures wind speed is the anemometer. Once the wind starts to blow, the Coriolis force (or Coriolis effect) causes it to bend to the right of its intended path in the northern hemisphere and to the left of its intended path in the southern hemisphere. The Coriolis force is an apparent force observed on any free-moving object in a rotating system. On Earth, this force results from Earth’s rotation and causes moving particles, including the wind, to deflect to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in the southern hemisphere. The amount of deflection depends upon: the rotation of Earth, the latitude and the object’s speed. The Coriolis force acts at right angles to the wind, only influencing wind direction and never wind speed.

A cyclone is an area of low atmospheric pressure around which winds blow counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere and clockwise in the southern hemisphere. Typically, low-pressure areas are associated with stormy weather. In contrast, an anticyclone is a high-pressure weather system where air descends. In the northern hemisphere, it exhibits a clockwise rotation around the anticyclone center, while in the southern hemisphere, it displays a counterclockwise rotation. A hurricane is a tropical cyclone with sustained winds of at least 64 knots. A knot is a unit of speed equal to 1 nautical mile per hour, which is approximately 1.85 km/hr.



An instrument for determining wind direction is the wind vane. With the help of an instrument aerovane we can measure both wind speed and direction. The layer of air from Earth’s surface, usually up to about 1 km, is influenced by friction with Earth’s surface and objects on it. This layer is called the atmospheric boundary layer, also known as planetary boundary layer or friction layer.





Light


Light is an electromagnetic radiation. The electromagnetic radiation is a form of energy and has both electrical and magnetic characteristics. The electric and magnetic fields in an electromagnetic wave oscillate along directions perpendicular to the propagation direction of the wave. The classification of electromagnetic waves according to frequency or wavelengths is the electromagnetic spectrum. Light represents a part of the electromagnetic spectrum (~400 to 700 nm). The word usually refers to visible light because it is visible to the human eye. The wavelengths of visible light typically range from 400 to 700 nm, between the infrared (with longer wavelengths) and the ultraviolet (with shorter wavelengths). The shorter wavelengths being the violet end of the spectrum and the longer wavelengths the red. Visible light is also called photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) because photosynthetic organisms perform photosynthesis in this region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength from 100 nm to 400 nm is ultraviolet (UV) radiation. It is shorter than that of visible light but longer than X-rays. Depending upon the wavelength, three ranges in UV radiation are UV-C (100 to 280 nm), UV-B (280 to 320 nm) and UV-A (320 to 400 nm). Ozone layer in stratosphere have the remarkable ability to absorb UV radiation, particularly in the UV-C and most of the UV-B regions of the electromagnetic spectrum.



The Sun is the primary source of light and energy on Earth, emitting energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation, collectively referred to as solar radiation. The intensity and duration of solar radiation intercepted at any point on the Earth’s surface vary significantly with both latitude and altitude. The latitudinal variation is mainly due to two factors. First, except at the equator, daylight hours are longest during the summer and shortest in the winter. Second, radiation hits the Earth’s surface at a smaller angle at higher latitudes, spreading sunlight over a larger area. In addition, radiation that penetrates the atmosphere at a lower angle must travel through a deeper layer of air. In this process, it encounters more particles in the atmosphere, which reflect more of it back into space, making that sunlight much less intense. Altitudinal variation mainly influences the intensity of light. As elevation increases, light intensity also increases because the thinner atmosphere absorbs and disperses less light.

Solar insolation is the amount of light or solar radiation an area receives over a given period of time.





Figure 1.4 The angle of incoming solar radiation differs at different latitudes, hence, the intensity of incoming solar radiation varies with latitude. In polar areas (i.e. higher latitudes), the sunlight strikes the Earth at a lower angle and spread over a larger surface area, hence, deliver less energy. In tropical locations (i.e. lower latitudes), the sunlight strikes the Earth at a higher angle and concentrated over a smaller area, hence, deliver more energy.





Effect of light on plants


Light from the sun is the primary source of energy for most of ecosystems present on the Earth. It is captured by plants through photosynthesis and its energy stored in the chemical bonds of organic compounds. Sunlight serves not only as an energy source for photosynthesis but also as a signal that regulates various growth and developmental processes, from seed germination to fruit development. The quality (wavelength or color), the quantity (intensity) and the duration (photoperiod) of light influence photosynthesis and many growths and development features of plants.

Light quality: The quality of light plays an important role in photosynthesis and photomorphogenesis (such as flower induction, seed germination and plant movements). In plants, photosynthesis occurs in the blue and red light. In terrestrial ecosystems, the quality of light does not change much. However, in aquatic ecosystems, the quality of light can be a limiting factor because both blue and red light are absorbed by water and by suspended particles present in it, and as a result, they do not penetrate deeply into the water.

Light quantity: The intensity of the light that reaches the Earth varies according to the latitude, season of the year and time of the day. Variation in intensity of light affects the processes of photosynthesis, growth and reproduction in plants. Plants, in general, can be divided into two groups: shade-tolerant species and shade-intolerant species. In ecology, shade tolerance refers to a plant’s ability to grow in low light intensity.

Light duration: The light duration (or photoperiod) plays a pivotal role in regulating numerous growth and developmental processes. Light is indispensable for photosynthesis, the process through which plants generate biomass for growth. Additionally, the duration of light governs various photomorphogenetic processes such as flowering and seed germination. Plants utilize photoreceptors such as phytochromes and cryptochromes to sense and respond to changes in photoperiod.





Temperature


Temperature is the degree of hotness or coldness of a substance. Temperatures at the Earth’s surface vary from place to place, from night to day, and from summer to winter. It is directly related to the duration and intensity of solar radiation. The factors which influence variation in temperatures on the Earth include latitude, altitude, topography, vegetation and others.





Effect of latitude


The most important factor influencing the temperature of a place on the Earth is the latitudinal location. Temperature is inversely related to latitude. As latitude increases, the temperature falls, and vice versa. The temperature at a particular latitude is influenced by two important factors:

the angle of the solar radiation



the distance that a beam of light travels through the Earth’s atmosphere.





The rays from the Sun strike the surface of the Earth at different angles. It influences the amount of solar energy intercepted at any point on Earth’s surface. When the incoming solar radiation is nearly perpendicular, the solar radiation is concentrated over a smaller surface area, causing high temperatures. At higher latitudes, the angle of solar radiation is smaller, causing solar radiation to spread over a larger surface area, causing lower temperatures. Because the angle of solar radiation varies depending on the latitude, surface temperatures on average are warmer at lower latitudes and cooler at higher latitudes.

Apart from the angle at which solar radiation strikes the Earth surface, the distance that a beam of light travels through the Earth’s atmosphere before it reaches the Earth’s surface also influences the temperature. A beam of solar radiation passing through the atmosphere at the equator travels through a less thick atmosphere than incoming solar radiation arriving at higher latitudes. As a result, less heat is lost in the atmosphere due to the reflection and scattering of solar radiation because they travel a short distance in the atmosphere. As incoming solar radiation travels through a thicker atmosphere, there is a greater chance for reflection and scattering of solar radiation. As a result, more heat is lost in the atmosphere because they travel long distances over the atmosphere before it hits the Earth’s surface.

Although the variation in solar radiation reaching Earth’s surface with latitude can explain the gradient of decreasing temperature from the equator to the poles, it does not explain the seasonal variation in temperature and day length at different latitudes. These variations occur because the Earth’s axis of rotation is tilted to its orbital plane.





Box 1.3 Earth: Rotation and Revoluton




Earth is subjected to two distinct motions – rotation and revolution. Rotation is the movement of the Earth on its axis. Earth takes about 24 hours to complete one rotation around its axis. The period of rotation is known as Earth day. Due to the spherical shape of the Earth, only half of it gets light from the Sun at a time. The portion facing the Sun experiences day while the other half away from the Sun experiences night. The circle that divides the day from night on the globe is called the circle of illumination. Day and night on the Earth occur due to this rotation. If the Earth does not rotate, then a portion of the Earth facing the Sun would always experience day (thus remain warm all the time). The other half would remain in darkness (thus remain cold all the time). Earth’s axis of rotation is not perpendicular but tilted at an angle of 23.4°. This tilt is responsible for the seasonal variations in temperature and day length. Only at the equator are there exactly 12 hours of day and night every day of the year.



Figure 1.5 Day and night due to rotation of the Earth. Rotation is the movement of the Earth on its axis.



The second motion of the Earth around the Sun in its orbit is called revolution. It takes 365 days and six hours (one year) to revolve around the Sun in an elliptical orbit. The direction of rotation and tilt on its axis of rotation do not change as Earth revolves around the Sun. Seasons change due to the change in the position of the Earth around the Sun. As shown in the figure below, around 21 June, the northern hemisphere is tilted towards the Sun. The rays of the Sun fall directly (i.e. perpendicularly) on the Tropic of cancer. The north pole is inclined towards the Sun and the places beyond the Arctic circle experience continuous daylight for about six months.



Since a large portion of the Northern hemisphere is getting light from the Sun, it is summer in the regions north of the equator. The longest day and the shortest night at these places occur on or around 21 June. At this time in the Southern hemisphere, all these conditions are reversed. It is winter season there. The nights are longer than the days. This position of the Earth is called the Summer solstice. The combination of more direct rays of sunlight and more hours of daylight causes the hemisphere tilted toward the Sun to receive more solar radiation and to have warmer temperatures.



Figure 1.6 Inclination of the Sun at Summer Solstice. The Sun is directly (90°) over the Tropic of Cancer and is at 66.5° over the equator. At this time, the area above the Arctic circle is in light 24 hours a day, while the area below the Antarctic circle is in darkness 24 hours a day.



On or around 21 December, the Tropic of capricorn receives direct rays of the Sun as the south pole tilts towards it. As the solar radiations fall vertically at the Tropic of capricorn, a larger portion of the Southern hemisphere gets light. Therefore, it is summer in the Southern hemisphere with longer days and shorter nights. The reverse happens in the Northern hemisphere. This position of the Earth is called the Winter solstice.

On or around 21 March and 22 September, direct rays of the Sun fall on the equator. At this position, neither of the poles is tilted towards the Sun; so, the whole Earth experiences equal days and equal nights. This is called an equinox. The Sun is directly (90°) over the equator and is at 66.5° at the Tropics of cancer and capricorn. At the equator, the duration of sunshine is 12 hours daily throughout the year. Around 22 September, it is autumn season in the Northern hemisphere and spring season in the Southern hemisphere. The opposite is the case on or around 21 March, when it is spring in the Northern hemisphere and autumn in the Southern hemisphere.





Effect of altitude


In the troposphere, the temperature generally decreases with altitude. The temperature usually decreases with height at the average lapse rate of 6.5°C per kilometer. The troposphere is about 12 kilnometers thick on average; it is thicker in summer than in winter. The troposphere over the equator is about 18 kilometers thick, while its thickness in the regions nearest the two poles is only about eight to nine kilometers.

Although the sunlight comes from the top to the bottom of the atmosphere, the troposphere is primarily heated from the bottom. The reason is that the troposphere’s gases absorb very little of the incoming solar radiation. Instead, the ground absorbs this radiation and then heats the tropospheric air by conduction and convection. Since the Earth’s surface is the primary heat source, heating is most effective near the ground, the temperature in the troposphere gradually decreases with increasing altitude.





Box 1.4 Climate




Climate is the long-term pattern of weather in a locality, region, or even across the entire globe. It represents the statistical summary of weather conditions, typically observed over a 30-year interval. Climate is assessed by analyzing patterns of variation in temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure, wind, precipitation, and other meteorological variables in a given region over extended periods of time. Two of the most crucial factors determining an area’s climate are air temperature and precipitation.

The terms ‘climate’ and ‘weather’ have distinct meanings. Weather refers to the short-term atmospheric conditions for a specific place and time. It is constantly changing and encompasses elements such as air temperature, air pressure, humidity, clouds, precipitation (rain or snow), wind speed, and direction. Weather varies both spatially and temporally.

Climatic zone

Climatic zones represent the regions on the Earth with distinct climates. Although no two places experience exactly the same climate, several different generalized climate zones can be recognized. Climatic zones can be classified according to the average and typical ranges of different variables, most commonly temperature and precipitation. The Köppen system of climatic zone classification is one of the most widely used systems. This system is based mainly on annual and monthly averages of temperature and precipitation. It was first introduced by Wladimir Köppen in 1884 and has been further modified by Trewartha. According to this system, there are five major climatic zones based on both precipitation and temperature, along with the corresponding vegetation.

Humid tropical climate; hot all the seasons.



Dry climate; inadequate annual rainfall; evapotranspiration exceeds precipitation.



Moist subtropical mid-latitude climate; warm to hot summers with mild winters, rainy climate.



Moist continental climate; warm summers and very cold winters.



Polar climate; extremely cold winters and cold summers.





Temperature and vegetation


The climatic conditions, growth responses, and activities of organisms are significantly influenced by temperature, the most important factor shaping global patterns of plant growth. Along with available sunlight and water, temperature determines whether the land will support dense forests, grassland, or nearly barren desert. Based on temperature, world’s vegetation is divided into various classes as– megatherms (where high temperatures prevail throughout the year and dominant vegetation is tropical rainforest), mesotherms (with high temperature alternating with low temperature, and dominant vegetation is tropical deciduous forest), microtherms (where low temperatures prevail and vegetation is of mixed coniferous forest type) and hekistotherms (with very low temperature and alpine vegetation being dominant).

Humidity is a general term that refers to the water vapor content of the air. Absolute humidity is the actual amount of water vapor per unit volume of air. Relative humidity is the percentage of water vapor in the atmosphere compared with the maximum amount of water vapor that the atmosphere could contain at that temperature.





Precipitation


In meteorology, precipitation refers to any product of the condensation of atmospheric water vapor that falls under gravity. This includes rain (precipitation in the form of liquid water drops), snow (precipitation in the form of ice crystals), sleet (precipitation in the form of transparent pellets of ice), and hailstones (precipitation in the form of solid balls of ice). Rain is formed when separate water droplets fall from the clouds to the Earth’s surface. To a meteorologist, rain is defined as falling drops of liquid water with a diameter equal to or greater than 0.5 mm. Rainfall is highest near the equator in the tropics, where the strong heating by the Sun creates significant vertical uplift of air and the formation of prolonged heavy showers and frequent thunderstorms. Annual rainfall totals in the tropics usually exceed 100 inches (or 2500 millimeters) and can be as high as 400 inches (or 10000 millimeters), particularly when influenced by monsoons or when mountains enhance the uplift of air.

Within the polar regions, precipitation is low because air is too cold to hold much water vapour. In addition, the cold heavy air descends precluding much cloud formation. In fact, some parts of Antarctica and the Arctic are as dry as the hot desert climates of the subtropics, where high pressure also limits cloud formation and precipitation. Both hot and cold deserts may receive less than 10 inches (or 250 millimetres) of precipitation each year. Indeed, in some parts of the subtropics, rain may not fall for several years.





1.2 Adaptation to the physical environment


Every organism requires specific environmental conditions for its normal growth and development. Organisms are adapted to some environmental conditions which are necessary for them to remain alive. Adaptations are a product of natural selection. It involves the acquisition of genetic traits that enable an organism to survive, grow, and reproduce under the prevailing environmental conditions.

An ‘ adaptation’ is any genetically determined heritable trait (behavioral, morphological or physiological) of an organism that has evolved over a period of time by the process of natural selection such that it maintains or increases the fitness (reproductive and survival) of an organism under a given set of environmental conditions.

The Earth’s environment is heterogeneous and dynamic. Environmental conditions vary in both space and time. Each combination of environmental conditions presents a unique set of constraints on the organisms that inhabit them—constraints on their ability to survive and reproduce. The fitness of any trait is a function of the prevailing environmental conditions; the characteristics that enable an individual to maximize fitness under one set of environmental conditions generally limit its ability to do so under a different set of conditions. Therefore, as features of the environment change, so will the set of traits that increase the ability of individuals to survive and reproduce. Over the timescale of generations, natural selection favours different traits under a change in environmental conditions. This same process can occur spatially. Local populations of the same species inhabiting different environments and experiencing different selective agents will undergo differences in traits. This differentiation results in a divergence in the distribution of genotypes and associated phenotypes.

Adaptation is different from acclimatization. Acclimatization involves physiological, anatomical or morphological adjustments within a single organism that improve performance or survival in response to environmental change. It occurs in a short period of time (days to weeks), and within the organism’s lifetime. The terms acclimatization and acclimation are widely regarded as synonymous. When an organism is subjected to changed condition in laboratory, organism shows compensatory changes to the new environment. These changes are known as acclimation. In other words, acclimation is adjustment to laboratory conditions. Whereas acclimatization is compensatory adjustment of the organism to change in the natural environment.





Plant’s adaptation to water stress


Terrestrial plants have evolved a range of adaptations in response to variations in precipitation and soil moisture. The plants which grow in dry or xeric conditions are known as xerophytes, plants of dry habitat. Xerophytic habitat can be of different types such as: Physical dryness (in these habitats, soil has very little water due to inability of soil to hold water or low rainfall) and physiological dryness (in such habitat, water is sufficiently present but plants are unable to absorb it e.g. salty soil, acidic soil).

Xerophytes have evolved many adaptive morphological and physiological features to survive and reproduce in dry environment. Xerophytes are variously adapted to conserve water. Plants with such morphological and physiological adaptations are xeromorphic. The xeromorphic adaptations in different xerophytic species include – surface area reduction, sunken stomata and hairs, waxy leaf surface, opening of stomata at night, CAM photosynthesis, succulence (storage of water), extensive root system and other.

Based on adaptive features, xerophytes are classified into three categories: ephemerals, succulents and non-succulent plants.

Ephemerals are also termed as drought escapers (or drought evaders). These plants (e.g. Argemone mexicana) complete their life cycle in a very short period before the approach of actual dry conditions. Ephemerals persist as seeds during periods of drought, but are ready to sprout, flower and produce seeds whenever moisture is favorable. The seeds of many such species contain a germination inhibitor that must be washed out by a certain minimum amount of water. The young plants grow rapidly following the rain. They start flowering and setting seed almost immediately. They remain small, with no elaborate stem or root systems, with all energy put into flowering and seed production.

Succulents (or drought-enduring) such as Opuntia, Aloe are xerophytes which store water in their roots or stem or leaves for the dry period. Thus, they suffer dryness externally but escape internally due to the presence of fleshy water storage tissues. In addition to succulence i.e. storage of water, succulent plants have other water-saving features such as CAM photosynthesis, reduction in the number of stomata, waxy and hairy, or spiny outer surface.

Non-succulent (or drought-resistant) such as Calotropis procera, Casuarina equisetifolia are the true xerophytes. These perennials plants successfully endure long and continuous dryness. These are hence called ‘true xerophytes’. They face both external and internal dryness. They have many adaptations to resist dry condition.





Animal’s adaptation to thermal stress


In animals, temperature plays a significant role in controlling the rate of metabolic processes and maintaining homeostasis. Homeostasis (literally means same standing) is the property of an animal to regulate its internal environment to maintain a stable, constant condition under varying external environments. Among animals, some species can regulate their body temperature and some do not have this ability. Based on this property, all animals are broadly classified into two groups: homeothermic animals (or warm-blooded) and poikilothermic animals (often called cold-blooded because they can be cool to the touch).

Homeothermic (Greek homo – the same, and therme – heat) animals like birds and mammals can maintain their body temperature at a constant level irrespective of the environmental temperature. Maintaining homeothermy (a constant body temperature) is a very energy-consuming process, and it consumes about 90% of the animal’s energy intake but allows activity largely independent of environmental temperatures. They have high metabolic rates and low thermal conductance.

Poikilothermic (Greek poikilos – various, and therme – heat) animals like reptiles, fishes and amphibians are not able to maintain their body temperature at a constant level. In these organisms, the body temperature fluctuates with changes in the environmental temperature.

Poikilotherms have low metabolic rates and high thermal conductance. Environmental temperatures control their metabolic rates. Poikilotherms have an upper and lower thermal limit that they can tolerate. The range of body temperatures at which poikilotherms carry out their daily activities is the operative temperature range. Upper and lower limits of tolerance to temperature vary among the poikilothermic species. To maintain a tolerable and fairly constant body temperature during active periods, terrestrial and amphibious poikilotherms rely on behavioral thermoregulation such as changing position or location. To escape the long, cold winters, many terrestrial poikilotherms go into a long, seasonal torpor (dormancy) called hibernation. ‘Torpor’ is a state of decreased physiological activity in an animal. Hibernation is characterized by physiological changes such as slow breathing and heart rate and low metabolic rate. Similar to hibernation, the long-term torpor to escape hot and dry summer is termed estivation.

We also distinguish between endothermic (in Greek endo means ‘within’ and therme means ‘heat’) animals that produce sufficient metabolic heat to maintain a high body temperature and ectothermic (in Greek ecto means ‘outside’ and therme means ‘heat’) animals, which obtain much of their heat from the environment. Endotherms regulate their temperature by the production of heat within their own bodies, and ectotherms rely on external sources of heat. During the coldest seasons, many endothermic animals suspend their endothermic abilities and decrease the costs of endothermy by hibernating; at these times, they behave almost like ectotherms. Species that sometimes regulate their body temperature and sometimes do not are called temporal heterotherms.

Although it is true that many homeotherms are endotherms and many poikilotherms are ectotherms, we should not use the terms endothermy and homeothermy (or ectothermy and poikilothermy) synonymously. Ectotherm and endotherm emphasize the mechanisms that determine body temperature. The other two terms, homeotherm and poikilotherm, represent the nature of body temperature (either constant or variable).





Relationship between body size and environmental temperature


The influence of temperature is size-dependent in animals. All animals exchange heat with their external environment. A body exchanges heat with the external environment in proportion to the surface area exposed and the temperature difference. Hence, an animal with a large surface area as compared to volume exchanges more heat with the external environment. The surface area-to-volume ratio is dependent on the size, as shown in the following figure. Based on this principle, small-sized animals have a large surface area relative to volume. It decreases with an increase in size. Cold-blooded animals (ectotherms) take heat from the external environment through their body surface but must take enough heat to increase the temperature of entire body mass (volume). Therefore, the surface area-to-volume ratio is a key factor in controlling the heat uptake and the maintenance of body temperature. As an animal’s body size increases, this ratio decreases.



Because the organism has to absorb sufficient heat across its surface to warm the entire body mass, the amount of heat and the time required to raise body temperature likewise increase. For this reason, ectothermy imposes a constraint on body size for poikilotherms and restricts the distribution of the larger poikilotherms to the subtropics and tropics. The effect of size on homeotherms is opposite that for poikilotherms. For homeotherms, the body mass (or volume) produces heat through respiration, while heat is lost to the external environment across the body surface. The smaller the organism, the larger the ratio of surface area-to-volume and the greater the relative heat loss to the surrounding environment. Therefore, when challenged with cold, a small homeotherm loses heat more rapidly than a larger animal. If such an animal attempted to generate heat to offset the heat loss and maintain constant body temperature, it would require a relatively higher energy generation rate per unit mass. On the other hand, large animals have a relatively small surface-to-volume ratio and lose heat slowly if placed in a cold environment.

Several biological rules generalize the adaptive response of homeothermic animals to temperature due to differences in surface-to-volume ratios. Among the best known is Bergmann’s rule, which relates body size to average environmental temperature. Bergmann’s rule states that individuals of species in cooler climates tend to have larger body sizes than those in warmer climates (or species of larger body size are found in colder environments, and species of smaller body size are found in warmer areas). This relationship derives primarily because large size bodies have a small surface area-to-volume ratio. Because heat loss relates to the surface area, larger bodies can retain heat more efficiently in colder climates. In contrast, small-sized bodies (large surface area-to-volume ratio) lose heat more rapidly.

An extension of Bergmann’s rule is Allen’s rule, which states that endothermic animals from colder climates tend to have shorter extremities, such as ears and tails, compared to closely related species from warmer climates. This adaptation is due to the fact that smaller extremities have less surface area, leading to reduced heat dissipation in colder environments. Another extension of Bergmann’s rule is Hesse’s rule, also known as the heart-weight rule. It states that species in colder climates have a larger heart relative to their body weight compared to closely related species in warmer climates.



Figure 1.7 Animals from colder climates tend to have shorter appendages. The sizes of pinna of the jackrabbit and the snowshoe hare reflect adaptations to different temperature regimes.





1.3 Metabolic rate and size of animals


The rate at which energy is acquired, transformed, and used is known as the metabolic rate. Alternatively, we can say the animal’s metabolic rate is the amount of energy it needs per unit time. It is often estimated by measuring the rate at which oxygen is consumed. Many factors (such as temperature, developmental stage, diet, environmental conditions and activity) affect the metabolic rate of animals.



The most important factor affecting the metabolic rate of an individual is its size (mass). Let us understand this by analyzing a simple question. Does an elephant produce more heat per day than a mouse? The answer will be ‘yes.’ In general, the larger homeotherms produce more heat per day than the smaller homeotherms. In other words, the metabolic rate of homeotherms is positively correlated to body size. Now we will find the answer to the second question. Does an elephant produce more heat per kilogram of body weight per day than a mouse? The answer will be ‘no.’ Although small animals have relatively less metabolically active tissues due to their small body size but the metabolic rate per unit of body mass is immensely higher than the metabolic rate per unit body mass of large animals. Body size or mass of animals and metabolic rate are actually related. The relationship between resting metabolic rates and body mass can be expressed by the allometric relationship:



In this equation, M is the body mass, a is a constant that is characteristic of the kind of organism, b referred to as the scaling exponent (called allometric constant) that relates metabolic rate to body mass. If logarithms of both sides of this equation are taken, it can be rewritten as:



The study of the relationship of body size to an organism’s physical and physiological properties is called allometry. It can be defined broadly as ‘the study of size and its consequences.’



The relationship between body mass and the metabolic rate does not scale isometrically (i.e. b ≠ 1). Rather, b < 1 since small animals have a higher metabolic rate per unit of body mass than larger animals. What is the value of scaling coefficient (b)? There is controversy on the value of the scaling coefficient. Max Kleiber (1932) first proposed the typical value of the scaling coefficient close to 0.75 (i.e. 3/4). However, not all biologists agree. Many biologists have claimed that the scaling coefficient should be 0.67 (2/3). Recent analyses of metabolic rates and body mass data have argued that no single exponent b applies to a phylogenetic class. It has also been argued that there are different exponents for different phylogenetic groups. This relationship is remarkably uniform for all animals, from single-celled protists to mammals. Because scaling coefficient (b) is less than 1.0, larger organisms need less energy per day relative to their body mass than smaller organisms. This means that small organisms have a high metabolic rate relative to their body size. Remember, the metabolic rate per unit body mass, not the total metabolism of the individual, decreases with increasing mass or size. Thus, an adult human being requires more food than a small child but less food per kilogram of body mass.





1.4 Shelford’s law of tolerance


The existence, abundance and distribution of a species in an ecosystem are determined by the range of tolerance to environmental variables. Organism growth and survivorship are maximal at optimum value of the environmental factor or resource and decrease below (suboptimal) and above (supraoptimal) values. Therefore, an arbitrary optimum range, within which the organism’s performance is close to the maximum value, is often defined. Tolerance characterizes organism’s response to stress and is the organism’s ability to grow and survive in suboptimal and supraoptimal conditions. In the real world, environmental conditions exist as gradients. The performance of an organism changes along the gradient.

According to Shelford’s law of tolerance (formulated in 1913 by Victor E. Shelford), there are upper and lower threshold values on the environmental gradient beyond which the species cannot survive. These threshold values are the upper limit of tolerance and the lower limit of tolerance. The whole range over which the species is able to survive is the range of tolerance. Tolerance ranges differ for one species to another. Organisms may have a wide range of tolerance for one factor and a narrow range for another. When conditions are not optimal for a species with respect to one ecological factor, the limits of tolerance may be reduced for other ecological factors. For example, when soil nitrogen is limiting, the resistance of grass to drought is reduced. The prefix steno - meaning ‘narrow’ and eury - meaning ‘wide’ have been used for comparing the relative narrow and wide range of tolerance, respectively of an organism to a given environmental factor. For example, stenothermal organisms can tolerate only a narrow range of temperature whereas eurythermal organisms have wide range of temperature tolerance.



Figure 1.8 The response of an organism to a range or gradient of an environmental factor.



Similarly,

Stenohydric and euryhydric refer to narrow and wide tolerance, respectively, to water.

Stenohaline and euryhaline refer to narrow and wide tolerance, respectively, to salinity.

Stenophagic and euryphagic refer to narrow and wide tolerance, respectively, to food.

Stenoecious and euryoecious refer to narrow and wide tolerance, respectively, to habitat selection.

These terms apply not only to the organism level but equally well to the community level. For example, warm-water coral reefs occupy shallow sunlit, warm, and alkaline waters in order to grow and calcify at the high rates necessary to build and maintain their calcium carbonate structures. They are very stenothermal, in that they prosper only within a very narrow range of temperature. A prolonged 2°C drop in temperature is a stressful condition causing bleaching or loss of symbiotic algae.

Ecological amplitude: Species exhibit variability in their requirements from the environment, leading to differences in their ability to withstand changes in environmental conditions. The range of demands and consequent range of tolerance of a species is known as its ecological amplitude. Essentially, the ecological amplitude denotes the range of environmental factors that a specific species can withstand or tolerate. A species with a broad ecological amplitude can tolerate a wide range of environmental fluctuations, allowing it to occupy diverse habitats and adapt to various conditions. On the other hand, species with a narrower ecological amplitude are more specialized and have specific environmental requirements, limiting their distribution to particular habitats or conditions.





1.5 Species concept


Species are the basic taxonomic units of biological classification. Biologists have not been able to agree on exactly what a species is, or how species should be defined. Because of the importance of the definition of the term ‘species,’ a plethora of species concepts has been proposed. However, there is little agreement about the species concept so far.

Species traditionally have been described and identified on the basis of morphological criteria. According to morphological species concept, species are groups of individuals that are morphologically similar and clearly distinguishable from individuals of other species. Cronquist (1978) adopted this concept and considered species as the smallest groups that are constantly and determinedly distinctive and distinguishable by average means. This concept can be applied to both sexually as well as asexually reproducing organisms.

According to the most commonly used biological species concept, species are groups of interbreeding natural populations that are reproductively isolated from other such groups. Reproductively isolated means that members of the species do not interbreed with members of other species. The biological species concept explains why the members of a species resemble one another, and differ from other species. When two organisms breed within a species, their genes pass into their offspring. As this process is repeated, the genes of different organisms are constantly shuffled around the species gene pool. The shared gene pool gives the species its identity. The strength of the biological species concept is that it gives emphasis on reproductive isolation. However, the number of species to which this concept can be usefully applied is limited. It does not apply to organisms that reproduce asexually all or most of the time, such as prokaryotes. Furthermore, in the biological species concept, species are designated by the absence of gene flow. There are, however, many pairs of species that are morphologically and ecologically distinct, and yet gene flow occurs between them. Further, natural selection can cause such species to remain distinct despite of gene flow. Because of the limitations of the biological species concept, alternative species concepts are useful in certain situations.

Organisms performing asexual reproduction or breeding among members of distinct species raised questions about whether interbreeding and reproductive isolation alone could be the sole criterion for defining species. Consequently, in 1976, van Valen introduced the ecological species concept as an alternative criterion to define species based on their ecological roles and relationships within their environment. The ecological species concept defines a species as a group of organisms adapted to a distinct ecological niche.

Ecological niche

The range of physical and chemical conditions under which a species can survive, grow and reproduce, define its ecological niche. The ecological niche of a species in the absence of interactions with other species is referred to as the fundamental niche. The species’ realized niche is its ecological niche modified by its interactions with other species within the community.



According to this concept, a species is defined by its ecological niche, which includes its interactions with other organisms, its habitat requirements, and its role in the ecosystem. Organisms that occupy the same ecological niche are considered to belong to the same species because they are adapted to similar environmental conditions and share similar ecological roles. This concept emphasizes the functional and ecological aspects of organisms, emphasizing how they interact with their surroundings and the roles they play in the ecosystem.





Ecotype and Ecads


Species having a wide geographic distribution encounter a broader range of environmental conditions. The variation in environmental conditions often gives rise to a corresponding phenotypic variation. In some instances, phenotypic differences among populations of the same species at different sites are very abrupt. Such abrupt changes often reflect abrupt changes in the local environments. These abrupt phenotypic changes allow the population to adapt to local environmental conditions. In some populations, these phenotypic variations persist even if the population is shifted from that environment and placed in a new environment. Moreover, variations are inherited by their offspring, indicating that the characters are genetically rather than environmentally determined. Such a population that is adapted to unique local environmental conditions through genetically fixed phenotypic variations is called ecotype. Swedish ecologist Turesson (1925) first reported ecotypes in case of a plant species, Campanula rotundifolia. He found that mountain populations were shorter and flowered earlier than the lowland forms. This suited their growth in short mountain turf and their adaptation for rapid flowering and seed production in the shorter growing season in high-altitude mountain habitats. Turesson called these genetically adapted phenotypically different forms ‘ecotypes’. Thus, an ecotype describes a genetically different population (or subspecies or race) within a species that is adapted to specific environmental conditions. Moreover, adaptations are irreversible or genetically fixed. The different ecotypes of a particular species may differ in their edaphic, biotic, or microclimatic requirements. However, they can reproduce with other ecotypes of the same species and produce fertile offspring. Ecotypes can be classified and grouped together. A unit of classification that contains one or more ecotypes of a species is termed ecospecies (a term proposed by Turesson).

The population of a species with a measurable, gradual change in some phenotypic character, such as size and coloration over a geographic region, is termed ecocline. Due to continuous or gradual change, such population cannot be divided at any one point into two ecotypes. Ecoclines are usually associated with an environmental gradient such as temperature, moisture, light, or altitude.

An ecad (also known as ecophene) represents a population of individuals that belong to the same species but differ markedly in phenotypes such as size, shape, number of leaves, etc. These variations are environmentally induced and are temporary or reversible and not genetically fixed, i. e. one type of ecad may change into another with a change in its habitat. So, if different ecads are transplanted in the same habitat, all would become similar in appearance. Thus, ecads show phenotypic plasticity i.e. environmentally induced phenotypic variation. Phenotypic plasticity is the capacity of a single genotype to exhibit variable phenotypes in different environments. It is considered one of the major means by which plants can cope with environmental factor variability.





References


Balmford A, Green RE and Jenkins M (2003), Measuring the changing state of nature. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 18, 326–330.

Bonan GB (2008), Ecological Climatology: Concept and Applications, 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press.

Brady NC and Weil RR (2002), The Nature and Properties of Soils, 13th ed. Pearson Education, Inc.

Campbell NA et al. (2005), Biology, 7th ed. San Francisco CA: Pearson.

Chapman JL and Reiss MJ (2010), Ecology, Principles and Applications, 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press.

Clarke A (2004), Is there a universal temperature dependence of metabolism? Functional Ecology, 18, 252–256.

Cronquist A (1978), Once again, what is a species? In: Knutson L V, ed. Biosystematics in Agriculture. New Jersey: Allenheld Osmun, 3–20.

Gliessman SR (2008), Agroecology: The Ecology of Sustainable Food Systems, 3rd ed. CRC Press.

Killham K (1994), Soil ecology. Cambridge University Press, New York.

Kleiber M (1972), Body size, conductance for animal heat flow and Newton’s law of cooling. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 37; 139-50.

Kormondy EJ (1996), Concepts of Ecology, 4th ed. W.H. Prentice-Hall.

Lutgens FK and Tarbuck EJ (2013), The atmosphere an introduction to meteorology, 12th ed. Pearson.

Miller GT and Spoolman SE (2009), Essentials of Ecology, 5th ed. Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning.

Miller GT, Jr. (1988), Environmental Science, 2nd ed. Wadsworth, Belmont.

Odum EP and Barrett GW (2004), Fundamentals of Ecology, 5th ed. Cengage Learning.

Raven PH, Johnson GB, Mason KA, Losos JB, and Singer SR (2011), Biology, 9th ed. McGraw-Hill.

Smith TM and Smith RL (2009), Elements of Ecology, 7th ed. San Francisco CA: Pearson Benjamin Cummings.

Strahler A (2013), Introducing Physical Geography, 6th ed. Wiley.

Valen LV (1976), Ecological species, multispecies and oaks. Taxon, 233-239.

Weathers KC, Strayer DL and Likens GE (2013), Fundamentals of Ecosystem Science, Academic Press.





Chapter 2


Ecosystem Ecology


An ecosystem, also known as an ecological system, represents a structural and functional unit of nature that encompasses all organisms within a physically defined space. These organisms interact with each other and their physical environment. Essentially, any system that encompasses interacting biotic (living) and abiotic (nonliving) components can be classified as an ecosystem.

The concept of an ecosystem was first formally proposed by the English botanist Arthur Tansley in 1935. The term biogeocoenosis (proposed in the 1940s by the Soviet ecologist V. N. Sukachev) frequently used in Russian literature is roughly equivalent to the ecosystem. Its literal meaning is ‘life and Earth functioning together.’ A key advance in the adoption of the ecosystem concept occurred after the appearance of a popular textbook by Eugene Odum. Odum’s textbook was organized around the ecosystem concept. After Odum’s textbook, a famous article in Science by Francis Evans (1956) mentioned the ecosystem as ‘the basic unit in ecology.’ In the broadest sense, an ecosystem is the interacting system made up of all the living and non-living objects in a physically defined space.



Figure 2.1 An aquatic ecosystem. A physically defined space comprising all the organisms which are interacting with one another and with their physical environment.



According to this simple definition, the size, location and timescale at which ecosystems are defined can therefore precisely match the question that the scientist is trying to answer. An ecosystem could be of any size depending on the communities to be studied and its boundaries can be either real or arbitrary. An ecosystem may be as small as a single tree or as large as the entire Earth and can be studied for time periods as long as millions of years.

An ecosystem can be visualized as a functional unit of nature. It has all components: biological and physical, necessary for survival. Accordingly, it is the basic unit around which theories and experiments of ecology are organized.

All ecosystems are open systems in the sense that energy and matter are exchanged with their surroundings. It might be theoretically possible to define particular examples of ecosystems that are closed systems, not exchanging matters with their surroundings, but nearly all ecosystems do exchanges of energy and matters with their surroundings.

A thermodynamic system (or simply ‘system’) is a definite macroscopic region or space in the universe, in which one or more thermodynamic processes take place. Everything external to a thermodynamic system is called surroundings. System and surroundings are separated by a definite border called boundary.



Ecosystems change through time. These changes may be gradual and subtle (losses of minerals from a weathering soil) or fast and dramatic (a fire sweeping through a forest). Both external forces (changes in climate or nutrient inputs) and internal dynamics (accumulation or depletion of materials in a soil or a lake) are important in driving temporal changes in ecosystems. In some cases, changes are directional and predictable (e.g. soil weathering, the filling of a lake basin), while in other cases, changes may be specific and difficult to predict (e.g. the arrival of an invasive species).





Box 2.1 Levels of organization




To study how organisms interact with each other and with their physical environment, several hierarchical levels of the organization have been recognized. Ecological patterns and processes vary as a function of the level of organization at which they operate.

Ecologists have identified four fundamental levels of the organization to study the interactions between organisms and their environment. These levels of organization include individual organism, population, community and ecosystem. Therefore, ecology ranges in scale from the study of an individual organism through the study of populations to the study of communities and ecosystems.

The most basic level of the ecological organization starts with the individual (a single plant, insect or bird). At the level of the organism, ecology deals with how individual organisms are affected by (and how they affect) their environment. Organismal ecology gives focus on the individual organisms’ behaviour, physiology, morphology, etc. in response to the environment.

The next level of organization is the population. The term population has many uses and meanings in other fields of study. In ecology, a population is a group of individuals of the same species that occupy a given area. The population ecology deals with population growth and how and why a population changes over time.

Populations of different species in an area do not function independently of each other. They interact with each other. Hence, the next, more complex level of organization of the interacting population of different species form is the community. Ecological communities are made up of interacting populations of different species within some defined geographical area. Community ecology deals with the composition and organization of ecological communities and community development. Communities occur on a wide variety of scales from small pond communities to huge tropical rainforests. At the largest scales, these communities are known as ‘biomes’. A biome is a distinct ecological community of plants and animals living together in a particular climate (for example, tropical rainforests, coniferous forests, savannas). It is characterized by distinctive vegetation distributed over a wide geographical area and defined largely by regional climatic conditions.

An ecosystem (or ecological system) is the interacting system made up of all the living and non-living components in a physically defined space. Because an ecosystem is a system, it has boundaries. All systems that encompass interacting biotic and abiotic components may be considered as an ecosystem. Ecosystems are complex, open, hierarchically organized, self-organizing and self-regulated systems. Ecosystems ecology deals with the flow of energy and cycling of nutrients among organisms within a community and between organisms and the environment.

The highest level of organization for the ecological study is the biosphere (ecosystem on a planetary scale). It is an ultimate ecosystem. It includes all ecosystems present on the Earth.

In a strict sense, the biosphere represents all the living organisms of the Earth. But in ecology, the biosphere (also known as the ecosphere) is a functional concept which emphasizes the interrelationship between all living organisms and their environment on a planetary scale.

Although many ecologists have recognized ‘ecosystem’ as the fourth level of organization for an understanding of ecological phenomena. Some ecologists are considering the use of ‘ecosystem’ as the fourth level of organization is inappropriate because it does not include any new biological organization. Some have argued that the term ‘landscape’ would be a suitable term for a level of organization defined as an ecological system containing more than one community type.



Ecosystems ecology deals with the flow of energy and cycling of nutrients among organisms within a community and between organisms and the environment.



Autecology is the study of the interaction between organisms and their environments at the level of an individual, a population or an entire species.



Synecology is the study of an ecological community. It is also called community ecology. It is the synecology which describes the ecological community as a whole, especially the links between organisms.





2.1 Ecosystem components


Ecosystem consists of various abiotic (non-living) and biotic (living) components. The abiotic components of an ecosystem include various physical and chemical factors. The physical factors having the greatest effect on the ecosystem are: light, temperature, precipitation, air, fire and water. However, the chemical factors include pH, salinity, nutrient contents, moisture contents (for terrestrial ecosystem), amount of toxic substances and level of dissolved oxygen (in aquatic ecosystems).

Organisms that make up the biotic component of an ecosystem are usually classified as autotrophs and heterotrophs, based on how they get their food or organic nutrients they need to survive.

Autotrophs are organisms that can synthesize the organic compounds they need as nutrients from simple inorganic compounds obtained from their environment. They are the ultimate sources of organic compounds for all non-autotrophic organisms, and for this reason, biologists refer to autotrophs as the producers of the biosphere. There are two kinds of autotrophs – photoautotrophs and chemoautotrophs. Most autotrophs are photoautotrophs as they make their organic nutrients through photosynthesis. In most terrestrial ecosystems, green plants are the producers. In aquatic ecosystems, most of the producers are phytoplanktons, consisting of various species of floating and drifting bacteria and protists. Some autotrophs, mostly specialized bacteria, exploits chemical energy to convert inorganic carbon compounds into organic matters, in contrast with photosynthesis, which exploits the energy of light to produce organic matters. These autotrophs are called chemoautotrophs. Energy is derived in chemosynthesis from oxidizing reduced compounds.

Heterotrophs are the organisms which cannot synthesize the organic nutrients they need and get them by feeding on the tissues of producers or other consumers. Fungi, animals and most bacteria are heterotrophs. Heterotrophs can be classified into consumer and decomposer.

Consumers are the organisms, such as animals, that feed on producers and other consumers. There are several classes of consumers, depending on their food sources: herbivores (feed directly on plants), carnivores (feed on animals), omnivores (eat both plants and animals) and detritivores (eat detritus). Detritus are the dead bodies and waste product of living and once-living organisms or simply, decomposing organic material. Earthworms are a well-known example of detritivores (also known as detritus feeders), eating rotten plant leaves and other debris. Some detritus feeders, such as dung beetles, eat feces.

Consumers can also be classified into primary, secondary and tertiary consumers based on feeding level or trophic level. Primary consumers (i.e. herbivores) feed on producers and belong to the second trophic level. The secondary consumers (i.e. primary carnivores) feed only on primary consumers, and they belong to the third trophic level. Similarly, the tertiary consumers (i.e. secondary carnivores) feed on secondary consumers, and they belong to the fourth trophic level. Producers belong to the first trophic level.

Decomposers (like bacteria and fungi) are heterotrophs that feed on dead organic matters, and, in doing so, carry out the natural process of decomposition. Both decomposers and detritivores derive nutrition from dead organic matters. The difference is that detritivores actually eat the organic matter and decomposers secrete enzymes to digest the organic matter and then absorb the resulting molecules.

Other commonly used terms:

Saprotrophs are heterotrophic organisms that obtain its nutrients from non-living organic matters, usually dead and decaying plant or animal matters, by absorbing soluble organic compounds.

Phagotrophs: heterotrophic organisms (mainly animals) that obtain nutrients through the ingestion of solid or particulate organic matters.

Osmotroph: a heterotrophic organism that obtains its nutrients by absorbing organic matter present in solution.

Parasite: a heterotrophic organism that obtains its nutrients from living biomass.





2.2 Productivity


Productivity refers to the rate of formation of biomass per unit area in an ecosystem. It is usually expressed in units of mass per unit area (or volume) per unit time. The term productivity and production may be used interchangeably. Even when the production designates the amount of accumulated biomass, a time element is always assumed i.e. refer explicitly to rate.

Productivity differs from biomass. Productivity is the rate at which organic matter is created by producers. Biomass is the amount of organic matter present at any given time. The bio-mass is generally expressed as wet or dry biomass. Dry biomass refers to the mass of living matters after it has been dried to a constant mass. Wet biomass refers to the mass of living matters including its water content.

The primary productivity is the rate at which biomass is produced per unit area by the primary producers (both photoautotrophs and chemoautotrophs). The term ‘primary’ indicates that we are concerned with the first trophic level in the ecosystem. It can be expressed as grams of carbon assimilated (e.g. g C m–2 year–1) or dry weight of organic matter (e.g. g m–2 year–1) or their energy equivalents (e.g. J m–2 day–1). It is a fundamental ecosystem process and represents the first step associated with the capture, storage, and transfer of energy in the ecosystems. Not all primary productivity results from photoautotrophs. Some primary productivity also occurs through chemoautotrophs. In most ecosystems that receive significant light energy, chemosynthesis is only a small proportion of primary productivity. However, in unlighted ecosystems, chemoautotrophs can be the main primary producers.

The total amount of CO2 fixed to organic carbon by the photoautotrophs per unit time (i.e. total rate of photosynthesis) is referred to as gross primary productivity (GPP). A proportion of this fixed organic carbon is respired away by the photoautotrophs. The total amount of organic carbon that is oxidized to CO2 by photoautotrophs per unit time is the autotrophic respiration (RA). The difference between GPP and RA is known as net primary productivity (NPP). It is the amount of organic carbon produced by photoautotrophs that is not consumed by their own respiration.

This is also termed net assimilation. NPP can be described by the following equation:



NPP represents the actual rate of production of new biomass that is available for consumption by heterotrophic organisms (fungi and animals). An ecosystem’s NPP should not be confused with the standing crop. NPP is the amount of new biomass added in a given time period, whereas standing crop refers to the total living biomass, or amount of living organic matter, present in a given area at a particular point in time. It includes all the living organisms, such as plants, animals, and microorganisms, present in a given area. Primary consumers consume this organic carbon produced by autotrophs to support their growth and metabolism. Other components of the food web, such as detritivores and secondary consumers, also depend directly or indirectly on primary production for their energy supply. The rate of production of new biomass by consumers is called secondary productivity. Secondary productivity should not be divided into gross and net productivity. Secondary productivity is dependent on primary productivity for energy. A strong relationship exists between primary productivity in a variety of terrestrial ecosystems and the biomass of herbivores. The carbon fixed by photoautotrophs through photosynthesis can leave the ecosystem as inorganic carbon (usually in the form of carbon dioxide) via either autotrophic respiration (RA) or, after consumption by heterotrophs, via heterotrophic respiration (RH). The sum of RA and RH is called total ecosystem respiration (RE). The difference between GPP and RE is known as net community productivity (NCP), also termed as net ecosystem productivity.



Secondary productivity by herbivores is invariably less than that of the plants on which they feed. Where has the missing energy gone? First, not all of the plant biomass produced is consumed alive by herbivores. Second, not all the plant biomass that is eaten by herbivores (or herbivore biomass is eaten by carnivores) is assimilated and made available for incorporation into consumer’s biomass. Some are lost in the form of feces. Third, not all the energy that has been assimilated is actually converted into biomass. A proportion is lost as respiratory heat. This occurs both because no energy conversion process is ever 100% efficient and also because animals do work which requires energy, again released as heat.

Autochthonous and Allochthonous

All biotic communities depend on a supply of organic matter (i.e. energy) for their activities. In most ecosystems, this is contributed in situ by the photosynthesis of photoautotrophs. Organic matters that are produced by photosynthesis within an ecosystem’s boundaries (i.e. internal in origin) is known as autochthonous production. It is important to note that an ecosystem can receive organic matter from sources other than its own photosynthesis via the import of dead organic matter that has been produced elsewhere. An ecosystem that receives organic matter from sources other than its own photosynthesis – via the import of dead organic matter that has been produced elsewhere (i.e. external in origin) is called allochthonous production.

A substantial proportion of the organic matter in aquatic communities comes from the allochthonous material. The relative importance of the autochthonous sources and the allochthonous source of organic material in an aquatic system depends on the dimensions of the body of water and the types of terrestrial community that deposit organic material into it. Estuaries are often highly productive systems, receiving allochthonous material and a rich supply of nutrients from the rivers that feed them.





Patterns in primary productivity


Terrestrial primary productivity varies considerably across the surface of the Earth and among different ecosystem types. Terrestrial NPP per unit area varies latitudinally due to gradients in plant community composition, growing season length, precipitation, temperature and solar radiation. In terrestrial ecosystems, NPP is limited mainly by water, temperature and nutrient availability. Water is the most important factor of the primary productivity, and NPP often shows an almost linear relationship with annual precipitation in most terrestrial ecosystems. Temperature affects productivity primarily by slowing or accelerating plant metabolic rates. NPP generally declines from tropical regions to the poles because of temperature and light limitations. Tropical forests tend to be much more productive than other terrestrial ecosystems like temperate forests, tropical grassland (savanna) and boreal forests. Desert and tundra biomes, limited by precipitation and temperature respectively, contain the least productive ecosystems.

Terrestrial NPP also varies within an ecosystem with time and age. Both photosynthesis and plant growth are directly influenced by seasonal variations in environmental conditions. During cold winters or dry seasons primary productivity decreases. In the tropics, where conditions are favourable for plant growth round the year, there is little seasonal variation in net primary productivity. Disturbances due to herbivory and fire also lead to year-to-year variations in net primary productivity.



Figure 2.2 Net primary productivity (NPP) of different ecosystems. Different ecosystems vary considerably in their NPP as well as in their contribution to the total NPP on the Earth. Tropical rainforests and algal beds and coral reefs are among the most productive ecosystems. Although estuaries and coral reefs have very high NPP, their total contribution to global NPP is relatively small because these ecosystems are not very large. Similarly, the open ocean contributes maximum in terms of Earth’s total NPP than any other ecosystem, because of its very large size but average NPP is small.



Net primary productivity in aquatic ecosystems is limited mainly by light and nutrient availability. The most important nutrients affecting primary production in aquatic systems are nitrogen and phosphorus because they occur in very low concentrations. Oceans cover about two-thirds of the Earth’s surface, they account for less than half of its production. Although estuaries and coral reefs have very high NPP, their total contribution to global production is relatively small because these ecosystems are not very large. Similarly, the open ocean contributes maximum in terms of Earth’s total NPP than any other ecosystem, because of its very large size but the average NPP per unit area is small.

Table 2.1 Net primary productivity (NPP) and plant biomass of world ecosystems





Relationship between productivity and biomass


The standing crop biomass is a direct function of productivity. In general, there is a great difference in the total biomass that exists on terrestrial ecosystems compared to the aquatic ecosystems. But the average net primary productivity (NPP) to biomass (B) ratios (kilograms of dry matter produced per year per kilogram of standing crop) is 0.042 for forests, 0.29 for other terrestrial communities and 17 for aquatic communities. A very low value of NPP to B ratio for a forest is due to the fact that a large proportion of forest biomass is dead and also that much of the living support tissue is not photosynthetic. Their structure involves considerable investment in non-photosynthesizing and dead support tissues, and as a consequence, their NPP to B ratio is very low. In grassland communities, a greater proportion of the biomass is alive and involved in photosynthesis, though half or more of the biomass may be roots. The rapidly growing herbaceous species in grassland communities have relatively little support tissue. Thus, the NPP to B ratio is high as compared to the forest. In aquatic communities, particularly where productivity is due mainly to phytoplankton, there is no support tissue, there is no need for roots to absorb water and nutrients, dead cells do not accumulate and the photosynthetic output per kilogram of biomass is thus very high indeed. Another factor that helps to account for high NPP to B ratios in phytoplankton communities is the rapid turnover of biomass. The phytoplankton has a short turnover time, which means they have a small standing crop biomass compared to their production.





Measuring primary productivity


Primary productivity is usually measured as a rate of formation of biomass per unit area. Methods to measure primary productivity vary as a function of the types of autotrophs in an ecosystem—an algal population in a lake requires a different approach compared to trees in a forest. Various methods are used to estimate primary productivity. These methods include oxygen emission method, radioactive tracer method, harvest analysis method and others.





Oxygen emission method


Primary productivity is best estimated by measuring gaseous exchange—oxygen production or carbon dioxide uptake. The measurement of oxygen emission has been one of the most widely used procedures. Samples of water containing autotrophs are taken from a given depth of a pond, lake, or ocean and are distributed into pairs of small bottles. One of the paired bottles is wrapped with some material such as tinfoil so that no light penetrates. These are called the light and dark bottles, respectively. Hence, this method is also called as light and dark bottle method. Light bottle permits the photosynthesis to take place; the dark bottle not permits the photosynthesis but allow the respiratory activity. The oxygen concentration in each bottle is measured, the bottles are sealed and then suspended for a few hours (usually 4 to 8 hours) at the same depth from which the water was originally taken. At the end of this time, the oxygen content is determined either by standard chemical titration or with an electronic sensor. A basic assumption in the light and dark bottle method is that plant respiration is the same under the two conditions. In the light bottle, there is photosynthesis (or GPP) as well as respiration (R). The difference between these two processes is NPP = GPP – R. In the dark bottle, there is no photosynthesis and only respiration.



Let us assume,



The oxygen increased in the light bottle compared to the initial is due to photosynthesis, and the oxygen decreased in the dark bottle due to respiration. With this information we can calculate the respiration, NPP and GPP for our system:





Radioactive tracer method


It is one of the most useful and sensitive methods used to estimate primary productivity in an aquatic ecosystem, especially in lakes and oceans. This method mainly measures the CO2 uptake by using the radioisotope of carbon (14C). The method involves the addition of radioactive carbon usually in the form of a bicarbonate such as NaH14CO3 to a sample of water. During the time of exposure both the stable carbon (12C), which is present as CO2 or HCO–3 and the radioactive carbon (14C) are assimilated into carbohydrate and incorporated in the biomass of the primary producers.

Water samples are taken from a desired level and distributed in paired light and dark bottles. A known quantity of 14C, usually in the form of a bicarbonate such as NaH14CO3, is then introduced into the bottles, and they are resuspended to incubate, usually for about 6 hours. During the time of exposure both the 12C and the unstable 14C are assimilated into carbohydrate and incorporated in the biomass of the autotrophs. At the end of the incubation period the samples are filtered, and the 12C and 14C that has been incorporated photosynthetically is captured on the filter. The filters are dried and placed in a counting chamber to determine their level of radioactivity and hence the amount of radioactive carbohydrate produced. Calculations are then made from the photosynthetic formula, based on the assumption that the uptake of radioactive carbons is proportional to the stable carbon.





Harvest analysis method


Harvest analysis method (standing crop method) is one of the most common methods of measuring primary productivity. This method involves removing vegetation at periodic intervals and drying the samples to a constant weight. The part of the plant harvested varies with the intent of the study. Harvest method provides information about above ground productivity usually because below ground productivity requires the samples of root biomass. Although the roots of some annual and crops plant may be removed from the soil but the task becomes more difficult with grass and trees. One major limitation of the harvest method is that it fails to account for the amount of material that may have been consumed by herbivores. It also fails to account the energy used by the autotroph in its own metabolism, growth, and development. What is actually measured is the standing crop, the amount of autotroph at a given time, or at given time intervals.





2.3 Energy flow


All organisms require matter for their construction and energy for their activities. Hence, ecosystems consume energy and transform matters. Organisms in an ecosystem capture solar energy, transform and transfer energy and store energy. The behavior of energy in ecosystems can be conveniently shorthanded as ‘energy flow’ because energy transformations are directional in contrast to the cyclic behavior of matters. Energy flow is the key function in the ecosystem.

The operation of an ecosystem is consistent with the laws of thermodynamics that deal with the relationships between energy and matter in a system. The behaviour of the energy in the ecosystem is based on two basic laws of thermodynamics. The first law of thermodynamics also known as the law of conservation of energy, states that energy cannot be created or destroyed, but it can be converted from one form to another. The second law of thermodynamics states that every energy transformation that takes place will increase the entropy (i.e., randomness or disorder) of the universe. In other words, energy transformations cannot be 100% efficient; some energy is always lost as heat.

In most of ecosystems, energy enters as sunlight and is captured by plants through photo-synthesis. This solar energy is converted into chemical energy stored in organic molecules (i.e. energy transformation). This conversion represents the transformation of energy from one form to another. It is important to note that while energy changes form, the total amount of energy remains constant. In other words, the total chemical energy stored in the organic molecules synthesized through photosynthesis, along with the energy dissipated as heat, must equal the total solar energy intercepted by the photosynthetic organisms. Hence, energy may change form (e.g. from radiant to chemical) but not amount.

During energy transformation (solar energy is transformed into chemical energy), some amount of energy is converted to a form that’s unusable (unavailable to do work). In most cases, this unusable energy takes the form of heat. So, every time an energy transformation happens, some amount of useful energy will move from the useful to the useless category. Energy in the form of heat that does not do work goes to increase the randomness (disorder) of the universe. The degree of randomness or disorder in a system is called its entropy.

In ecosystems, energy flows unidirectionally. The conversion of solar energy to chemical energy by the process of photosynthesis is the starting point of energy flow within ecosystems. The fraction of incoming solar energy that the primary producers capture is very small. Only about 1-5 percent energy of incident solar radiation, or 2-10 percent of PAR (Photosynthetically Active Radiation) is actually captured by the photosynthetic process. The solar energy not used for photosynthesis is immediately converted to heat.

The primary producers carry out respiration simultaneously in which they break down some of the organic compounds in their bodies to release chemical energy. A portion of this chemical energy is used to make ATP, which in turn is used to power various metabolic processes. Ultimately, the chemical energy released by respiration is converted to heat. If organisms convert some chemical energy to heat, the conversion is one-way; they cannot use heat as a source of energy. The chemical energy from primary producer passes from one heterotroph trophic level to the next. Only the energy present in net primary productivity of primary producers can be used by other trophic levels. As chemical energy moves from one trophic level to the next, a great deal of the energy is diverted all along the way. It means that the amount of chemical energy available to secondary consumers (i.e. primary carnivores) is far less than that available to primary consumers (i.e. herbivores) and the amount available to tertiary consumers (i.e. secondary carnivores) is far less than that available to secondary consumers.

Why does the amount of energy decrease as energy is passed from one trophic level to the next? Consider the use of energy by the herbivore (i.e. primary consumers) as an example. After an herbivore ingests some plant biomass (i.e. food), it produces faeces. The chemical energy in the faecal matters is not passed along to the primary carnivore. The chemical energy of the food that is assimilated by the herbivore is used for a number of functions. Part of the assimilated energy is liberated by cellular respiration to be used for tissue repair, body movements, and other such functions. The energy used in these ways turns to heat and is not passed along to the primary carnivore. Some of the assimilated chemical energy is converted into the biomass of the herbivore and can serve as food for a primary carnivore. However, some herbivore individuals die rather than being eaten by carnivores. At the end, much of the chemical energy present in herbivores do not transfer to carnivores. Ecologists figure as a rule of thumb that the amount of energy available to a trophic level over time is about 10% of that available to the preceding level over the same period of time. Essentially all of the energy captured by photosynthesis in an ecosystem eventually becomes heat as the chemical energy is used by various trophic levels.



Figure 2.3 The flow of energy through an ecosystem. The energy that enters the ecosystem as solar energy (radiant energy) and is then passed along as chemical energy to successive trophic levels. At each step energy is diverted, meaning that the chemical energy available to each trophic level is less than that available to the preceding trophic level. Death at each level transfers energy to decomposers. Energy lost as heat at each level is returned to the external environment.





Universal energy flow model


E. P. Odum proposed ‘Universal’ model for energy flow. This model attempts to recognize the various inputs and fates of energy. A universal energy flow model is applicable to any living component, whether it be a plant, animal, microorganism, individual, population, or trophic group, as shown in figure 2.4. Standing biomass (B) representing the biomass (or its energy equivalent) at any given time. The total energy input (or ingestion) is indicated by ‘I’. For strict autotrophs this is light and for strict heterotrophs it is organic food. Not all of the input is transformed into the biomass; when light passes through plants without being utilized or some of it may simply be egested from the digestive tract without being assimilated. This energy component is indicated by not assimilated (NA). That portion which is utilized or assimilated is indicated by ‘A’. In autotrophs, the assimilated energy (A) is known as gross production or gross photosynthesis. In animals, the term, ‘metabolized energy,’ is often used for the ‘A’ component. A key feature of the model is the separation of assimilated energy into the production (P) and respiration (R). That part of the assimilated energy (A) which is burned and lost as heat is designated as respiration (R), while that portion which is transformed to new or different organic matter is designated as production (P). This is the ‘net production’ in green plants and simply ‘production’ (or secondary production) in animals. It is important to point out that the ‘P’ component is energy available to the next trophic level, as opposed to the ‘NA’ component that enters into the detritus food chain. Production (P) may take a number of forms. Three subdivisions are shown in figure 2.4. ‘G’ refers to additions to the biomass or growth. ‘E’ refers to assimilated organic matter which is excreted or secreted (e.g. urea, mucus, etc.). This ‘leakage’ of organic matter, often in dissolved or gaseous form, may be appreciable but is often ignored because it is hard to measure. Finally, ‘S’ refers to ‘storage,’ as in the accumulation of fat which may be re-assimilated at some later time. The reverse ‘S’ flow shown in figure 2.4 may also be considered a ‘work loop’ in that it depicts that portion of production which is necessary to ensure a future input of new energy (e.g. reserve energy used by a predator in the search for prey).



Figure 2.4 Components of universal energy flow model. Adapted from Odum and Barrett, Fundamentals of Ecology, Fifth edition.



A simplified representation of energy flow through ecosystem depicting three trophic levels in the linear food chain has been made in figure 2.5. For anyone trophic level, such a diagram consisted of a box representing the biomass (or its energy equivalent) at any given time and pathways through the box representing the flow of energy. Assimilated energy (A) is divided into the production (P) and respiration (R) components. R is the energy that is lost as heat (maintenance energy) and P is the portion transformed to new organic matter and is the part of the energy that is available to the next trophic level. Thus, P represents net primary production in plants and secondary production in animals. At the same time, the non-assimilated component (NU – not utilized), such as feces, enters the detritus food chain. P component is energy that is available to the next trophic level while NU component is energy that remains at the same trophic level.



Figure 2.5 Simplified energy flow diagram depicting three trophic levels in a linear food chain. Standard notations for successive energy flows are as follows: La = light absorbed by plant cover; GPP = gross primary production; A = total assimilation, NPP = net primary production; SP = secondary (consumer) production; NU = energy not consumed by next trophic level; NA = energy not assimilated by consumers (egested); I = input (or ingestion); B = standing plant biomass; and R = respiration. Adapted from Odum and Barrett, Fundamentals of Ecology, Fifth edition.



Two aspects with respect to energy flow in the ecosystem need careful consideration. First, the energy flows unidirectionally, i.e. from producers through herbivores to carnivores; it cannot be transferred in the reverse direction. Second, the amount of energy decreases with successive trophic levels.





Concept of the trophic level


A trophic level refers to the organism’s position in the food chain. The word trophic derives from the Greek word meaning to food (or feeding). It is simply a feeding level, as often represented in a food chain. Producers comprise the first trophic level, followed by the primary consumer (herbivores), then secondary consumers (carnivores feeding on herbivores) and so on.

It is important to note that many animals do not specialize in their diets which feed at more than one trophic level. Omnivores (such as humans) eat both animals and plants. Further, except for some specialists, most carnivores don’t limit their diet to organisms of only one trophic level. Frogs, for instance, don’t discriminate between herbivorous and carnivorous bugs in their diet. If it’s the right size, and moving at the right distance, chances are the frog will eat it. It’s not as if the frog has brain cells to waste wondering if it’s going to mess up the food chain by being a secondary consumer one minute and a quaternary consumer the next.

The number of trophic levels also varies in different ecosystems. Generally, its number is more in aquatic ecosystems than in terrestrial ecosystems.



Figure 2.6 Flow of food energy through different trophic levels. First level (the producer trophic level), herbivores occupy the second level (the primary consumer trophic level), primary carnivores occupy the third level (the secondary consumer trophic level), and secondary carnivores occupy the fourth level (the tertiary consumer trophic level).



Table 2.2 Trophic levels and physiological roles in the community





2.3.1 Food chains


A classic paper by Lindeman (1942) laid the foundations of ecological energetics. He attempted to quantify the concept of food chains by considering the efficiency of energy transfer between trophic levels. The first trophic level belongs to the primary producers, the second level to the herbivores (primary consumers), and the higher levels of the carnivores (secondary consumers). Some consumers occupy a single trophic level, but many others, such as omnivores, occupy more than one trophic level. The relationship between one trophic level and adjacent trophic levels may be described by a food chain.

‘The flow of food through a series of organisms that consume and are consumed is termed as a food chain.’ A food chain shows the movement of energy and matter through a system by indicating the path of food from a producer to a final consumer.

In general, food chains have 3 to 5 trophic links with 15 to 20 species. The length of food chain (the number of feeding links from a basal species to a top predator) also may reflect the physical characteristics of a particular ecosystem. A harsh arctic landscape has a much shorter food chain than a temperate or tropical one.



Number of trophic levels



Why are food chains relatively short? There are two main hypotheses. One, the energetic hypothesis, suggests that the length of a food chain is limited by the inefficiency of energy transfer along the chain. As we know, only about 10% of the energy stored in the organic matter of each trophic level is converted to organic matter at the next trophic level. At each transfer, a proportion (often as high as 80% to 90%) of the potential energy is lost as heat. Therefore, the shorter the food chain — or the nearer the organism to the first trophic level — the greater the energy available to that population. The second hypothesis, the dynamic stability hypothesis, proposes that long food chains are less stable than short chains. Population fluctuations at lower trophic levels are magnified at higher levels, potentially causing the local extinction of top predators. This hypothesis predicts that food chains should be shorter in unpredictable environments. Most of the data available support the energetic hypothesis.

Types of food chains

Within any ecosystem, there are two major food chains: the grazing food chain and the detritus food chain. The distinction between these two food chains is the source of energy for primary consumers. In the grazing food chain, the source of energy is living plant biomass (or net primary production). In the detrital food chain, the source of energy is dead organic matter or detritus.

Grazing food chains begin with photosynthetic plants (primary producers). Primary consumers (or herbivores) form the second link in the grazing food chain. They gain their energy by consuming primary producers. Secondary consumers (or primary carnivores), the third link in the chain, gain their energy by consuming herbivores. Tertiary consumers (or secondary carnivores) are animals that receive their energy by consuming primary carnivores.



More often than not, such simple food chains are oversimplified versions of the reality of feeding relationships. Instead, there are often multiple and interconnecting pathways, as well as numbers of different species involved at each trophic level. These complex pathways resemble a web rather than a simple chain and are referred to as food webs. So, a food web is a pictorial representation of the feeding relationship between organisms in an ecosystem and consists of interlocking food chains.

Detritus food chains begin with dead organic matter (detritus) and goes from non-living organic matter to detritus-feeding organisms (detritivores) and their predators. A large amount of organic matter is generated by the death of plant’s parts, animals and their excretion products in all ecosystems. Hence, detritus food chain is present in all ecosystems.

There is one notable difference in the flow of energy between trophic levels in the grazing and detritus food chains. In the grazing food chain, the flow is unidirectional, with net primary production providing the energy source for herbivores, herbivores providing the energy for carnivores, and so on. In the detritus food chain, the flow of energy is not unidirectional. The waste materials and dead organic matter in each of the consumer trophic levels are ‘recycled,’ returning as an input to the dead organic matter at the base of the detritus food chain.

The flow of energy in a single food chain; either grazing or detritus, is termed the single-channel energy flow model. However, in nature, that is rarely the case. In all ecosystems, the grazing and detritus food chains are interconnected, not all food eaten by herbivores is actually assimilated; some (such as undigested fecal matters) is diverted to the detritus pathway. The Y-shaped model (or two-channel energy flow model) explains the connection between a grazing and a detritus food chain.



Figure 2.7 Y-shaped or two-channel energy flow diagram. Under natural conditions, the two food chains namely the grazing food chain and detritus food chain are not completely isolated from one another. The grazing food chain beginning with green plants goes to herbivores and their consumers. In the detritus food chain, beginning with dead organic matter passes to detritivores and their consumers. For instance, dead bodies of small animals that were once part of the grazing food chain become incorporated in the detritus food chain. Functionally, the distinction between the two is of time lag between the direct consumption of living plants and ultimate utilization of dead organic matter. Adapted from Fundamental of Ecology by Odum and Barrett.



Although, most of the natural ecosystems possess both grazing and detritus types of food chains. Their relative importance, however, varies from one ecosystem to another. In terrestrial and shallow water ecosystems, grazing food chains dominate because a major proportion of the annual energy flow passes through this circuit. In case of tidal marshes, almost 90% of the primary production is routed through the detritus food chains.

Autotroph and detritus-based ecosystem

The autotroph based ecosystems depend directly on the influx of solar radiation. They are characterized by a dependence on energy captured by photosynthetic autotrophs and secondarily by the movement of that captured energy through the system via herbivory and carnivory. A large number of ecosystems function in this way and numerous herbivores, carnivores and omnivores are dependent on such autotrophic ecosystems.

Some ecosystems depend less on direct solar energy incorporation and more on the influx of dead organic material, or detritus, produced in another ecosystem. Ecosystems, such as caves, are independent of direct solar energy and are dependent on the influx of detritus for energy. These ecosystems are regarded as detritus-based ecosystems.





2.3.2 Ecological efficiencies


In ecosystems, living organisms are linked together by feeding relationships. Producers (or autotrophs) have the ability to fix carbon through photosynthesis via chlorophylls in their leaves. Herbivores are the primary consumers of organic molecules fixed by the producers.

Carnivores are secondary consumers, living on the organic molecules of the herbivores. There may be several levels of carnivores in any one ecosystem; in such cases, the ultimate level will be occupied by the top carnivore. The final groups of organisms in an ecosystem are decomposers, bacteria and fungi which can break down the complex organic chemicals of dead materials and waste products. The amount of energy reaching each trophic level is determined by the NPP and the efficiencies with which food energy is converted to biomass energy within each trophic level.

Ingestion

Ingestion is the process by which food is taken into the alimentary canal.



Assimilation

Assimilation is the process by which digested foods are absorbed by the cells of the alimentary canal.



Percentage of energy in the biomass produced by one trophic level that is incorporated into the biomass produced by the next higher trophic level is called ecological efficiency (also called as transfer efficiency or Lindeman’s efficiency).

The proportions of net primary production that flow along each of the possible energy pathways depend on transfer efficiencies in the way energy is used and passed from one step to the next. A knowledge of three categories of transfer efficiency is required to predict the pattern of energy flow. These are consumption efficiency (CE), assimilation efficiency (AE) and production efficiency (PE).

Consumption efficiency (or exploitation efficiency) is the percentage of total productivity available at one trophic level (Pn–1) that is actually consumed (i.e. ingested) by a trophic compartment one level up (In).



In the case of secondary consumers, it is the percentage of herbivore productivity eaten by carnivores. Consumption efficiencies of herbivores are typically low in most ecosystems dominated by vascular plants, which are in many cases well defended against herbivores. For example, herbivores consume less than 10% of primary production in most terrestrial ecosystems. Herbivory in aquatic ecosystems is generally greater than in terrestrial ecosystems especially for algal-based ecosystems where herbivores often consume more than 50% of primary production. Similarly, in terrestrial forests, consumption efficiencies of herbivores are less as compared to grasslands where most plants are nonwoody.

Assimilation efficiency (assimilation/ingestion) is the percentage of ingested food (I) that is assimilated (A) across the gut wall in a trophic level. The unassimilated material is lost as feces.



Assimilation efficiency depends on quality of food and the physiology of consumer. Carnivorous have a higher assimilation efficiency (approximately 80%) than herbivores (20% to 50%) because animal food is more easily digested than plant food. Assimilation efficiency also vary widely among ectotherms and endotherms. Endotherms are much more efficient than ectotherms. In aquatic ecosystem, autotrophs are mostly of small biomass but very high in digestible matters as compared to their counterparts in the terrestrial ecosystem. Hence, herbivore assimilation efficiency is higher in aquatic ecosystem than in terrestrial ecosystem.

Production efficiency (production/assimilation) is the percentage of assimilated food energy (A) that is incorporated into new biomass (P). The remainder is entirely lost as respiratory heat.



Production efficiency (also called net production efficiency or tissue growth efficiency) varies mainly according to the taxonomic class of the organisms concerned. It is determined primarily by animal metabolism. Invertebrates, in general, have high efficiencies (30–40%), losing little energy in respiratory heat. Among the vertebrates, cold-blooded animals (poikilotherms) have higher values for production efficiency (around 10%) as compared to warm-blooded animals (homeotherms). Due to very high energy expenditure for maintaining a constant body temperature, warm-blooded animals convert only 1–2% of assimilated food energy into production. Among homeotherms, production efficiency decreases with decreasing body size because a small size results in a high surface to volume ratio and therefore a high rate of heat loss. Similarly, herbivores tend to have higher production efficiency than carnivores.

The product of the assimilation efficiency (AE) and production efficiency (PE) is the gross production efficiency (production/ingestion or P/I); the proportion of food energy that is converted to consumer’s biomass. For example, if a herbivore (such as a snail) was found to have an assimilation efficiency of 25% and a production efficiency of 40%, then its gross production efficiency (AE × PE) is only 0.25 × 0.40 = 0.10 or 10%. Gross production efficiencies of warm-blooded terrestrial animals rarely exceed 5 percent. Herbivores tend to have higher production efficiency but lower assimilation efficiency than do carnivores.

Trophic transfer efficiency

Lindeman’s law of trophic transfer efficiency (or simply trophic efficiency) states that the efficiency of energy transfer from one trophic level to the next is about 10% i.e. about 10% of the net primary productivity of producers ends up as herbivores, about 10% of the net productivity of herbivores ends up as primary carnivores, and so on. In other words, 90% of the energy available at one trophic level typically is not transferred to the next. This loss is multiplied over the length of a food chain. For example, if 10% of available energy is transferred from primary producers to primary consumers (herbivores), and 10% of that energy is transferred to secondary consumers (primary carnivores), then only 1% of net primary production is available to secondary consumers (10% of 10%).

After Lindeman’s pioneering work, it was generally assumed that trophic transfer efficiencies were around 10% (referred to a 10 percent law). However, there is certainly no law of nature that results in precisely one-tenth of the energy that enters a trophic level transferring to the next. It ranges from approximately 5% to 20%, depending on the type of the organisms in the ecosystem. The overall trophic transfer efficiency from one trophic level to next is simply the product of CE, AE and PE (i.e. CE × AE × PE).





2.3.3 Ecological pyramid


Ecological pyramids provide a graphical representation of the relationships between different trophic levels within an ecosystem. Pyramid can be based on number of individuals of different species belonging to a trophic level, total living biomass belonging to a trophic level, and energy flow in a biotic community. The base of each pyramid corresponds to the producers or the first trophic level, while the apex represents the top consumer or highest trophic level. Ecological pyramids can take on different shapes, either upright or inverted, depending on the nature of ecosystem. Upright pyramids indicate a decrease in numbers, biomass, or energy as we move up the trophic levels. In contrast, inverted pyramids indicate an increase in the number, biomass, or energy as we move up from the lower to higher trophic levels.



However, there are certain limitations of ecological pyramids such as it does not take into account the same species belonging to two or more trophic levels. It assumes a simple food chain not food web. Moreover, some category of organisms such as saprophytes are not given any place in ecological pyramids.

Pyramid of numbers

A graphic representation of the total number of individuals of different species belonging to each trophic level in an ecosystem is known as pyramid of number. It consists of a number of horizontal bars depicting specific trophic levels which are arranged sequentially from primary producer level through herbivore, carnivore onwards. The length of each bar represents the total number of individuals at each trophic level in an ecosystem, expressed in terms of the number of individuals per unit area.

For most ecosystems, like grassland ecosystem, pyramids of numbers are upright because the numbering of organisms decreases at successively higher trophic levels. However, there are some ecological systems for which pyramid of numbers may be inverted. For example, if we depict the situation of a single tree along with its dependent insect population, we would get an inverted pyramid. Since the tree is a primary producer, it would represent the base of the pyramid and the dependent phytophagous insect population will represent the second trophic level.

Pyramid of biomass

Pyramid of biomass represents the total dry biomass of living beings of different species at each trophic level at a particular time. It is usually determined by collecting all the organisms occupying each trophic level separately and measuring their dry biomass.

This eliminates the size difference problem because all kinds of organisms at a trophic level are weighed. Generally, the biomass of producers is much greater than the biomass of herbivores and the biomass of herbivores is greater than that of carnivores and so on. In other words, we find that biomass decreases at each trophic level if we move from producer to top carnivore. Therefore, diagrammatic representation of biomass of individuals belonging to different trophic levels invariably assumes the shape of an upright pyramid. This, however, is not always the case. In some aquatic ecosystems, like large lakes and oceans, the pyramid of biomass, sometimes assumes an inverted form. Since microscopic phytoplanktonic algae are the primary producers in the aquatic system, being single-celled organisms, they do not accumulate much biomass and consequently, at a given time, the total weight or the standing crop of phytoplankton is less as compared to herbivores or other consumers. This is the reason for the base of the pyramid in aquatic ecosystem being smaller than the upper structure.

Pyramid of energy

A pyramid of energy shows the flow of energy from one trophic level of a community to the next. The units of pyramids of energy are therefore energy/area/time, e.g. kcal m–2 yr–1. In other words, pyramids of energy show the rate at which energy flows from one trophic level to the next.

Pyramids of numbers and biomass measure only the standing crop (the amount of biomass present at a time) of each trophic level, not their turnover rate.



The pyramid of energy can never be inverted; that is, the flow of energy through each trophic level must always decrease with increasing trophic level.



An energy pyramid more accurately reflects the laws of thermodynamics, with loss of energy occurs at each transfer from one trophic level to another, hence the pyramid is always upright. In energy pyramids, a given trophic level always has a smaller energy content than the trophic level immediately below it. This is due to the fact that some energy is always lost as heat is going from one trophic level to the next. Each bar in the pyramid indicates the amount of energy utilized at each trophic level in a given time annually per unit area.



Figure 2.8 There are three types of ecological pyramid— pyramid of numbers, pyramid of biomass and pyramid of energy. The pyramid of numbers shows the total number of individuals of different species at each trophic level. The pyramid of biomass shows how much biomass is present in all the organisms at each trophic level. The pyramid of energy shows that there is a decrease in energy when it moves from lower trophic level to higher trophic level. Pyramids of numbers may quite often be inverted; pyramids of biomass only rarely.





2.4 Nutrient cycling


The Earth is essentially a closed system with respect to matter and all matter on the Earth cycles. Every matter that is used by living organisms passes between the biotic and abiotic components of the Earth. By ‘matter’ we mean elements (such as carbon, nitrogen, oxygen) or molecules (water). Nutrient cycling (or more precisely element cycling) is the movement of elements through both the biotic and abiotic components of the Earth. It is the transport and transformation of elements within and among ecosystems. It involves the incorporation of elements by living organisms and their subsequent release back into the environment via decomposition. It links biotic and abiotic parts of ecosystems. The rate of nutrients cycle in an ecosystem is directly related to the rates of primary productivity (nutrient uptake) and decomposition (nutrient release). Environmental factors that influence these two processes will affect the rate at which nutrients cycle through the ecosystem. The movement of elements through atmosphere, hydrosphere, lithosphere and biosphere is generally termed as a biogeochemical cycle. An element’s specific route through a biogeochemical cycle depends on the nature of element. All elements occurring in organisms are part of biogeochemical cycles. In addition to being a part of living organisms, these elements also cycle through abiotic components of ecosystems.

Lithosphere

The lithosphere is composed of all the solid land mass comprising Earth’s crust and upper mantle.



Biosphere

All the living things in the planet are categorized under the biosphere. In this view, the biosphere includes all the biotic components of the Earth.



Atmosphere

The atmosphere is the body of gases that surrounds our planet.



Hydrosphere

The hydrosphere includes all the gaseous, liquid and solid forms of water of the Earth.



There are two basic types of biogeochemical cycles: gaseous and sedimentary. This classification is based on the primary source (i.e. reservoir) of an element to the ecosystem. The place where a chemical is held for long periods of time is called a ‘reservoir’. In gaseous cycles, the atmosphere acts as a major reservoir of the element. Such cycles show little or no permanent change in the distribution and abundance of the element. Carbon and nitrogen are prime representatives of biogeochemical cycles with a prominent gaseous phase. In the sedimentary cycle, the major reservoir is the lithosphere from which the elements are released largely by weathering. The sedimentary cycles, exemplified by phosphorus, sulfur and most of the other biologically important elements, have a tendency to stagnate. In such cycles, a portion of the supply may accumulate in large quantities, as in the deep ocean sediment, and thereby become inaccessible to organisms and to continual cycling. Some of the elements that are characterized by sedimentary cycles do have a gaseous phase, sulfur and iodine being among them, but these phases are insignificant in that there is no large gaseous reservoir.

An element’s specific route through a biogeochemical cycle varies with the particular element. Based on spatial scale, there are, however, two general categories of biogeochemical cycles: global and local cycle. In local cycles such as the phosphorus cycle, there are no mechanisms for long distance transfer of elements; whereas global cycles such as nitrogen cycle, involve atmosphere for long distance transfer of elements. Global cycles unite the Earth into one giant interconnected ecosystem. Gaseous forms of carbon, oxygen, sulfur and nitrogen occur in the atmosphere, and cycles of these elements are essentially global. Other, less mobile elements, including phosphorus, potassium and calcium, generally cycle on a more localized scale, at least over the short term. Lithosphere is the main abiotic reservoir of elements performing local cycle.





General model of nutrient cycling


Although the nutrient cycling of the various elements differ in detail, from the perspective of the ecosystem all nutrient cycles have a common pattern. A general model of nutrient cycling includes the main reservoirs of elements and the processes that transfer elements between reservoirs. Each reservoir is defined by two characteristics: whether it contains organic or inorganic materials and whether or not the materials are directly available for use by organisms. The nutrients in living organisms and in detritus are available to other organisms when consumers feed and when detritivores consume non-living organic matter. Some materials are moved from the living or organic reservoir to the fossilized organic reservoir, when dead organisms were buried by sedimentation over millions of years, becoming coal, peat. The nutrients in these deposits cannot be assimilated directly.



Figure 2.9 A general model of nutrient cycling.



Inorganic materials (elements and compounds) that are dissolved in water or present in the soil or air are available for use. Organisms assimilate materials from these reservoirs directly and return chemicals to them through the relatively rapid processes of cellular respiration, excretion, and decomposition. Although organisms cannot directly tap into the inorganic elements tied up in the rocks, these nutrients may slowly become available through weathering and erosion. Similarly, unavailable organic materials move into the available reservoir of inorganic nutrients when fossil fuels are burned, releasing emissions into the atmosphere.





Carbon cycle


Carbon cycle is predominantly a gaseous cycle, with carbon dioxide as the main vehicle of flux between the biotic and abiotic components. The major reservoirs of carbon include soils, the sediments of aquatic ecosystems, the oceans (dissolved carbon compounds), plant and animal biomass, and the atmosphere. The largest reservoir is sedimentary rocks such as limestone; however, this pool turns over very slowly.

Photosynthesis and respiration are the two opposing processes that drive the global carbon cycle. Terrestrial and aquatic autotrophs acquire carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, incorporate it into the organic matter of their own biomass via photosynthesis and release much of it through respiration. Terrestrial plants use atmospheric carbon dioxide as their carbon source for photosynthesis, whereas aquatic plants use dissolved carbonates. The decomposition of dead organic matters also releases carbon back into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide.

Two ecological processes – energy flow and nutrient (element) cycling - are the fundamental functions of ecosystems. These two processes proceed concurrently in ecosystems, a few generalizations can be made:

The ultimate source of energy (for most ecosystems) is the Sun.



The ultimate fate of energy in ecosystems is to be lost as heat.



Energy and nutrients are passed from organism to organism through the food chain as one organism eats another.



Decomposers remove the last energy from the remains of organisms.



Inorganic nutrients are cycled, energy is not.





Figure 2.10 Carbon cycle



Dead organic matters also form fossil fuels as a result of incomplete anaerobic decomposition and fossilization. Fossil fuels are hydrocarbons, primarily coal, crude oil or natural gas, formed from the remains of dead plants and animals. It is a general term for buried combustible geologic deposits of organic materials, formed from decayed plants and animals that have been converted to crude oil, coal, natural gas by exposure to heat and pressure in the Earth’s crust over millions of years. The burning of fossil fuels is adding significant amounts of additional carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.

Over geologic time, volcanoes are also a substantial source of carbon dioxide. In addition, carbon finds its way into inland waters and oceans as bicarbonate resulting from weathering (carbonation) of calcium-rich rocks such as limestone and chalk.





Nitrogen cycle


The atmospheric phase is predominant in the global nitrogen cycle. Nitrogen exists in many different forms, including both inorganic (e.g. ammonia, nitrate) and organic (e.g. amino and nucleic acids) form. The main reservoir of nitrogen is the atmosphere, which is about 80% nitrogen gas (N2). The other reservoirs are soils and the sediments of lakes, rivers and oceans (bound nitrogen); surface water and groundwater (dissolved nitrogen); and the biomass of living organisms.

In nitrogen cycle, nitrogen is converted between its various chemical forms. This transformation can be carried out by both biological and non-biological processes. The important processes in the nitrogen cycle include nitrogen fixation, ammonification, nitrification and denitrification.

Nitrogen fixation

Natural processes of nitrogen fixation are of two types – Biological nitrogen fixation and Nonbiological nitrogen fixation (including nitrogen fixation by lightning and photochemical reactions). Approximately 90% of nitrogen fixation is biological nitrogen fixation, in which prokaryotic organisms fix molecular nitrogen into ammonia. It is a reductive biosynthetic process. Few prokaryotic organisms (termed as nitrogen-fixing organisms or diazotrophs) are capable of biological nitrogen fixation only. Eukaryotic organisms are unable to fix nitrogen. The biological reaction of nitrogen fixation generates at least one mole of H2 in addition to two moles of NH3 for each mole of nitrogen molecule. Hence, total eight electrons are required in the reduction of one mole of nitrogen to two moles of NH3.



Ammonification

Most of the nitrogen in the soil exists in organic forms. When organic nitrogen is converted into ammonium ions by bacteria and fungi, it is called ammonification or mineralization. Mineralization is a general term used for a process in which organically bound nutrient is released in an inorganic form.

Nitrification

The oxidation of ammonium ions to nitrite and subsequent oxidation of nitrite to nitrate is called nitrification. It is carried out exclusively by bacteria. There are two distinct steps of nitrification that are carried out by distinct types of bacteria. The first step in nitrification is the oxidation of ammonium ions to nitrite. This step is carried out by nitrifying bacteria (known as ammonia-oxidizers) of genera Nitrosomonas, Nitrosospira and Nitrosococcus.

The second step in nitrification is the oxidation of nitrite to nitrate. This step is carried out by nitrifying bacteria (known as nitrite - oxidizers) of genera Nitrospira, Nitrobacter and Nitrococcus.



Denitrification

The process of conversion of NO3– into N2 by anaerobic denitrifying bacteria is called denitrification. These bacteria use nitrate rather than oxygen as an electron acceptor during respiration. This causes nitrate to be reduced, producing in turn NO2–, NO, N2O and finally N2. Denitrification can only be performed under anaerobic conditions.

The process is performed primarily by heterotrophic denitrifying bacteria (such as Paracoccus denitrificans and various pseudomonads), although autotrophic denitrifiers have also been identified (e.g. Thiobacillus denitrificans).



Anammox

Anammox (an abbreviation for ANaerobic AMMonium OXidation) is a recently discovered bacterial process which involves the anaerobic oxidation of ammonium to molecular nitrogen using nitrite as electron acceptor. Therefore, this process couples the oxidation of ammonium to the reduction of nitrite and includes features of both nitrification (ammonium oxidation) and denitrification (nitrite reduction and N2 production) in a single process. Anammox bacteria are chemolithoautotrophs. The reaction is mediated by a specialized group of planctomycete-like bacteria that were first discovered in man-made ecosystems (wastewater treatment systems).





Figure 2.11 The nitrogen cycle is the process by which nitrogen is converted between its various chemical forms. This transformation can be carried out by both biological and non-biological processes. Important processes in the nitrogen cycle include fixation, mineralization (ammonification), nitrification, denitrification and anammox.





Phosphorus cycle


The phosphorus cycle is unique among other major nutrient cycles in not having significant gaseous phase. Phosphorus occurs in only minute amounts in the atmosphere. A little phosphorus does get into the atmosphere as dust or sea spray, but these amounts are very very less. Phosphorus tends to cycle only locally.

The main reservoirs of phosphorus are rocks and ocean sediments. There are also large quantities of phosphorus in the oceans (in dissolved form) and in organisms. Phosphorus is released from rocks by weathering, leaching, erosion, and mining for use as agricultural fertilizers. Weathering of rocks gradually adds phosphorus to soil; some leaches into ground-water and surface water and may eventually reach the sea. Nearly all of the phosphorus in terrestrial ecosystems comes from the weathering of calcium phosphate minerals. Plants take up phosphate rapidly and efficiently. In fact, they can do this so quickly that they often reduce concentrations of phosphorus to extremely low levels. Hence, in most soils, only a small fraction of the total phosphorus is available to plants. Phosphate that is not taken up into the food chain settles to the ocean floor or lake bottom, eventually forming sedimentary rock. Phosphorus can remain locked in sedimentary rock for millions of years, becoming available again through the geological process of uplift, which exposes the element to weathering. The phosphorus cycle may be described as an ‘open’ cycle because of the general tendency for mineral phosphorus to be carried from the land to the oceans. Ultimately phosphorus becomes incorporated in ocean sediments.



Figure 2.12 Phosphorus cycle.





Sulfur cycle


In the global phosphorus cycle, the lithospheric phase is predominant, whereas, in the nitrogen cycle, the atmospheric phase is more important. Sulfur, by contrast, has atmospheric and lithospheric phases of similar magnitude i.e. the sulfur cycle has both sedimentary and gaseous phases.

In the long-term sedimentary phase, sulfur present in organic and inorganic deposits, released by weathering and decomposition. The weathering of rocks provides about half the sulfur draining off the land into rivers and lakes.

Sulfur enters the atmosphere from both natural sources and human activity. These include combustion of fossil fuels, volcanic eruptions and gases released by decomposition. It enters the atmosphere initially as hydrogen sulfide (H2S) which quickly interacts with oxygen to form sulfur dioxide (SO2).



Figure 2.13 Sulfur cycle.



The amount of nutrients, such as carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, calcium, etc., present in the soil at any given time, is referred to as the standing state. It varies in different kinds of ecosystems and also on a seasonal basis.



Three natural biogeochemical processes release sulfur into the atmosphere:

The formation of the volatile compound dimethylsulfide,



Anaerobic respiration by sulfate-reducing bacteria and



Volcanic activity.





The weathering of rocks provides about half the sulfur draining off the land into rivers and lakes, the remainder deriving from atmospheric sources. The available sulfur taken up by plants, passed along food chains and, via decomposition processes, becomes available again to the plants. The combustion of fossil fuels is the major human activity to the global sulfur cycle.





Decomposition


Decomposition is the process by which organic compounds are broken down into simple compounds. It is brought about by both abiotic and biotic agencies. For example, forest fires cause decomposition of detritus, releasing CO2 and other gases into the atmosphere and minerals into the soil. One can differentiate abiotic from biotic decomposition. The abiotic decomposition means degradation of a substance by chemical or physical processes. Decomposition and mineralization are closely related processes. In fact, mineralization is a part of the decomposition process. Decomposition does not always lead to mineralization. Mineralization is a biological process in which elements present in organic substances are converted to water-soluble inorganic states by soil microorganisms whereas decomposition could be due to physical, chemical or biological processes. So mineralization is one of the decomposition processes. Mineralization is the opposite of immobilization. When an inorganic nutrient is incorporated into an organic compound, the process is called immobilization. Mineralization is a vital process in ecosystem dynamics since most plant essential nutrients (such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur) are made available to plant uptake through the process of mineralization.

Decomposition by biological agents is an oxidative process in which complex, energy-rich molecules are being broken down by decomposers eventually into water-soluble inorganic nutrients. The process of decomposition usually starts with decomposers (bacteria and fungi). Decomposers use carbon compounds contained in dead organic matter as a source of energy.

When a plant or animal dies, it leaves behind nutrients and energy in the organic material that comprised its body. Scavenger and detritivores may feed on the carcasses or litter, but they will inevitably leave behind a considerable amount of unused energy and nutrients. Unused energy and nutrients will be present both in the unconsumed portions (bones, feathers or fur in the case of animals, wood and other indigestible litter in the case of plants) and in the feces of the scavengers and detritivores. Decomposers complete decomposition by breaking down the remaining organic matters. Decomposers eventually convert all organic matters into inorganic nutrients. This releases inorganic nutrients (such as nitrogen, phosphorus and magnesium) in a form usable to plants and bacteria. This process resupplies nutrients to the ecosystem, in turn allowing for greater primary production.

Decomposition rates are largely controlled both by biotic and abiotic factors. Biotic factors include mainly substrate quantity and quality and the type and size of the microbial community; abiotic factors include variables such as soil temperature, moisture and pH, which determine the soil environmental conditions. Decomposers usually grow faster and decompose organic matter more quickly in warmer climate. Hence, decomposition in a tropical rainforest is rapid, relatively little dead organic matter accumulates on the forest bed. The relatively low concentrations of some nutrients in the soil of tropical rainforests result from a faster nutrient cycling rate. In temperate forests, where decomposition is much slower, the soil may contain a large amount of the dead organic matter in the forest. Decomposition on land is also slower when conditions are either too dry for decomposers to thrive or too wet to supply them with enough oxygen.





2.5 Ecosystem services


Ecosystem services are ‘the benefits which people obtain from ecosystems’. According to IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), ecosystem services are ecological processes or functions which have value to individuals or society. For example, forest ecosystems purify air and water, mitigate droughts and floods, cycle nutrients, generate fertile soils, provide wildlife habitat, maintain biodiversity, pollinate crops, provide storage site for carbon and also provide aesthetic, cultural and spiritual values.

Ecosystem services are grouped into four broad categories. All of these services are provided by complex chemical, physical, and biological processes, powered by the Sun, and operate at different temporal and spatial scales.

Provisioning: Provide goods that humans can use directly, such as the production of food and water;

Regulating: Help to regulate environmental conditions, such as the control of climate and disease;

Supporting: Provide numerous support services, such as nutrient cycles and crop pollination;

Cultural: Provide aesthetic benefits, such as spiritual and recreational benefits.





2.6 Control of trophic structure: top-down versus bottom-up control


We have learned about how materials and energy flow through ecosystems. Now, we can address the question of ‘what controls the trophic structure’? The control of tropic structure i.e. the partitioning of biomass between trophic levels is broadly divided into two categories. The first of these categories, bottom-up control, emphasizes the energy inputs into the primary producers and the subsequent efficiency of energy transfer between trophic levels in determining the biomass accumulation at each trophic level. The second category, top-down control, emphasizes the importance of predation in influencing patterns of biomass accumulation at different trophic levels.

Bottom-up control

Bottom-up control (abiotic control) of trophic structure means that the production of biomass at each trophic level is controlled by inputs of nutrients, light or water that set quantity and quality of primary production. Biomass accumulated by producers then passes to higher trophic levels as a function of trophic transfer efficiency. This model proposes a unidirectional influence from lower to higher trophic levels, in which nutrients and other abiotic factors (such as light, water) are the main determinants of the biomass of primary producers. The nutrient supply controls the biomass of primary producers, which controls herbivore’s biomass, which in turn controls predator’s biomass. If the nutrient supply is increased, the resulting increase in production of primary producers is propagated through the food web and all of the other trophic levels will respond to the increased biomass. An important exception to this pattern occurs in aquatic food webs, where ‘inverted biomass pyramids’ can occur as a consequence of the extremely short generation time of unicellular producers relative to resident herbivores and predators.

Top-down control

Top-down control (biotic control) means that predation by higher trophic levels affects the accumulation of biomass at lower trophic levels. It suggests that biomass accumulation at any one trophic level depends on the intensity of predation from the trophic level above i.e. carnivores control population densities of herbivores directly and that herbivores control plant biomass directly. The effects of top-down control may, therefore, percolate down from predators through herbivores to plants.

A top-down control is a trophic cascade where the trophic structure is influenced by the removal of a top predator (a third or fourth level consumer). Top predators eat prey. By doing so predators can impact prey abundance. When the impact of a predator on its prey trickles down one or more feeding level to affect the density of prey’s prey, the ecologist term this interaction a tropic or feeding cascade. Trophic cascades occur when predators limit the density of their prey and thereby enhance survival of the next lower trophic level. Trophic cascades by definition must occur across a minimum of three feeding levels.



Figure 2.14 Bottom-up and top-down control. Bottom-up control proposes that plant quantity or quality limits the density of herbivores, which in turn sets limits on the abundance of predators. Top-down control proposes that plant biomass is limited by herbivores and that herbivores are limited by predators.





Bottom-up and top-down control of the distribution of biomass at different trophic levels. The circle size indicates trophic level biomass.



Thus, the top-down control postulates that the control of each trophic level comes from the trophic level above. It is mainly predation that controls the accumulation of biomass at lower trophic levels because predators limit herbivores, which in turn limit plants, which in turn limit nutrient levels through their uptake during growth and reproduction.

So, which theory is correct? While recognizing the differences between these two factors, it is also important to emphasize that both bottom-up and top-down control represent extremes along a continuum of importance for regulatory control. There is evidence from many ecosystem studies that both controls are operating to some degree, but that neither control is complete. Because both of these controls are operating in any system at any time, hence we must understand the relative importance of each control in order to help us to predict how an ecosystem will behave or change under different circumstances, such as in the face of a changing climate.





2.7 Types of ecosystems


Ecosystems are of different types. These can be broadly categorized as follows:

Natural ecosystem

Terrestrial ecosystem, such as forest, grassland, desert.

A forest is an ecosystem with a high density of trees and other woody vegetation.

A grassland is an ecosystem where the vegetation is dominated by grasses and other herbaceous (non-woody) plants. Grasslands occur in regions that are too dry for forests but that have sufficient soil water to support a herbaceous plant canopy that is lacking in deserts.

A desert is an ecosystem that receives an extremely low amount of precipitation, less than enough to support the growth of most plants. Deserts are defined as areas with an average annual precipitation of less than 250 millimeters per year, or as areas where more water is lost by evapotranspiration than falls as precipitation.



Aquatic ecosystem, which may be further distinguished on the basis of salt content as: Freshwater ecosystem (such as lake, pond) has very low salt content (0.5 ppt or less). Marine ecosystem (such as ocean, estuaries) has very high salt content (35 ppt or less).





Artificial or domesticated ecosystem

These are maintained artificially by man by the addition of energy. For example, croplands like maize, wheat, rice field etc., where man tries to control the biotic community as well as the physicochemical environment.





2.7.1 Aquatic ecosystem


An aquatic ecosystem represents a body of water. Aquatic ecosystems are commonly categorized on the basis of whether the water is moving (streams, rivers) or still (ponds, lakes) and whether the water is fresh, saline or brackish. Aquatic ecosystems are generally divided into two major types based on salinity – the marine ecosystem and the freshwater ecosystem. Marine ecosystems cover over 70 percent of the Earth’s surface and are the largest aquatic ecosystems of the Earth. Freshwater ecosystems include lakes, ponds, rivers, streams and springs and cover about 2 percent of the Earth’s surface. These ecosystems can be divided into lentic ecosystems (still water such as lake, pond) and lotic ecosystems (flowing water such as a river).





Variation in light and temperature in aquatic ecosystem


Both the quantity and quality of light change with water depth. Water surfaces are poor reflectors of solar radiation and therefore serve as a good sink for solar energy. When light strikes the surface of water, a certain amount is reflected back to the atmosphere. The amount of light entering the water surface is reduced further due to absorption of light by water itself and second due to absorption and scattering of light by suspended particles present in it. Water absorbs wavelengths differently. Longer wavelengths such as red are absorbed at a shallower depth than shorter wavelengths such as blue, which penetrates to a deeper depth. Changes in the quantity and quality of light have important implications to aquatic life either directly by influencing the quantity and distribution of productivity or indirectly by influencing the vertical profile of temperature with water depth.

Earth is heated by solar radiation coming from the Sun. Because the Earth is round, the angle at which incoming solar radiation fall differs with latitude. At low latitudes (i.e. the tropics), surface water receives more sunlight as compared to the high latitudes. Poles receive only about 40 percent of the heat that the equator does. Thus, the surface water at the poles remains very cold.

The temperature of aquatic bodies also varies with water depth. Temperature decreases from top to bottom. Solar radiations only transfer heat through the photic zone. Most of this energy is absorbed in the first 2 meters of the water. The photic zone varies in depth but can be up to 200 meters deep in the oceans. The depth of the photic zone is based on the amount of solids and other light-scattering elements present in the water. Water density is also directly related to temperature. As the temperature of water increases or decreases, it alters the density of water. Warm water is less dense than cold water.





Primary productivity in aquatic ecosystems


In aquatic (marine and freshwater) ecosystems, primary productivity is influenced by temperature, nutrients and light availability. Light and nutrients are the most important factors controlling primary productivity. Because solar radiation drives photosynthesis, light is a key factor in controlling primary productivity in aquatic ecosystem. The depth of light penetration affects primary productivity. The decrease in light with increasing depth limits the depth of water to which primary producers are restricted.

Aquatic ecosystems are divided into photic and aphotic zones on the basis of light penetration. The photic zone (euphotic zone or sunlight zone) is the uppermost layer of water in an aquatic body that is illuminated with sunlight. The depth of the photic zone depends on light intensity and water clarity. The portion of an aquatic body where there is little or no sunlight penetrates is called aphotic zone. It is formally defined as the depths beyond which less than 1% of sunlight penetrates. Intensity of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) declines exponentially with water depth in the photic zone. Hence, photosynthetic rate (production) by photosynthetic organisms declines with depth in photic zone, whereas, respiration (light independent process) is relatively constant with depth. The depth of photic zone at which photosynthetic rate is equal to respiration rate (P/R = 1) is called the compensation depth. Above compensation depth, photosynthetic rate is greater than respiration rate (P/R > 1), whereas below compensation depth respiration rate is greater than photosynthetic rate (P/R < 1).



Figure 2.15 At compensation depth, photosynthetic rate (P) is equal to respiration rate (R). Respiration is a light-independent process, whereas photosynthesis is a light-dependent process. Hence, respiration rate is relatively constant with depth, whereas photosynthetic rate declines with depth as a function of declining available light. Above compensation depth, photosynthetic rate is greater than respiration rate, whereas below compensation depth respiration rate is greater than photosynthetic rate.



Apart from light, nutrients limit primary productivity in aquatic ecosystems. The nutrient most often limits primary productivity is either nitrogen or phosphorus. Concentrations of these nutrients are very low in the photic zone because they are rapidly taken up by phytoplanktons.





Marine ecosystems


Marine ecosystems are aquatic ecosystems whose waters possess a high salt content. Out of all of the types of ecosystems on the planet, marine ecosystems are the most prevalent. Scientists have classified marine ecosystems into different categories such as open ocean ecosystem, ocean floor ecosystem, estuary ecosystem; however, categories aren’t always clearly defined, so some categories may overlap or envelope other categories.

Oceans represent the largest and the most diverse type of ecosystem. Oceans can be divided into numerous regions depending on the physical and biological conditions. Ocean environment is generally classified on the basis of light penetration (euphotic, disphotic and aphotic zones), distance from shore and water depth (littoral or intertidal, neritic and oceanic zones) and whether it is open water (pelagic zone; zone neither close to the bottom nor near the shore) or bottom (benthic zones).

The littoral zone (or inter-tidal zone) is the shoreline between land and ocean. The neritic zone is the shallow water zone over the continental shelf, a water depth of about 200 meters. The oceanic zone is the deep-water zone beyond the continental shelf.

The open ocean is called the pelagic zone. The pelagic zone is further subdivided into five different zones. From the surface to about 200 meters is the epipelagic zone (or sunlight zone). This is the region where the photosynthesis most commonly occurs and therefore contains the largest biodiversity. From 200 to 1000 meters is the mesopelagic zone (also known as twilight zone or midwater zone), where little light penetrates. Below the mesopelagic, water depth from 1000 to 4000 meters is the bathypelagic zone (also known as midnight zone or dark zone), where darkness is virtually complete. After bathypelagic zone is abyssopelagic zone (simply as the abyss), down to a water depth of 6000 meters. The water temperature is near freezing, and there is no light at all. Water deeper than 6000 meters, found in deep trenches, is termed the hadalpelagic zone. It represents the deepest parts of the ocean.

The benthic zone describes the bottom of the ocean, extending from the shoreline to the deep seafloor. The benthic zone may include areas that are only a few meters below water surface or may be at the more than 6000 meters from water surface. It is divided into zones based on their depth from the shallowest to the deepest – nearshore zones (littoral and sub-littoral), bathyal zone (200 to 2,000 meters, abyssal zone (2,000 to 6,000 meters) and hadal zone (over 6,000 meters deep).



Figure 2.16 Zonation in marine ecosystem according to depth and the light availability. The benthic zone describes the bottom of the ocean, extending from the shoreline to the deep seafloor.





Hot hydrothermal vents


Hot hydrothermal vents are found on the ocean floor, in regions where the ocean floor is spreading and are associated with gradual upwelling of mineral-rich fluid from the Earth’s interior. Moving Earth’s crust creates cracks and crevices in the ocean floor. These cracks allow the seawater to percolate downwards. Seawater that percolates downward toward the hot molten rock is heated and driven back upward, carrying minerals leached from the hot rock. On ocean floor, these minerals solidify as they cool, forming chimney-like structures. There are two main types of chimneys or hydrothermal vents – Black smokers and white smokers. Black smokers (emit a cloud of black materials) are chimneys formed from deposits of mainly iron sulfide, which is black. White smokers (emit a cloud of white materials) are chimneys formed from deposition of barium, calcium and silicon, which are white. A temperature gradient is set up, from more than 350°C near the core of the vent, down to 2–3°C in the surrounding ocean. Many types of organisms coexist near the hydrothermal vents. Close to the vent, at temperatures up to about 150°C, various chemoautotrophic species of bacteria live, directly fuelled by geochemical energy. Despite the extreme temperatures and pressures, toxic minerals, and lack of sunlight that characterized the deep-sea hydrothermal vent ecosystem, the species living there are thriving.





Box 2.2 Salinity




Salinity is the measure of all the salts dissolved in water. It is usually measured in parts per thousand (ppt or ‰). The average ocean salinity is 35 ppt and the average river water salinity is 0.5 ppt or less. This means that in one kilogram (1000 grams) of seawater, 35 grams are salt. Because the water in estuaries is a mixture of freshwater and ocean water, the salinity in most estuaries is less than the open ocean. Bottom water almost always contains more salt than surface waters. The salt in the ocean is mostly made up of sodium and chlorine. Sodium chloride accounts for about 85% of the dissolved salt. Salinity is often measured by measuring how well electricity travels through the water. This property of water is called conductivity. Water that has dissolved salt in it will conduct electricity better than water with no dissolved salt. The more salt dissolved in the water, the better the water conducts electricity.





Figure 2.17 A hot hydrothermal vent in the ocean floor. Water percolates down toward the hot molten rock upwelling from the Earth’s interior and is heated and driven back upward, carrying minerals leached from the hot rock. Minerals precipitate from the water as it cools, forming a chimney. A temperature gradient is set up, from more than 350°C near the core of the vent, down to 2–3°C in the surrounding ocean. Different classes of organisms, thriving at different temperatures, live in different neighborhoods of the chimney. Close to the vent, at temperatures up to about 150°C, various chemoautotrophic species of bacteria live, directly fuelled by geochemical energy.



The basis of the ecosystems is chemoautotrophic bacteria. These bacteria use sulfur compounds, particularly hydrogen sulfide, to produce organic materials (carbohydrates) by the process of chemosynthesis. Hydrogen sulfide, found under the crust, is brought up in the vent water. Without these bacteria, the entire ecosystem of hydrothermal vents could not exist. Primary consumers in the ecosystem depend on these bacteria for food. Many animals, like the giant tube worms (Riftia pachyptila) have colonies of these bacteria inside their body and use the sugars made by the bacteria for energy. Giant tube worms have no mouth or stomach, so they are fully dependent on the bacteria.





Coral reefs ecosystem


Coral reefs are a special subtype of ocean floor ecosystem. Found only in warm tropical waters and at relatively shallow depths, coral reefs are among the most productive ecosystems on the planet. About one-quarter of marine species depend on coral reefs for food, shelter or both. Because of the diversity found in the habitats created by corals, reefs are often called the ‘rainforests of the sea.’

Corals are marine invertebrates in the class Anthozoa of phylum Cnidaria. Corals are modular animals, anemone-like cylindrical polyps, with prey-capturing tentacles surrounding the opening or mouth. More than 6,000 species of coral are known. Most structures that we call ‘coral’ are, in fact, made up of hundreds to thousands of tiny coral polyps. Each soft-bodied polyp secretes a hard outer skeleton of calcium carbonate that attaches either to rock or the dead skeletons of other polyps. Although various types of corals can be found from the water’s surface to depths of 6000 m, reef-building corals are generally found at depths of less than 45 m. One fascinating feature of shallow water, reef-building corals is their mutualistic relationship with photosynthetic endozoic dinoflagellate algae called zooxanthellae, which live in their tissues. Because reef-building corals have a symbiotic relationship with algal cells, their distribution is limited to depths where sufficient solar radiation is available to support photosynthesis. Deep-sea corals occur in much deeper or colder oceanic waters and lack zooxanthellae. The coral provides the algae with a protected environment and the compounds they need for photosynthesis. In return, the algae produce oxygen and help the coral to remove wastes. Precipitation of calcium from the water is necessary to form the coral skeleton. This precipitation occurs when water temperature and salinity are high and carbon dioxide concentrations are low. These requirements limit the distribution of reef-building corals to the shallow, warm tropical waters (20°C to 28°C).



In terms of geomorphology, three main coral reef types are recognized- fringing reefs, barrier reefs and atolls. Fringing reefs develop on shallow rocky substrata adjacent to landmasses and are separated from the land by narrow, shallow lagoons. Barrier reefs are separated from land by deeper, wider lagoons. Atolls are rings of coral that create protected lagoons, usually form when islands surrounded by fringing reefs sink into the sea or the sea level rises around them.





Estuary


An estuary (from Latin word means tide) is a transition area between river and sea. It is a semi-enclosed coastal body of water where freshwater from land runoff mixes with seawater. These areas of transition between the land and the sea are driven by tides but sheltered from the full force of ocean wind and waves. When freshwater meets salty seawater, both water combines into a brackish mixture. At estuary, salinity is intermediate between salt- and fresh water. However, salinity varies spatially within estuaries, from nearly that of freshwater to that of seawater. Salinity also varies with the rise and fall of the tides. Estuaries are among the most productive ecosystems in the world and are home to unique plant and animal communities that have adapted to brackish water. However, estuaries are not only found where freshwater from rivers and saltwater from the ocean meet and mix. There are also several types of entirely freshwater ecosystems that have many similar characteristics to the traditional brackish water estuaries. These freshwater estuaries also provide many of the ecosystem services and functions that brackish estuaries do.





Box 2.3 Mangrove




Mangroves are trees or large shrubs which are salt-tolerant and grow in intertidal zones in tropical and subtropical regions. They form dense forests along many tropical and subtropical coasts. Mangroves form two groups known as true mangroves and associate mangroves. True mangroves are highly adapted to the intertidal zone where all or part of them are regularly submerged in saltwater. The length of inundation tolerance varies between true mangrove species. Plant species other than the true mangroves are known as associate mangroves. They are also highly adapted to salty conditions, but less than true mangroves, and will only tolerate infrequent inundation by saltwater during extremely high tides. Mangroves host a wide diversity of life, including sponges, shrimp, crabs, jellyfish, fish, birds and even crocodiles.



Mangrove forest

Natural forests with > 30% canopy cover, composed of species of mangrove tree, generally along coasts in or near brackish or salt water.





Freshwater ecosystem


In freshwater, the average salinity is 0.5 ppt or less i.e. very low salt content. It exists in various forms such as lakes, rivers, ponds and wetlands. The study of the physical, chemical and biological properties of freshwater is referred to as limnology. Freshwater ecosystems include both running water (lotic ecosystem) or still water (lentic ecosystem). A lotic ecosystem (also called the riverine ecosystem) can be any kind of moving water, such as river, spring, channel or stream. A lentic ecosystem (also called the lacustrine ecosystem) entails a body of standing water such as ponds and lakes.

Plants that are especially adapted to growing in a saline environment are called halophytes. Plants not so adapted to saline conditions are called glycophytes.

Certain plants, called xerohalophytes, are adapted to grow in an environment that is both dry and saline at the same time.





Lake


A lake is an inland body of standing water that is usually larger and deeper than a pond. Lake like the ocean is divided into separate zones which are defined by their distance from the shore. The littoral zone, which is closest to the shore, is host to a wide variety of rooted plants species due to its warm, shallow environment. In lakes and ponds, much of the species diversity is concentrated in the littoral zone, near the shore. The limnetic zone (pelagic zone) is the open water farther from shore and is dominated by planktons. The deeper region of a lake below the limnetic zone is called the profundal zone which contains only heterotrophs. The zone at the bottom of a lake is termed benthic. The benthic zone is occupied by communities of organisms collectively called the benthos. The terms benthic and benthos are derived from the Greek for depths of the sea, but the terms are also used in freshwater biology to refer to the zone and organisms at the bottom of freshwater bodies.



Figure 2.18 The zones in lake water are determined by gradients of light from the water surface to the bottom.



Life-forms in a lake ecosystem include producers, consumers and decomposers. The producers may be of two main types – rooted or large floating plants (macrophytes) generally growing in shallow water; and minute floating plants, usually algae called phytoplankton, distributed throughout the lake as deep as light penetrates.

Life-forms in a lake ecosystem can also be categorized as plankton (free-floating organisms), nekton (free-swimming organisms, such as fish), benthos (bottom-dwelling organism), neuston (the collective term for the organisms that float on the top of the water, epineuston or live right under the surface, hyponeuston), and periphyton (organisms attached to submerged surfaces).

The term benthic refers to the floor of the aquatic ecosystem, and benthos refers to plants and animals that live there.





Thermal stratification


Changes in the temperature profile with depth in an aquatic system are called thermal stratification. Freshwater lakes of temperate regions generally become thermally stratified due to differential heating and cooling. A well stratified temperate lake during summer has a layer of freely circulating warm surface water with small temperature gradient known as the epilimnion. A second layer called metalimnion (or thermocline), which is characterized by a steep decline in temperature, separates the more uniformly warm upper layer from more uniformly cold deeper waters. The third layer is the hypolimnion, a deep, cold layer of dense water where no temperature gradient is evident. Thermocline checks the mixing of water between epilimnion and hypolimnion. In freshwater lotic ecosystems, thermal stratification is not observed.



Figure 2.19 Temperature and density profiles with water depth for a temperate lake during summer. (a) The region of the vertical depth profile where the temperature declines most rapidly is called the thermocline. The thermocline is located between an upper layer of warm, less dense water called the epilimnion and a deeper layer of cold, denser water called the hypolimnion. (b) The rapid decline in temperature in the thermocline results in a distinct difference in water density in the warmer epilimnion as compared to the cooler waters of the hypolimnion, leading to a two-layer density profile—warm, low-density surface water and cold, high-density deep water.





Seasonal changes in water temperature


The temperature profile of a deep-water lake of temperate region changes from one season to the next and creates a cyclic pattern. Due to seasonal variation in the input of solar radiation to the water surface give rise to seasonal changes in the vertical profile of temperature.

Let us begin with spring season. After the ice melts on a lake, the lake water is generally has the same temperature from the surface to the bottom (i.e. isothermal). It allows circulation and mixing of the lake water. Surface water can be pushed to the lake bottom and bottom water can rise to the surface. This circulation pattern allows large amounts of oxygen to reach the bottom of the lake. The mixing of the lake water at this time of year is called spring overturn.

As air temperature rises in summer, heat from the Sun begins to warm the lake. The layer of warm water at the surface of the lake is called the epilimnion. The cold layer below the epilimnion is called the hypolimnion. These two layers are separated by a layer of water which rapidly changes temperature with depth. This is called the thermocline (or metalimnion).

Stratification during the summer acts as a deterrent to complete lake mixing. Wind circulates the surface water, but the warm water of the epilimnion is unable to move through the cold, dense water of the hypolimnion. As a result, the water is only mixed in the epilimnion.

As autumn (fall) approaches and temperature decreases, the epilimnion begins to decrease in depth. Eventually, the epilimnion gets so shallow that it can no longer be maintained as a separate layer and the lake loses its stratification. Thus, as in the spring, the lake water in the autumn has generally uniform temperatures and wind can once again thoroughly mix the lake water. In addition, surface water, which is in direct contact with the cold air, gets cooled faster than the water below. This cold, dense water sinks and further helps to mix the lake, and again more oxygen and nutrients are replenished throughout the lake. This process is called autumn overturn.

As winter approaches, the surface water is eventually cooled below 4°C. As water temperature at the surface reaches 0°C, ice begins to cover the surface of the lake. During the winter, ice cover prevents wind from mixing the lake water. Again, stratification occurs but the pattern is reversed (inverse stratification); cold water rests over warm water. A layer of water colder than 4°C, but warmer than 0°C forms just under the ice. Below this water, the remainder of lake water is usually near 4°C.



Figure 2.20 The seasonal cycle of water temperature (in °C) in a temperate lake. Cross-section of a temperate lake along with temperature profiles with depth for each season. (a) The lake surface freezes in winter. (b) When the ice melts in the spring, the cold water again sinks and mixes the lake. (c) In the summer, the warmest water occurs at the surface, and water temperature decreases with depth. (d) Cold air temperatures in the autumn cool the upper layers and this dense cold water sinks, thoroughly mixing the lake.



Deep-water lakes or ponds in tropical regions exhibit permanent thermal stratification due to the consistent year-round input of solar radiation, without significant seasonal variations. Conversely, shallow ponds often display minimal thermal stratification during the summer due to wind-mediated water circulation.





Nutrient inputs and cycling


As in any ecosystem, nutrient inputs and cycling have important influences on the structure and function of lentic systems. Nutrients are transported into the lake via terrestrial run-off, groundwater flow, atmospheric deposition (e.g. rain), and direct input from terrestrial systems (e.g. leaf litter). The three most important nutrients are nitrogen, carbon and phosphorus, which are essential elements to all organisms. Phosphorus and nitrogen have been considered the most limiting in lentic systems. The supply of nutrients into the lake determines the amount of primary productivity that can be supported. Lakes can be categorized on the basis of their richness in nutrients, which typically affects plant growth into three classes: oligotrophic, mesotrophic and eutrophic lakes.

Oligotrophic lakes: These lakes are nutrient-poor and biologically unproductive.

Mesotrophic lakes: These lakes contain a moderate amount of nutrients and with an intermediate level of productivity.

Eutrophic lakes: These lakes are very rich in nutrients and biologically very productive. High nutrient concentration results in excessive growth of algae (algal bloom) and low oxygen levels and undesirable water quality.





River


Streams are bodies of water with constant motion, referred to as a current. Geologists classify streams into various categories based on their size, depth, speed, and location. Rivers are the largest types of streams, capable of transporting significant amounts of water from higher to lower elevations.

Rivers have three spatial dimensions – length, width, and depth. Every river can be divided into three zones: the source zone (steep slope and fast velocity), the transfer zone (lower altitude, slower velocity, and wider riverbed), and the deposition zone (very low slope, slow velocity, large bends (meanders) are formed, and the river splits into arms). The point where a river meets a large body of water, such as an ocean or a lake, is known as the mouth.

The river corridor includes river channels, fluvial deposits, riparian zones, and floodplains. The active river channel refers to the defined pathway that a river follows within its banks. The bottom or floor of a river is called the riverbed. The shape and size of the river channel are determined by four basic factors: slope, water velocity, particle size of the sediment, and runoff. Fluvial deposits consist of sedimentary materials transported and deposited by the action of flowing water. These deposits are typically found in riverbeds, floodplains, and other areas where the river’s flow has deposited them. Riparian zones are transitional areas between terrestrial ecosystems, such as forests or grasslands, and aquatic ecosystems. Floodplains are areas adjacent to rivers and streams that are subject to periodic flooding during heavy rainfall. Floodplains serve as natural reservoirs capable of absorbing excess water, thereby reducing the risk of downstream flooding. Floodplains may be situated on one or both riverbanks. These dynamic systems comprise various components that continuously undergo processes of formation and alteration.

The movement of eroded soil and rock particles in water flow is called the transport of sediments. Sediment transport is measured by the number of undissolved particles that pass through a river spot over a certain time. The sediment load of a river consists of suspended and bedload sediment. Suspended sediments are fine particles that are easily moved by turbulence in the bottom layer. Bedload sediments are the bottom particles, which are dense and big enough to move downstream mainly by rolling or hopping.

The processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition interacting with vegetation make river corridors very dynamic ecosystems. Rivers constantly change shape and location. New meanders and arms are formed, old ones are abandoned; the riverbed itself shifts. This phenomenon is called the migration of the river corridor.





Wetlands


‘Wetlands are areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted to life in saturated soil conditions’

Wetlands are ecosystems in which the land surface is saturated or covered with standing water either permanently or seasonally (i.e. can be permanently flooded, periodically flooded, permanently saturated, periodically saturated). These ecosystems are transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. The water found in wetlands can be saltwater, freshwater or brackish. Brackish water has more salinity than freshwater, but not as much as seawater.

There are four major types of wetlands: marsh, swamp, bogs and fen. Three major features used to describe the wetlands are hydrology, type of vegetation and type of soil. Hydrology has two components. One involves physical movement of water: direct precipitation, flooding and groundwater. The other component is the hydroperiod, which involves duration, frequency and season of flooding.

Marshes are the most productive wetlands characterized by mineral soils and are typically dominated by grasses and floating-leaved plants. Swamps are forested wetlands characterized by mineral soil, seasonally or permanently flooded, and dominated by trees. Thus, grasses dominate marshes, while trees dominate swamps.



Wetlands are area of marsh, fen, peatland or water, whether natural or artificial, permanent or temporary, with water that is static or flowing, fresh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine water, the depth of which at low tide does not exceed six metres. Ramsar convention, 1971



Bogs and fens are organic soil wetlands. Organic soil is produced by the accumulation of plant materials. Generally, these wetlands are referred to as peatlands due to their ability to form peat. Bogs are acidic, unproductive wetlands that develop in relatively cool but wet climates. Bogs receive water exclusively from rainfall, not from streams or groundwater. They depend on rainwater for their supply of nutrients. Since rainwater has very little nutrient content, bog has very poor nutrient level. The dominant species in bogs are mosses. Fens are alkaline rather than acid areas, receiving water mostly from surface and groundwater sources.





Box 2.4 Ramsar Convention




The Ramsar Convention (also known as the Convention on Wetlands) is an intergovernmental treaty that provides the framework for national action and international cooperation for the conservation and wise use of wetlands and their resources. It is named after the city of Ramsar in Iran, where the convention was signed in 1971. The 2nd of February each year is World Wetlands Day, marking the date of the adoption of the convention on wetlands on 2 February 1971.

As of 2023, there are 172 contracting parties to the convention. India is also a signatory to the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands. The ‘Ramsar List’ (a list of wetlands of international importance) comprises 2,502 Ramsar Sites. Currently, India has 75 Ramsar Sites.



Wetlands can also be classified into the following categories: marine (coastal wetlands, including coastal lagoons, rocky shores, and coral reefs); estuarine (comprising deltas, tidal marshes, and mangrove swamps); lacustrine (associated with lakes); riverine (found along rivers and streams); and palustrine (meaning ‘marshy,’ including marshes, swamps, and bogs).





2.7.2 Terrestrial ecosystem


Terrestrial ecosystems are found exclusively on land. The key to the meaning of terrestrial ecosystems lies in the word ‘terrestrial’, which generally means anything occurring on land. Therefore, terrestrial ecosystem refers to the interacting system made up of living organisms and non-living objects occurring on land. Only 28 percent of the Earth’s surface belongs to terrestrial ecosystems.





Forest ecosystem


A forest is a complex ecosystem which is predominantly composed of trees and shrubs. It is defined as ‘a land spanning more than 0.5 hectares with trees higher than 5 meters and a canopy cover of more than 10 percent’ (UN FAO). It does not include land that is predominantly under agricultural or urban land use. Forests are the dominant terrestrial ecosystem of Earth and are distributed across the globe. Forests account for 75% of the gross primary productivity of the Earth’s biosphere and contain 80% of the Earth’s plant biomass. Based on canopy cover, a forest can be classified into three categories: very dense forest (all lands with a tree cover canopy density of 70% and above), moderately dense forest (all lands with a tree cover canopy density between 40% and just above 70%), and open forest (all lands with a tree cover canopy density between 10% and 40%). Forest types differ widely, determined by factors including latitude, altitude, temperature, rainfall patterns and soil composition. Climate (temperature and rainfall), soil types and topography are the main factors that determine the type of forest. There are three major types of forest – taiga forest, temperate forests and tropical forests.

Forest is a minimum area of land of 0.05-1.0 hectares with tree crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of more than 10-30% with trees with the potential to reach a minimum height of 2-5 metres at maturity in situ. UNFCCC, 2011



Taiga forest (coniferous forest or boreal forest) is located at higher latitudes, close to the polar region and is dominated by needle-leaved, drought tolerant, evergreen trees. The taiga or boreal forest has a subarctic climate. Winter is long and very cold and summer is short and cool. Precipitation occurs primarily in the form of snow, 40–100 cm annually.





Box 2.5 Primary and secondary forest




A primary forest is a forest that has never been logged and has developed following natural disturbances and under natural processes, regardless of its age. It refers to untouched, pristine forest that exists in its original condition. A secondary forest is a forest that has been logged and has recovered naturally or artificially. Secondary forest regenerates largely through natural processes after significant removal or disturbance of the original forest vegetation by human or natural causes at a single point in time or over an extended period and displaying a major difference in forest structure with respect to pristine primary forests. The term ‘primary forest’ is commonly perceived to be the ‘climax forest type’ for a given region and environment, which is thought to be relatively stable. The term ‘secondary forest’ then relates to successional forests that develop after clearing of the original forest, and secondary succession is complete when they develop again into climax communities or primary forests.

A degraded forest is a secondary forest that has lost, through human activities, the structure, function, species composition or productivity normally associated with a natural forest type expected on that site. Hence, a degraded forest delivers a reduced supply of goods and services from the given site and maintains only limited biological diversity (UNEP/CBD). There are generally three commonly used parameters when identifying degraded forests. It includes reduction in canopy cover and/or trees per unit area, reduction in biological diversity and reduction in the soil as indicated by soil cover, depth or fertility.



Temperate forests are found in the temperate climatic zone (between the tropics and boreal regions) in both the Northern and Southern Hemisphere. They may also be called ‘four-season forests’ because these forests experience four distinct seasons. In the temperate region, winters are mild and rainfall is moderate. Temperate forests are a mix of deciduous, broad-leaved and coniferous evergreen trees. They are simpler in structure than tropical forests and support a lesser number of tree species. Temperate forests can be further distinguished by weather patterns and geographical features that favour the predominance of certain kinds of trees. It can be temperate coniferous evergreen forests, temperate broadleaf forests, temperate deciduous forests (a subgroup of temperate broadleaf forests, consist of trees that lose their leaves every year) and temperate rainforests (typically have heavy rainfall and high humidity).

Tropical forests are forested landscapes in tropical regions, occurring at low altitude zones near the equator (found within 23.5° latitude of the equator). Tropical forests are mainly evergreen rainforests and moist forests. It also includes other forests like a seasonal tropical forest: (also known as moist deciduous, semi-evergreen seasonal, tropical mixed or monsoon forests) and mangrove forests. Tropical rainforests are forests characterized by high rainfall, with annual rainfall in the case of tropical rainforests exceeds 200 cm and high temperature (average temperature is between 20-25°C).





Deforestation


Deforestation is the permanent destruction of forests in order to make the land available for other uses. It is the ‘permanent removal of forest cover and withdrawal of land from forest use, whether deliberately or circumstantially.’

According to UNFCCC, deforestation is defined as the direct human-induced conversion of forest to nonforest land. The global Forest Resource Assessment (FRA) did not distinguish natural loss of forest from that caused by human impacts. However, both definitions refer to long-term or permanent change from forest to nonforest.

Cause of deforestation: The biggest driver of deforestation is agriculture. Subsistence farming is responsible for about 48% of deforestation (UNFCCC). Subsistence agriculture is self-sufficiency farming in which the farmers focus on growing enough food to feed themselves and their families. Logging operations for wood and paper products are second major reason for deforestation. Other causes of deforestation may include population growth, urbanization and globalization.

Effect of deforestation: Deforestation can have a negative impact on the environment. The most dramatic impact is loss of habitat for millions of species. About eighty percent of Earth’s land animals and plants live in forests, and many cannot survive the deforestation that destroys their habitats. Deforestation is considered to be one of the contributing factors to global climate change. It plays a critical role in absorbing the greenhouse gases that fuel global warming. Fewer forests mean larger amounts of greenhouse gases entering the atmosphere—and increased speed and severity of global warming.





Afforestation


Afforestation is the establishment of a forest in an area where there was no previous forest cover. The IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) Guidelines define afforestation as the ‘planting of new forests on lands which, historically, have not contained forests.’ In contrast, reforestation refers to establishment of forest on land that had recent tree cover. In India, National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board (NAEB), set up in August 1992, is responsible for promoting afforestation, tree planting, ecological restoration and eco-development activities in the country. It provides financial assistance to Non-Governmental Organizations and voluntary agencies for afforestation, tree planting and eco-development activities.





Social forestry


Social forestry is a programme to increase forest areas that are close to human settlement and have been degraded over the years due to human activities needed to be afforested. It involves the afforestation of unused and fallow land for the benefit of rural and urban communities (i.e. forestry outside the conventional forests). The National Commission on Agriculture, Government of India, first used the term ‘social forestry’ in 1976. Social forestry scheme can be categorized into groups: farm forestry, community forestry, extension forestry and agro-forestry.

Farm forestry: It is the name given to programmes which promote commercial tree growing by farmers on their own land.

Shifting cultivation is an agricultural system in which plots of land are cultivated temporarily, then abandoned and allowed to revert to their natural vegetation while the cultivator moves on to another plot. The period of cultivation is usually terminated when the soil loses fertility.

It is a primitive practice of cultivation in states of North Eastern Hill Region of India. Shifting cultivation here is known as ‘ jhum cultivation’ and people involved in such cultivation are called Jhumia.



Community forestry: It is the raising of trees on community land and not on private land as in farm forestry. All these programmes aim to provide for the entire community and not for any individual.

Extension forestry: Planting of trees on the sides of roads, canals and railways, along with planting on wastelands is known as ‘extension’ forestry, increasing the boundaries of forests.

Agroforestry: Planting of trees on and around agricultural boundaries, and on marginal, private lands, in combination with agricultural crops is known as agroforestry.





Grassland ecosystem


Grassland ecosystems are dominated by perennial grass species. Grasslands have a high primary productivity and relatively low biomass. Grazing has a significant influence on the structure and composition of grassland communities and tends to maintain high species diversity. There are two major types of grassland ecosystems – Tropical and temperate grasslands.

Tropical grassland (Savannas) is grassland with scattered individual trees. Savannas are always found in warm or hot climates where the annual rainfall is between 30-50 cm per year. It has a distinct wet and dry season. The dry season comes during winter. Savanna receives all its rain during summer. Plants are adapted to the long dry periods. Many plants are xerophytic in nature.

Temperate grasslands have hot summers and cold winters and the amount of rainfall (25 to 75 cm) is less than in savannas. Temperate grassland is found in all continents except Antarctica. However, a vast majority of these ecosystems are found in Africa, South America, North America and Russia. Temperate grasslands are known as the veldts of South Africa, the puszta of Hungary, the pampas of Argentina and Uruguay, the steppes of the former Soviet Union and the plains and prairies of central North America.





Desert ecosystem


A desert is a region that receives very little precipitation (an average annual precipitation of less than 250 mm or 10 inches). The amount of evaporation in a desert often greatly exceeds the annual rainfall. All deserts are arid and there is little water available for plants and other organisms. Humidity (water vapour in the air) is near zero in most deserts. Rain is usually the main source of water in a desert, but it occurs very rarely. Many desert dwellers rely on groundwater, stored in aquifers below the surface. Groundwater comes from rain or other precipitation, like snow or hail.





Types of deserts


The world’s deserts can be divided into five types—subtropical, coastal, rain shadow, interior, and polar- according to the causes of their dryness.

Subtropical deserts: Subtropical deserts are caused by the circulation patterns of air masses. They are found along the Tropic of Cancer, between 15 and 30 degrees North of the Equator, or along the Tropic of Capricorn, between 15 and 30 degrees South of the Equator. Hot, moist air rises into the atmosphere near the Equator. As the air rises, it cools and drops its moisture as heavy tropical rains. The resulting cooler, drier air mass moves away from the Equator. As it approaches the tropics, the air descends and warms up again. The descending air hinders the formation of clouds, so very little rain falls on the land below. The world’s largest hot desert, the Sahara desert, is a subtropical desert in Northern Africa. Other subtropical deserts include the Kalahari desert in Southern Africa and the Tanami desert in Northern Australia.

Coastal deserts: Cold ocean currents contribute to the formation of coastal deserts. Air blowing toward shore, chilled by contact with cold water, produces a layer of fog. This heavy fog drifts onto land. Although humidity is high, the atmospheric changes that normally cause rainfall are not present. A coastal desert may be almost totally rainless, yet damp with fog. The Atacama desert, on the Pacific shores of Chile, is a coastal desert.

Rain shadow deserts: Rain shadow deserts exist near the leeward slopes of some mountain ranges. When moisture-laden air hits a mountain range, it is forced to rise. The air then cools and forms clouds that drop moisture on the windward (wind-facing) slopes. When the air moves over the mountain top and begins to descend the leeward slopes, there is little moisture left. The descending air warms up, making it difficult for clouds to form. Death Valley, in the US states of California and Nevada, is a rain shadow desert.

Interior deserts: Interior deserts, which are found in the heart of continents, exist because no moisture-laden winds reach there. By the time air masses from coastal areas reach the interior, they have lost all their moisture. Interior deserts are sometimes called inland deserts. The Gobi desert, in China and Mongolia, lies hundreds of kilometers away from the ocean. Winds that reach the Gobi have long since lost their moisture.

Polar deserts: Parts of the Arctic and the Antarctic are classified as deserts. These polar deserts contain great quantities of water, but most of it is locked in glaciers and ice sheets year-round. So, despite the presence of millions of liters of water, there is actually little available for plants and animals. The largest desert in the world is also the coldest. Almost the entire continent of Antarctica is a polar desert, experiencing little precipitation. Few organisms can withstand the freezing, dry climate of Antarctica.





Desertification


According to UNCED (United Nations Conference on Environment and Development), ‘Desertification is a process of land degradation in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas, resulting from various factors, including climatic variation as well as human activities.’ The arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid regions together form the ‘drylands.’ Desertification is a slow and self-accelerating process of land degradation. Land degradation manifests itself through soil erosion, water scarcity, reduced agricultural productivity, loss of vegetation cover and biodiversity, drought and poverty.

In India, approximately 50.8 Mha land area (15.8% of the country’s geographical area) is estimated to be arid, 123.4 Mha (37.6%) semi-arid and 54.1 Mha (16.5%) dry sub-humid regions (Ministry of Environment and Forests, 2001). In other words, drylands cover about 228 Mha area (69% of the total geographical area of the country). The causes of desertification are both natural (i.e. climate) and man-made. Important factors that cause desertification include overgrazing, urbanization, climate change, overdrafting of groundwater, deforestation, natural disasters and tillage practices in agriculture that place soils more vulnerable to wind. Overgrazing is the major cause of desertification worldwide.





2.8 Biomes


The ‘biome concept’ was introduced by F. E. Clements and V. E. Shelford (1939) for broad-scale distribution of world vegetation and associated animals. A biome is a distinct ecological community of plants and animals living together in a particular climate. Each biome has characteristic appearance and distributed over wide geographical area defined largely by regional climatic conditions (mainly mean annual temperature and precipitation). ‘Biome’ is a broader term than ‘habitat’; any biome can comprise a variety of habitats. It is the largest geographical biotic unit.

Flora is the collection of all species occurring in a particular region or time. It represents the taxonomic composition of plant community in a particular region.



Vegetation, a general term, represents the plant community in a particular region without specific reference to particular taxa. The vegetation type is defined by characteristic dominant species.



Biomes are defined by their characteristic vegetational types and associated climatic conditions rather than by the presence of particular plant species. A biome represents the largest scale at which ecologists classify vegetation. Consequently, two regions assigned to the same biome may differ in the species that dominate the landscape. For example, tropical rainforests around the world are all composed of tall, lushly vegetated trees, but the tree species that dominate a South American tropical rainforest are different from those in an Indonesian one. Biomes are named according to their vegetation types but they also include the animals that are present.





Biome distribution


Earth’s biomes are closely correlated with climate. Temperature and precipitation are the most important climatic factors affect the distribution of biomes. Temperature is largely dependent on intensity and duration of solar radiation, which is, in turn, directly associated with latitude. Similarly, precipitation pattern is strongly influenced by major wind patterns, which are associated with latitude. Because a given biome is recognized by the type of climax vegetation, besides climate, other factors such as topography, soils and exposure to disturbances such as fire also play an important role in the terrestrial biome distribution.

In Odum’s popular textbook, Fundamentals of Ecology, term landscape has been placed above biomes in levels-of-organization hierarchy. In ecology, landscape is defined as a heterogeneous area composed of a cluster of interacting ecosystems that are repeated in a similar manner throughout. The study of the pattern and interaction between ecosystems within a landscape of interest, and the way the interactions affect ecological processes, especially the unique effects of spatial heterogeneity on these interactions is called landscape ecology.





Figure 2.21 The distribution of biome types as a function of mean annual temperature and precipitation.





Biome types


Biomes are classified into aquatic and terrestrial biomes. No two ecologists seem to agree on how many biomes there are. Traditionally, terrestrial biomes have been defined and classified mainly in terms of their vegetation. Some of the major terrestrial biomes in the world are tropical rainforests, deserts, tropical grasslands (savannas), temperate grasslands, temperate deciduous forests, coniferous forests (taiga or boreal forest), chaparral (shrublands) and tundra. These broad categories reflect the relative contribution of three general plant life-forms - trees, shrubs, and grasses - in their climax vegetation. The climax vegetation of the grassland biome is grass, although the species vary in grassland biomes located at different geographical regions.





Tundra biome


Tundra is a polar desert and is characterized by very extreme climatic conditions such as low temperatures, low precipitation, strong winds and long periods of shortage of liquid water. There are two main types of tundra - arctic tundra and alpine tundra. Arctic tundra biome is characterized by a short growing season, low precipitation and permanently frozen deeper soil (called permafrost). Plant life consists of grasses, sedges and lichen (Reindeer moss). Trees are absent. The alpine tundra is found high on the mountains. They are characterized by widely fluctuating temperatures, strong winds, snow and a thin atmosphere.





Desert biome


Deserts are found at latitudinal positions between 15° to 35° North and South of the equator and also in rain shadows. Deserts have annual precipitation less than 30 cm. Low precipitation may be due to high subtropical pressure (the Sahara desert), geographical position in a rain shadow (the Western North American deserts) and high elevation (the Gobi desert). The Sahara is the world’s largest desert. There is a lot of variability in desert types, like hot deserts, cold deserts, high elevation deserts and rain shadow deserts. Consequently, there is a great deal of variation in the biodiversity, productivity and organisms found in different types of desert. Most deserts are very hot. The hot deserts generally experience hot days and cold nights. Three types of xerophytic plants are adapted to deserts – ephemeral, succulent and non-succulent.





Tropical grassland (or Savanna biome)


Savanna is grassland with scattered individual trees. The term savanna was originally used to describe the treeless areas of South America. Climate is the most important factor in creating savanna. Savannas which result from climatic conditions are called climatic savannas. Savannas that are caused by soil conditions are called edaphic savannas. These can occur on hills or ridges where the soil is shallow, or in valleys where clay soils become waterlogged in wet weather.



An evergreen tree has leaves throughout the year, always green. Evergreen trees do lose leaves, but each tree loses its leaves gradually and not all at once. Deciduous trees seasonally shed their leaves.



A third type of savanna, known as derived savanna, is the result of people clearing forest land for cultivation. Savannas are always found in warm or hot climates where the annual rainfall is between 30-50 cm per year. The nature of the vegetation cover, however, is more closely determined by the amount and seasonality of precipitation than by temperature. The soils are porous, having only a thin layer of nutrient-rich matter called humus. Three major selective forces dominate the evolution of plant traits in savannas - recurring fire, periodic drought, and grazing. There are frequent fires in the savanna and the dominant vegetation is fire-adapted.





Temperate grasslands


Temperate grasslands are characterized as having grasses as the dominant vegetation. Trees and large shrubs are absent. Temperate grasslands have hot summers and cold winters and the amount of rainfall (25 to 75 cm) is less than in savannas. As in the savanna, seasonal drought and occasional fires are very important to maintain biodiversity. However, their effects aren’t as dramatic in temperate grasslands as they are in savannas. The type of grassland community that develops, and the productivity of grasslands, depends strongly upon precipitation. Higher precipitation leads to tall grasses with a high biodiversity of grasses. Temperate grasslands include the prairies of North America, the steppes of Russia, the pampas of Argentina, and the veldt of South Africa.





Tropical rainforests


Tropical rainforests occur at low altitude zones near the equator (found within 23.5° latitude of the equator) and are characterized by a high temperature, high rainfall and greatest diversity of species. The average temperature is between 20-25°C and varies little throughout the year. Winter is absent. Annual rainfall exceeds 200 cm. Although, the climate of tropical rainforest regions varies geographically but is typically characterized by a mean temperature of all months exceeding 18°C and minimum monthly precipitation above 6 cm. Warm and moist conditions promote strong chemical weathering and rapid leaching of soluble materials. Soil is deeply weathered with no distinct horizons, nutrient-poor and acidic. Decomposition is rapid and most of the nutrients available for uptake by plants are a result of the rapid decomposition of dead organic matters. The vegetation of tropical rainforest is characterized by evergreen, hygrophilus, tall and rich in lianas and epiphytes. Additional characteristics of tropical rainforest include the dominance of woody plants, principally trees; high species richness; sparse undergrowth; relatively slender trunks compared to trees of temperate forests.



Canopy in tropical forests is multilayered and continuous, allowing little light penetration. The dominant plants are phanerophytes – trees, lianas and epiphytes. The rainforest is highly stratified and generally form five vertical layers:

Emergent layer: scattered, very tall emergent trees (50 to 60 meters tall).



Upper canopy: main canopy layer comprising most of the tall trees (25 to 35 meters tall).



Lower canopy: subcanopy comprising mainly small shade tolerant trees (5 to 20 meters tall).



Understory: shrubs and young trees above the forest floor. The underlying layer of vegetation growing between the lower canopy and the forest floor.



Ground cover: a ground layer composed of tall herbs and ferns.





Figure 2.22 Vertical stratification of a tropical rainforest.



The largest region of rainforest in the world is in the Amazon basin of South America. The second largest is located in Southeast Asia. Tropical rainforests have a very high diversity of plant and animal species. Covering only about 6 percent of the land surface, tropical rainforests account for more than 50 percent of all known plant and animal species.





Temperate deciduous forest biome


A temperate deciduous forest (a subtype of temperate broad-leaf forest) is dominated of trees that lose their leaves every year. The deciduous leaf is characteristic of environments with a distinct growing season. Leaves are typically shed at the end of the growing season and then regrown at the beginning of the next. The temperate deciduous forest biome is characterized by a distinct seasonality that includes a long growing season together with a cold winter season in which much of the vegetation may be dormant. Temperate climate has four seasons of winter, spring, summer and fall. Precipitation (65 to 130 cm) is distributed evenly throughout the year. The temperature varies widely from season to season with cold winters and hot, wet summers. Temperatures fall below freezing each winter. The average yearly temperature is about 10°C. Temperate forests are distinguished from boreal forests by having a 4–6 month frost-free growing season with on average at least four months at 10°C or above. Located between 30° and 60°, with most forests between 40° and 55°. Soil is fertile, enriched with decaying litter.





Taiga biome


Taiga biome (coniferous forest biome or boreal forest biome) is located at higher latitudes, close to the polar region between 50° and 60° north latitudes and is dominated by needle-leaved, drought tolerant, evergreen trees. Winter is long and very cold and summer is short and cool. Precipitation occurs primarily in the form of snow, 40–100 cm annually. Soil is thin, nutrient-poor and acidic. The flora consists mostly of cold-tolerant evergreen conifers with needle-like leaves, such as pine, fir and spruce. Taiga is the largest terrestrial biome on the Earth.





Chaparral biome


‘Chaparral’ is the name applied to the evergreen sclerophyllous (hard-leaved) vegetation. Sclerophyllous vegetation possesses small leaves, thickened cuticles, glandular hairs and sunken stomata, all characteristics that function to reduce water loss during the hot, dry summer period. In North America, the sclerophyllous shrub community is known as ‘chaparral’. Chaparral biome is a shrubland (or scrubland) biome, dominated of shrubs or short trees. In general, a shrub is a plant with multiple woody, persistent stems but no central trunk. Chaparral biome is characterized by mild, rainy winters and long, hot, dry summers and is located in west coastal regions between 30° and 40° North and South latitude. Annual precipitation generally falls within the range of 30-50 cm. Plants have adapted to drought-like conditions and also adapted to fire caused by the frequent lightning that occurs in the hot, dry summers.



Table 2.3 General features of some terrestrial biomes





References


Barrett GW, Likens GE and Odum EP (2002), Pioneer of ecosystem ecology. BioScience, 52: 1047-1048.

Begon M, Townsend CR, Harper JL (2006), Ecology: From individuals to ecosystems, 4th ed. Blackwell Publishing.

Bormann FH and Likens GE (1967), Nutrient cycling. Science, 155:424-429.

Campbell NA et al. (2005), Biology, 7th ed. San Francisco CA: Pearson.

Carpenter SR and Kitchell JF (1988), Consumer control of lake productivity. BioScience, 38:764-769.

Chapin FS, Matson PA and Vitousek PM (2011), Principles of Terrestrial Ecosystem Ecology, 2nd ed. Springer.

Chapman JL and Reiss MJ (2010), Ecology: Principles and Applications, 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press.

Dodson SI, Arnott SE and Cottingham KL (2000), The relationship in lake communities between primary productivity and species richness. Ecology, 81, 2662–2679.

Field CB, Behrenfield MJ, Randerson JT and Falkowski PG (1998), Primary production of the biosphere: integrating terrestrial and oceanic components. Science, 281, 237–240.

Jorgensen SE (1997), Integration of ecosystem theories: A pattern. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Knight TM et al. (2005), Trophic cascades across ecosystems. Nature, 437, 880-883.

Kormondy EJ (1996), Concepts of Ecology, 4th ed. W.H. Prentice-Hall.

Krebs CJ (2009), Ecology, 6th ed. San Francisco CA: Pearson Benjamin Cummings.

Lidicker WZ (2008), Levels of organization in biology: on the nature and nomenclature of ecology’s fourth level. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc.

Melillo JM et al. (1993), Global climate-change and terrestrial net primary production. Nature, 363, 234–240.

Molles MC Jr. (2010), Ecology: Concepts and Applications, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, NY.

Naveh Z and Lieberman AS (1984), Landscape ecology: Theory and application. New York: Springer Verlag.

Odum EP (1969), The Strategy of Ecosystem Development. Science, 164, 262-270.

Odum EP and Barrett GW (2004), Fundamentals of Ecology, 5th ed. Cengage Learning.

Ricklefs RE (1990), Ecology, 3rd ed. W.H. Freeman and Company, New York.

Roy J et al. (2001), Terrestrial Global Productivity. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Schlesinger WH (1997), Biogeochemistry: An analysis of global change. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Smith TM and Smith RL (2009), Elements of Ecology, 7th ed. San Francisco CA: Pearson Benjamin Cummings.

Stiling P (2015), Ecology: Global insights and investigations, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Education.

Whittaker RH and Likens GE (1973), The primary production of the biosphere. Human Ecology, 1:301-369.





Chapter 3


Population Ecology


Each species in an ecosystem exists as a population. A population is a group of individuals of the same species that live together in a region. In essence, a population, also referred to as a biological population consists of a group of interbreeding or potentially interbreeding individuals found in the same space or area at the same time. The study of populations (especially population abundance) and how they change over time is called population ecology. It studies the spatial and temporal patterns of the abundance and distribution of organisms and mechanisms that produce those patterns. The study of population ecology includes understanding, explanation and prediction of population growth, regulation and dynamics or demography.

Multicellular organisms are of two kinds, unitary organisms and modular organisms. Most animal populations are made up of unitary organisms. In unitary organisms, the form is highly determinate consisting usually of a strictly defined number of parts (such as legs or wings) established only during embryogenesis. Their pattern of development and final form are predictable. For example, all dogs have four legs, all squid have two eyes, etc. In modular organisms, on the other hand, neither timing nor form is predictable. These organisms grow by the repeated iteration of modules, usually to yield a branching pattern. Examples of modular organisms include plants and many sessile benthic invertebrates. In modular organisms, a single genetic individual (or genet) can consist of many modules (or ramets) capable of existence as individuals. In plants, a genet is an individual that has arisen from a seed. A ramet is a new plant which has arisen through vegetative propagation and is now a completely independent plant with its own roots and shoots. For example, a population of grasses may consist of several genets, each of which has several ramets.





3.1 Population characteristics


Scientists study a population by examining how individuals within that population interact with each other and how the population as a whole interacts with its environment. A population has several characteristics or attributes which are a function of the whole group and not of the individual. Different populations can be compared by measuring these attributes. These attributes are population density, natality, mortality, distributions, etc. The study of the group characteristics of a population, their changes over time and the prediction of future changes is known as demography.

Demography is the study of the vital statistics of populations and how they change over time.





Population density


The size of the population is represented by its fundamental property called density. It is generally expressed as the number of individuals or the population biomass per unit area or volume. Two types of densities are described – crude density and specific (or ecological) density. Crude density is the density per unit of total space. Generally, populations do not occupy all the space as whole because all area may not be habitable. Hence, density per unit of habitable space is called specific density. It includes only that portion of total space that can actually be colonized by the population.

Determining population size

Population size (or abundance) is a function of population density and the area that is occupied (geographic distribution). Usually, population size is estimated by counting all the individuals from a smaller sample area, then extrapolated over a larger area. When the individuals are not mobile - their population size may be estimated by counting individuals within a specified area. When individuals are very mobile and frequently move from one area to another then we can count the number by applying a common method called a mark-recapture method. Using this method, a small random sample of the population is captured, marked, then released to disperse within the general population. The marked individuals mix freely with unmarked individuals and within a short time are randomly mixed within the population. The population is resampled and the numbers of marked and unmarked individuals are recorded. We then assume that the ratio of marked to unmarked individuals in the second sample taken is the same as the ratio of marked to unmarked individuals in the first sample. We can use a simple formula for estimating total population size (N):



This expression is known as the Lincoln-Peterson index to population size.

Let’s take an example to understand mark-recapture method. Suppose, we catch 50 fish (Labeo rohita) in a lake and mark (color) them. After that, we release all marked fishes immediately as close as possible to the collection site. A week later (after giving sufficient time to mix randomly with the whole population) we catch 40 fish (a second sample) and 5 of them are previously marked fish. If we assume no immigration or emigration has occurred, which is quite likely in a closed system like a lake, and we assume there have been no births or deaths of fish, then the total population size of fish is 400 (50×40/5).





Natality


Natality refers to the birth of individuals in a population. The ‘natality rate’ (or birth rate) is expressed as the number of individuals produced per female per unit time. To describe ‘rate’, we must specify time interval (such as one year or one month) and a base population. Two bases are commonly used – Per capita or per individual (it is equivalent to the number of births per individual per unit of time) or Per 1000 individuals.

Natality may be maximum natality or ecological natality. Maximum natality (sometimes called absolute or physiological natality) is the theoretical maximum number of individuals produced under ideal environmental conditions (i.e. no ecological limiting factors) and is a constant for a given population. Ecological or realized natality refers to the number of individuals produced under an actual or specific environmental condition. It is not a constant for a population but may vary with the size and age composition of the population and the physical environmental conditions.

In ecology, fecundity and fertility are not same. The fecundity can be described as the maximum reproductive output potential of an individual under ideal environmental conditions. This limit is set by the genotype. The term fertility differs from fecundity in that it describes the actual reproductive performance of an individual under prevailing environmental conditions and it is a generalization of the terms ‘ birth rate’ and ‘ natality rate’. Both fecundity and fertility are expressed as rates. That is the mean number of offspring produced per individual in the population, per unit time.





Mortality


Mortality refers to the death of individuals in a population. Like natality rate, mortality rate (death rate) may be expressed as the number of individuals died during a given period. Mortality may be minimum mortality or ecological mortality. A theoretical minimum mortality, a constant for a population, represents the loss under ideal or non-limiting conditions. Ecological mortality (or realized mortality) is the loss of individuals, under a given environmental condition. Like ecological natality, it is not a constant but varies with population and environmental conditions.

Information of the death and survivor of a population with respect to age is represented in the form of table known as life table. It is simply ‘an age-specific account of mortality.’ Raymond Pearl, (1921) first used life table for Drosophila populations obtained under laboratory conditions. The best way to construct a life table is to follow the fate of a cohort, a group of individuals of the same age, from birth until all of the individuals are dead. To build the life table, we need to determine the number of individuals that die in each age class and proportion of the cohort surviving from one age class to the next.

What is really vital for the population is not which members die, but which member survives? Consequently, specific mortality rate of a population is expressed by survivorship curve. A survivorship curve is a graphical representation of the numbers of individuals surviving in a population at various ages. Survivorship curves are of three general types:

A highly convex curve (type I curve) is characteristic of the species in which the population mortality rate is low until near the end of the lifespan. It is known as the ‘death at senescence’ curve. Organisms that exhibit such survivorship curve have relatively few offspring but invest much time and resources in raising their young. Many large mammals, including humans, exhibit type I curves.

A highly concave curve (type III curve) is characteristic of those species where the mortality rate is high during the early stages. This is typical of species that produce many offspring. Few survive initially, but once individuals reach a critical size, their risk of death decreases. Oysters or shellfish show this type of curve. In oysters, mortality is extremely high during free-swimming larval stages, but once an individual is well established on a favourable substrate, life expectancy improves considerably.

In type II curve, which falls between type I and III, the rate of mortality is constant at all age groups (i.e. from birth to maximum age), so that an individual’s chance of living another year is just as good at one age as another. Thus, the mortality of individuals do not depend on their age. This curve is typical of several bird species and also in the case of human beings exposed to poor nutrition and hygiene.



Figure 3.1 Three main types of survivorship curves. Type I – a convex curve in which mortality is low initially and most of the mortality occurs towards the end of the life. Type II – a straight line in which mortality is more or less constant throughout the lifespan. Type III – a concave curve in which mortality is extremely high initially but decreases markedly for much of the remainder of the lifespan.



Type I survivorship curves are typical of organisms which are likely to breed several times during the course of their lifespan. This strategy is referred to as iteroparous. Species with a type III curve are more likely to breed only once during their lifetime, a strategy referred to as semelparous. Note that the terms semelparous and annual are not strictly synonymous. Semelparous refers to the type of reproductive event, whereas annual refers to the lifespan. Similarly, the term perennial refers to organisms (most often plants) that live for more than one year, whereas iteroparous refers to the number of reproductive events in the lifespan. In plants, the terms monocarpy and polycarpy are sometimes used instead of semelparity and iteroparity.

How realistic are these three survivorship types? The three survivorship curves are generalizations, and few populations exactly fit one of the three. Some species have one type of survivorship curve early in life and another type as adults. For example, Herring gulls have a type III survivorship curve early in life and type II curve as adults.





Dispersion


Dispersion refers to the spatial and temporal distribution pattern of individuals of a population. It describes the pattern of spacing among individuals within the boundaries of the population. Individuals in a population may be distributed in three broad patterns – Regular, Random and Clumped (aggregated or contagious).

In regular dispersion (also called a uniform or even distribution), the individuals are more or less spaced at an equal distance from one another. Individuals are more evenly spaced than expected by chance. This is rare in nature but is common in managed systems like croplands. A regular distribution pattern may be the result of competition or social interactions.

In random dispersion, the position of one individual is unrelated to the positions of other individuals. This kind of distribution occurs where the environment is very uniform and there is no tendency to aggregate. This is also relatively rare in nature.

Whatever the length of their life cycle, species may be either semelparous or iteroparous based on reproductive strategies. A species is called semelparous if it has only one reproductive event before death while a species is iteroparous if it has multiple reproductive events before death.



In clumped dispersion (also called a contagious or aggregated dispersion) individuals are aggregated into groups of varying size. Most populations exhibit this kind of dispersion. A clumped distribution pattern often results from the uneven distribution of a resource. Human population shows clumped distribution due to their social behaviour, economic condition and geographic factors.



Figure 3.2 Diagrammatic representation of the spatial pattern of distribution of individuals within a population over on area – regular, random and clumped dispersion.





Age structure and Age pyramids


It is obvious that individuals in a population will be of different age groups. Relative numbers of young and old individuals in a population significantly influence the behaviour of a population such as natality and mortality. The proportion of individuals in each age group is called the age structure of that population. The nature and character of a population are influenced by its age structure. It influences both natality and mortality. The ratio of various age groups in a population determines the current reproductive status of the population.

Populations can be divided into three ecologically important age groups or classes – the pre-reproductive, reproductive, and post-reproductive ages. The relative duration of these age classes in proportion to the lifespan varies greatly with different organisms. In human, the three ages are relatively equal in length. Many animals such as insects have very long pre-reproductive period, a very short reproductive period and no post-reproductive period.

The easiest and most convenient way to represent the age distribution in a population is to arrange the data in the form of ‘age pyramid’. An age pyramid is a graphical representation that shows the number or proportion of individuals belong to different age classes in a population of any organism at any given time. There are three types of hypothetical age pyramids:

Expanding population

It represents a rapidly growing population with a high birth rate. This population is characterized by a high proportion of pre-reproductive age class individuals. Under these conditions number of individuals in the pre-reproductive age class is greater than reproductive age class; resulting in a pyramid-shaped age structure.

Stable population

In this population, the number of individuals in the pre-reproductive and reproductive age classes become more or less equal in size; the post-reproductive groups remain as the smallest. The graphic representation of this stabilized population is bell-shaped.

Diminishing population

This population is characterized by a low proportion of pre-reproductive age class individuals due to reduced birth rate. The pre-reproductive class diminishes gradually in size as compared to the reproductive and post-reproductive age classes, resulting in an urn-shaped age structure. This is representative of a population that is dying off.



Figure 3.3 Age pyramids of different types of populations: 1. expanding population (indicating a high proportion of pre-reproductive age class individuals in a population) 2. stable population (indicating a more or less equal proportion of pre- and reproductive age classes individuals) 3. diminishing population (indicating a low number of pre-reproductive age class individuals).





Dispersal


An animal population is inherently dynamic in nature since individuals are always leaving or entering the populations. The movement of individuals in space is referred to as dispersal. Generally, the term dispersal refers to the more specific movement of individuals away from each other. One-way outward movement of individuals from an area is referred to as emigration whereas one-way inward movement of individuals into an area is called immigration. For some species, dispersal is a systematic process of periodic movement between areas by a process called migration. Dispersal affects the spatial distribution of individuals and consequently the localized patterns of population density. Emigration may cause density in some areas to decline, while immigration into other areas will increase the density of subpopulations or even establish new populations in habitats that were previously unoccupied. For some organisms, such as plants, dispersal is passive and dependent on various dispersal mechanisms. For mobile organisms, dispersal can occur for a variety of reasons, including the search for foods, mates and unoccupied habitat.





3.2 Population growth


A population is a changing entity. The term ‘population growth’ refers to the change in the number of individuals in a population with time. It refers to how the number of individuals in a population increases or decreases with time. Change in population is determined by four factors: birth, death, emigration and immigration. In a closed population, change in population is only related to birth and death of individuals whereas, in case of open population, birth, death, immigration and emigration result in a change of population. Population growth is also determined by the environment, and by how sensitive the population is to changes in the environment. By environment, we mean not only the physical environment, but also interactions of the population with other species in its habitat.



A closed population is one in which we expect no immigration or emigration of individuals. A population in which immigration or emigration occurs is called open population.





Exponential growth


A population shows exponential growth if there is no limitation on growth i.e. growth under an ideal unlimited environment. During exponential growth, the number increases in the geometric progression 20, 21, 22, 23,…. In geometric growth, the rate of increase is expressed as a constant fraction or an exponent by which a particular population is multiplied (like 2, 4, 8, 16…). By contrast, a pattern of growth that increases at a constant amount per unit of time (i.e. 1, 2, 3, 4 or 1, 3, 5, 7…) is called arithmetic growth. The exponential form of growth can be described by an exponential growth equation:



Where, N = Population size

r = Intrinsic rate of increase

The intrinsic rate of increase (r) represents the per capita rate of increase. It is expressed in number per unit time per individual. The maximum value of the intrinsic rate of increase (rmax) occurs in an ideal unlimited environment, in the absence of environmental resistance. The sum total of all environmental factors that together act to limit the biotic potential of an organism from being realized is called environmental resistance. It includes both biotic factors such as predation, competition, parasitism and abiotic factors such as drought, fire, flood etc. The intrinsic rate of increase is often referred by the less specific but widely used expression biotic potential (or reproductive potential) and it differs from one species to another e.g. deer populations can grow faster than a population of elephants.



The ‘intrinsic rate of increase’ can be maximum or realized. The maximum intrinsic rate of increase (rmax) occurs under an ideally unlimited environment, whereas the realized or actual intrinsic rate of increase (r) occurs under the actual prevailing environment. The maximum intrinsic rate of increase is always greater than or equal to realized intrinsic rate of increase. In exponential population growth, r = rmax = constant.

In a closed population,

r is defined as the per capita birth rate minus the per capita death rate.

r = Per capita birth rate (b) – Per capita death rate (d)

Under an ideal unlimited environment, when b is maximum and d is minimum, r is rmax. The value of r also tells us about nature of population growth. When,



Equation 1 is written as a differential equation. It tells us about the population growth rate but not the population size. However, if equation 1 is integrated, the result can be used to predict population size. Suppose, if we consider the initial population size (or we can say, population size at time zero) is N0 and population size after time t is Nt, then the integral form of the exponential growth equation will be:



Where, e is a mathematical constant, the base of the natural logarithm



By taking the natural log of both sides,



When resources (food and space) in a habitat are unlimited, all members of a species have the ability to grow exponentially. The population size that increases exponentially at a constant rate, results in a J-shaped growth curve when population size (N) is plotted over time (t).



Figure 3.4 Exponential population growth. A. A J-shaped growth curve when population size (N) is plotted over time (t) in linear or arithmetic scale (note that a log transformation linearizes the plot). B. A linear growth curve when natural log of population size (ln N) is plotted over time (t). C. The relationship between dN/dt.N (i.e. r) and population size, N.



Calculation of doubling time: Doubling time indicates how long the present population will take to double from its present size. It is a measure of how rapidly a population grows. The doubling time for an exponential function N0ert is the time td that gives a population of 2 × N0. Thus, we can get the doubling time by solving the equation:



Taking the natural logarithm of both sides gives:



From the above equation, if we know the intrinsic rate of increase (r) we can easily find the projected doubling time of a population. The larger r is, the shorter is doubling time. However, we are assuming that the population is not affected by its age distribution, and that r is constant during this time period.





Logistic growth


The exponential growth assumes that resources are unlimited, but it is never the case in the real situation. As population density increases, each individual has access to fewer resources. It means a particular environment can only support a maximum population size. The number of individuals of a particular species that a particular environment can support indefinitely is defined as carrying capacity (represented by the letter K). Carrying capacity is not fixed, but varies over space and time with the abundance of limiting resources. It is determined by various factors including predation, competition and climatic conditions. Since such factors are many and varied, it is clear that the carrying capacity of any area for a population may vary over a period of time. So, the growth of a population eventually slows as the population reaches the carrying capacity for environment. This is known as Verhulst-Pearl logistic growth.

We can modify the exponential equation to incorporate changes in growth rate near the carrying capacity. If the maximum sustainable population size i.e. carrying capacity is K, then K–N is the number of additional individuals the environment can accommodate, and (K–N)/K is the fraction of K that is still available for population growth. By multiplying the exponential rate of increase r . N by (K–N)/K, we can modify the growth rate of the population:



Where, N = Population size

dN/dt = Rate of change in population size

K = Carrying capacity

r = Intrinsic rate of increase

The above equation for logistic growth was formulated by Francois Verhulst in 1838, which he called the logistic growth equation. It is the simplest equation describing population growth in a resource-limited environment. The logistic growth equation can be written in several ways:



The differential form of logistic growth equation can be changed in to the integral form. For integral form of the logistic growth equation, we need to integrate the differential equation from time (0) to time (t). If we consider the initial population size (or we can say, population size at time zero) is N0 and population size after time t is Nt, then the integral form of the logistic growth equation will be:



Where, e is a mathematical constant, the base of the natural logarithm

Quantification of r

The realized intrinsic rate of increase (r) at any given time can be calculated by multiplying the maximum intrinsic rate of increase (rmax) by the density-dependent term [1 – (N/K)]. The term [1 – (N/K)] is a fractional factor that varies based on the current population size in relation to the environment’s carrying capacity. This formula helps to estimate the realized intrinsic rate of increase considering the population’s current size in relation to its environment’s carrying capacity.

The logistic model of population growth produces a sigmoid (S-shaped) growth curve when population size is plotted over time. In sigmoid growth form, the population increases slowly at first (establishment or positive acceleration phase), then more rapidly (perhaps approaching a logarithmic phase), but it soon slows down gradually as the environmental resistance increases in percentage (the negative acceleration phase), until equilibrium is reached and maintained. The upper level, beyond which no major increase can occur, as represented by the constant K, is the upper asymptote of the sigmoid curve and has been aptly called the carrying capacity.



Figure 3.5 A. Change in population size (N) through time as predicted by the logistic model of population growth. Initially (low values of N), the population grows exponentially; as N increases, the rate of population growth decreases, eventually reaching zero as the population size approaches the carrying capacity. B. The relationship between the rate of population growth, dN/dt and population size, N, takes the form of a parabola, reaching a maximum value at a population size of N = K/2. The rate of population growth (dN/dt) is at its highest when N = K/2 (called the inflection point) and then decreases as it approaches the carrying capacity (K). C. The relationship between per capita rate of increase, dN/dt.N and population size, N.



In logistic growth equation, the term (K–N)/K indicates how much of the resources are still available to populations. When N is much less than K, the term (K–N)/K becomes approximately 1 and the equation becomes dN/dt = rN (equation for exponential growth). As N almost becomes equal to K, the term (K–N)/K is almost zero and dN/dt, i.e. the growth rate also becomes zero. In the logistic growth model, the greatest population growth rate is achieved at half the carrying capacity (K/2), and populations with a greater value of r will reach K more rapidly (in less time) than populations with lesser values of r.



Figure 3.6 Relationship between population growth rate and population size. Populations far from the carrying capacity (K) will have high growth rates–positive if the population is below K and negative if it is above K. As the population approaches K, growth rates approach zero.



Implicit in the concept of carrying capacity is competition among individuals for essential resources. Competition occurs when individuals use a common resource that is in short supply relative to the number of individuals seeking it. Competition among individuals of the same species is referred to as intraspecific competition. As long as the availability of resources does not limit the ability of individuals to survive, grow, and reproduce, no competition exists. Because the intensity of intraspecific competition is usually density-dependent, it increases gradually, at first affecting growth and development. Later, it affects individual survival and reproduction.

Logistic growth equation: Assumptions

The carrying capacity is constant for a system.



Population growth is not affected by the age distribution.



Birth and death rates change linearly with population size.



Abiotic factors (density-independent factors) do not affect birth and death rates.



All individuals are identical (intraspecific competition has same effect on everyone).



No impact of other species on population growth.



No time lag in effect of density on population growth.





3.3 Life table: Age-specific mortality and survival


The rate of population growth depends on both the survival and mortality. To obtain a clear and systematic age-specific information of survivor and mortality within a population, ecologists construct life table. There are two basic kinds of life tables. The one type is the cohort (or dynamic or horizontal) life table and other is static (or time-specific or stationary or vertical) life tables. A cohort is a group of same-aged individuals. In cohort life table, the fate of a group of same-aged individuals is followed from birth to death whereas a static life table is made from data collected from all ages at one particular time. Static life table is based on the assumption that each age class is sampled in proportion to its numbers in the population and the death and birth rates are constant and the population is stable.



The construction of a life table begins with a cohort, a group of individuals born during the same period of time. For example, data presented below represent a cohort of 530 squirrels from a population in JNU, Delhi. The fate of these 530 individuals was tracked until all had died some 6 years later. The first column of numbers labeled as x represents the age in units of years. By convention, we classify a newborn as age 0 (not age 1). The ages are 0 through 5 and age classes are 1 through 5. The second column, nx represents the number of individuals from the original cohorts that are alive at the specified age (x). Of the original 530 individuals born (age 0), only 159 survived to an age of 1 year, while of those 159 individuals, only 80 survived to age 2. Only 5 individuals survived to age 5, and none of those individuals survived to age 6 (that is why there is no age 6).

The relationship between ages and age classes.



There is a distinction between the ages and age classes. In the above diagram, a newborn is classified as age 0 (not age 1) whereas, the first age class includes both newborns and individuals who are about to celebrate their first birthday.



The difference between the number of individuals alive for any age (nx) and the number alive at the beginning of the next age (nx+1) is the number of individuals that have died during that time interval represents the age-specific mortality (dx). The number of individuals surviving to any given age (i.e. age-specific survivorship) is calculated by taking ratio nx/n0, where n0 is the number alive at the start of the study. The number of individuals that died during any given time interval (dx) divided by the number alive at the beginning of that interval (nx) provides an age-specific mortality rate (qx).

Table 3.1 Cohort life-table from a hypothetical squirrels population





Gross and net reproduction rate


In a sexually reproducing non-hermaphroditic population, only females within the population give birth. The birth-rate of females generally varies with age. Therefore, a better way of expressing birth-rate is the number of births per female of age x. For example, a life-table of age-specific fertility (mx) of a squirrel population is given below:



We assume that the female survives to the maximum age of 5 years. At age 0, females produce no young, therefore the value of mx is 0. The average number of female offspring produced by a female of age 1 is 2. For females of age 2 and 3, the mx value increases to 3, then declines to 2 at age 4. By age 5, the females no longer reproduce, so the value of mx is 0. The sum (represented by Σ) of the mx value across all the ages provides an estimate of the average number of female offspring born to a female over her lifetime. It is termed as gross reproductive rate. In this example, the gross reproductive rate is 10. However, this value assumes that a female survives to the maximum age of 5 years. But survivorship of females also varies with age. Hence when we include both age-specific fertility and age-specific survival, it gives net reproductive rate (R0).

In the following table, age-specific survivorship (lx) in each age-class has been considered together with the age-specific fertility (mx). Although mx may initially increase with age, lx in each age-class declines. To adjust for mortality, we multiply the mx value by the corresponding lx.

The resulting value, lxmx, gives the mean number of female offspring produced by females in each age-class. Thus for 1 year old females, the mx value is 2 but when adjusted with lx, the lxmx value drops to 0.6. For age 2 the mx is 3, but lxmx drops to 0.45 and reflecting poor survival of adult female. When the values of lxmx are summed over all ages at which reproduction occurs, it gives net reproductive rate (R0). It is the average number of female that will be left during a lifetime by a new born female. If R0 < 1, it indicates that the members of the population are not replacing themselves (i.e. the population is declining). Similarly, if R0 > 1, it denotes an increasing population whereas, R0 = 1 indicates a stationary or stable population.

Table 3.2 Life table and age-specific fertility (mx) and average number of offspring per age (lxmx)





3.4 Population regulation


Are ecologial populations regulated? If so, how? What does population regulation really mean? Population ecologists have identified a number of mechanisms by which populations could be regulated. Broadly speaking, the regulation of population growth is either density-dependent or density-independent.

Density-dependent regulation of population growth operates as a function of population size or density. These regulations can exhibit either a positive or negative correlation with population density. In cases of density-dependent negative regulation, the population’s growth rate is inversely related to population density. This situation arises when either the per capita birth rate declines, the per capita death rate increases, or both occur as the population size expands.



Figure 3.7 In cases of density-dependent negative regulation, the population growth rate shows an inverse correlation with its size. This situation manifests when either the per capita birth rate (b) decreases as the population size increases, or the per capita death rate (d) increases, or both phenomena occur simultaneously as the population size increases. When the birth rate equals the death rate (b=d), the population size remains constant. This equilibrium point represents the carrying capacity, K.



Negative regulation primarily involves the competition for limited resources such as space, water, and nutrients. For instance, a rabbit population might undergo exponential growth until intraspecific competition intensifies for limited resources such as space and food, causing either a decrease in the birth rate or an increase in the death rate, resulting in a reduced population growth rate.

However, density-dependent population growth is not always negatively related to population density or size. In certain cases, the growth rate increases with population size. This phenomenon, known as the Allee effect (named after W. Allee, who first described it), represents a positive relationship. Generally, Allee effects are observed in small or sparse populations. Specifically, they arise from beneficial interactions among individuals that result in the per capita population growth rate increasing with the number of individuals. Allee effects come in two main types: component and demographic. Component Allee effects are evident in populations where there is a positive correlation between specific fitness components (such as reproduction or offspring survival) and population size. Demographic Allee effects occur when these component Allee effects result in a positive relationship between per capita population growth and population size.

Various mechanisms can cause a positive relationship between fitness and population size, affecting reproduction and survival. A well-established reason for the Allee effect is mate limitation. With sexual reproduction requiring contact between male and female gametes, mate limitation reduces reproduction in small populations. Another factor is increased vulnerability to predators. The per capita risk of predation is lower in larger prey populations compared to smaller ones. Lastly, genetic mechanisms may contribute to Allee effects. In many organisms, a small population size leads to inbreeding depression, reducing average fitness.

Density-independent regulation of population growth operates regardless of population density. This population regulation type is usually linked to abiotic events, such as changes in the physical environment, like floods and seasonal weather variations, that either promote or hinder population growth. These effects remain independent of population density.

Relationship between intrinsic rate of increase (r) and population size or density: The relationship between the intrinsic rate of increase and population size differs between density-independent and density-dependent regulation. In density-independent regulation, the intrinsic rate of increase (r) remains constant regardless of the population size. Conversely, in density-dependent regulation, the intrinsic rate of increase (r) changes in relation to the population size, decreasing as population size increases.



Figure 3.8 The density-dependent regulation involves changes in the intrinsic rate of increase (r) as a function of population size or density. In contrast, in density-independent regulation, the intrinsic rate of increase (r) remains constant and is not influenced by changes in population size or density.





3.5 Concept of metapopulation


The distribution of a species over the landscape is limited to those areas that provide a suitable habitat. Habitats are often so fragmented that the species exists as distinct, partially isolated subpopulations, each possessing its own population dynamics. Movement of individuals among subpopulations (patches) establishes links or interconnections. Such separated populations interconnected by the movement of individuals are called metapopulations. In 1970, population ecologist Richard Levins of Harvard University coined the term ‘metapopulation’ to describe a population consisting of many local populations – a population of populations.

A ‘population’ is a group of interacting individuals of the same species occupying a given habitat whereas the ‘metapopulation’ is a collection of local subpopulations interacting within the larger area. It represents a set of local populations connected by dispersing individuals. The dynamics of this set of local populations differ from that of a single, continuous population.

A classic metapopulation is a regional population composed of many local populations, each of which may be extant or extinct at any one point in time. This situation occurs when patches of suitable habitat are separated by uninhabitable areas. It is an important concept for understanding population dynamics in patchy habitats. The persistence of the metapopulation is highly influenced by:

the number of patches;



the size and quality of the patches; and



the connectivity among the patches.





Figure 3.9 In the meta-population concept, the distribution of a species (defined by the dotted line) is composed of a group of sub- or local populations (grey circles) that are linked by dispersal (movement of individuals represented by arrows).



Metapopulation persistence is a dynamic balance between the extinction and recolonization of empty habitat patches. For local extinction to occur, populations on separate patches must be reasonably isolated from one another (no immigration). When no individuals move among the subpopulations, each subpopulation behaves independently.

Colonization involves the movement of individuals from occupied patches to unoccupied patches to form new local populations. The persistence of the metapopulation, therefore, depends on the balance between the rates of local extinction and the (re)colonization of unoccupied patches. If rates of immigration are high in comparison to local rates of extinction, the local populations will function as a single continuous population. In contrast, if the colonization rate is not sufficient to offset the local extinction rate, the metapopulation will not persist.

The ability of individuals to disperse between habitat patches is directly related to their spatial arrangement on the landscape and patch size. The rate of colonization declines with increasing isolation (distance from adjacent patches). The risk of local extinction increases with decreasing patch size. Relatively small, isolated subpopulations may suffer local extinction, especially if the habitat patch is small. Reduced isolation can compensate for patch size through increased rates of recolonization.

Some researchers have extended the framework of metapopulations to examine the dynamics involving interactions among local communities. Each habitat patch on the landscape is composed of a set of plant and animal species that define the ‘local community’. The set of local communities that are linked by the dispersal of multiple potentially interacting species define the metacommunity. The interaction among communities is influenced by size, shape, spatial arrangement of the habitat patches and the matrix in which they are embedded.





3.6 Life history


An organism’s life history is its age-specific lifetime pattern of growth, survival and reproduction. The traits that describe the life history of an organism (termed life history traits) include informations like size of organism, age of first reproductive event, number of offspring produced during each reproductive event, number of reproductive events during a lifetime, size of offspring at the time of birth, reproductive life span and total life span of organism (how long do individuals live?). These traits are directly associated with reproduction and survival of an organism and affect the ‘life table’. Variations in these traits reflect different allocations of an individual’s resources in growth, reproduction and survivorship. Combinations of these life history traits create life history strategies.

Organisms have adopted a great variety of life history strategies and these strategies have evolved to maximize their survival and reproduction fitness. How life histories of different species have evolved? The ‘perfect’ life history is one with maximum survivorship and maximum reproduction fitness. Life history theory explains how natural selection and other evolutionary forces shape organisms to optimize their survival and reproduction in the face of ecological challenges posed by the environment. The goal of life history theory is to understand the variation in life history strategies.





Life history trade-offs


The evolution of life histories involves trade-offs. As we know, each individual has finite amount of energy that it can allocate to specific tasks i.e. among growth, maintenance and reproduction. Its allocation to one task reduces the resources available for the others. Life history traits are subject to trade-offs. Trade-offs are caused by competitive allocation of limited resources to one life history trait versus the other within a single individual. Resources devoted to one trait are unavailable to others. A trade-off is a negative relationship between two life history traits. A trade-off exists when an increase in one life history trait (improving fitness) is coupled with a decrease in another life history trait (reducing fitness). Trade-offs can also involve more than two traits.

Organisms face trade-offs in life history traits related to growth, survival and reproduction. For example, allocation to reproduction reduces the amount of energy available for growth and survival. Because each individual has a limited amount of energy that it can allocate to specific tasks. Its allocation to one task reduces the energy available for the others. Thus, there is a trade-off between the number and size of offspring, within a given total reproductive investment. That is, a reproductive allocation can be divided into fewer, larger offspring or more, smaller offspring.

There is a trade-off between fecundity (reproduction) and survival. Individuals with higher reproductive effort have a shorter lifespan or vice versa. The energy required for reproduction is utilized for the gonad development, gametes formation, find a mate, mating activities, production of offspring and parental care. Together, the total energetic costs of reproduction per unit time are referred to as an individual’s reproductive effort. Increased allocation to reproduction results in a reduction in the probability of future survival of parents, and therefore future reproduction. Therefore, allocation to reproduction at any time during the life of an individual involves trade-offs between current benefits from the production of offspring and costs in terms of potential reduction in future reproduction.

There is a trade-off between the number and size of offspring too. The number of offspring affects the parental investment each receives. If the parent produces a large number of off-springs, it can afford only minimal investment in each one. In such cases, animals provide no or very less parental care and plants store little food energy in seeds. Parents that produce few young are able to expend more energy on each.





r- and K-selection


An organism has a finite amount of energy to spend. Some must be spent for basic metabolic needs i.e. maintenance. Any energy left over can be spent in two activities: growth and reproduction. The energy required for reproduction is utilized for the gametes formation, find a mate, mating activities, production of offspring and parental care. Allocation of energy to one function must, then, reduce the amount available for the other. Allocation of energy among the various activities of an organism reflects balances between the benefits and costs of each activity. Species differ with regard to the energy available for reproduction and growth. It varies not only with life history patterns but also with the environmental conditions.

Robert McArthur and Edward Wilson proposed the idea of r- and K-selection based on environmental conditions of the habitats that species occupy. We can imagine two contrasting types of habitat’s environment:

those that are short-lived, variable, unpredictable and uncertain.



those that are fairly constant or predictable environment, with few random environmental fluctuations.





The theory of r- and K-selection predicts that species adapted to these two different environments will differ in life history traits such as size, fecundity, age at first reproduction, number of reproductive events during a lifetime, and total life span. In short-lived variable, unpredictable and uncertain environment, selection favours species with a high reproductive potential. In contrast, in long-lived fairly constant or predictable environment, selection favours organisms with lower biotic potential but better capabilities for using and competing for scarce resources (greater energy investment in the maintenance and survival of the individual). The two opposing selective forces were designated ‘ r-selection’ and ‘ K-selection’. The terms r and K used to characterize two contrasting strategies relate to the parameters of the logistic model of population growth – r is the intrinsic rate of increase, and K is the carrying capacity (maximum sustainable population size).

A strongly variable and unpredictable environments lead to a highly fluctuating population density. These conditions select for a high intrinsic growth rate ‘r’ which is achieved by a distinctive life history strategy consisting of rapid development, a small body size, early reproduction, large number of offspring (with low survival), minimal parental care, semelparity and a short life-span (usually with a life-span of less than a year). Species with this reproductive pattern overcome the massive loss of their offspring by producing so many unprotected young that a few will survive to reproduce many offspring to begin the cycle again. Such species make use of temporary habitats and exploit noncompetitive situations. They are good colonizers and respond rapidly to disturbance. Species with these characteristics are called r-strategists and indicates that these individuals have been favored for their ability to reproduce rapidly.

Synonyms for r-strategists are r-selected species, fugitive species and opportunistic species. Algae, bacteria, rodents, annual plants (such as dandelions) and most insects are r-strategists. Such species tend to be opportunists. They reproduce and disperse rapidly when conditions are favourable or when a disturbance opens up a new habitat or niche for invasion, as in the early stages of ecological succession. On the other hand, long-lived fairly constant or predictable environmental conditions allow a population to reach its carrying capacity K and thus a stable population density. The concept says that these conditions select for a high K, which is achieved by slow development (associated with great competitive ability), a large body size, delayed reproduction, iteroparity and a long life-span.

Table 3.3 Differences between r-selection and K-selection





Species with these characteristics are called K-strategists (K-selected species or stable species). These species spent little energy into reproduction and put most of their energy into nurturing and protecting their young until they reach reproductive age. Among animals, parents care for the young; among plants, seeds possess stored food that gives the seedlings a strong start. Among K-strategists mortality is more dependent on density than on unpredictable environmental conditions. Species are specialists, efficient users of a particular environment and cope with physical and biotic pressures.





Grime’s triangle of life history strategies


The plant ecologist Phillip Grime used a framework similar to that used by MacArthur and Wilson to develop a life history classification for plants. In this framework, Grime categorized factors that limit plant biomass or productivity into the following:

Stress: Stress encompasses any condition that restricts plant production. Examples include water shortages, nutrient deficiencies, or low temperatures.

Disturbance: Disturbance refers to the partial or total loss of plant biomass resulting from the activities of herbivores, pathogens, or environmental factors such as frost, soil erosion, or fire. The disturbance may be natural or a consequence of human activity.

Grime classified plants based on three life-history strategies— ruderals (R), competitors (C) and stress tolerators (S) — which relate to plant adaptations to different habitats.

Ruderals (comparable to r-selected species) are adapted to colonize the disturbed sites. These species are typically small in size and short-lived where allocation of resources is primarily to reproduction. Ruderal species typically dominate the disturbed area for a few years, gradually losing the competition to other native species. Thus, ruderal species are those which are found in the environments with high disturbance, low competition.

Competitors (comparable to K-selected species) colonize habitats with abundant resources and allocate resources to growth, favoring resource acquisition and competitive ability. Competitors are adapted to live in highly competitive but supportive environments.

Habitats where resources are limited favour stress tolerators that allocate resources to maintenance. Stress tolerators such as mangroves and cacti are adapted to cope with extreme environmental conditions such as high salinity or temperatures that exist in salt marshes and deserts, respectively.

The triangular representation of this scheme (as shown in the figure 3.9) implies a trade-off between the three strategies. It is difficult to classify many plant types in only one of these three extremes. One cannot be a good stress tolerator and a good competitor at the same time. Many plant types adopt a combination of strategies depending on the relative amounts of each of the three main driving factors – C-S (competitor–stress tolerator strategists), C-R (competitor–ruderal strategists) and S-R (stress tolerator–ruderal strategists). Many plant species adopt intermediate strategies (C-S-R), depending on the environmental conditions and tend to lie in the center of Grime’s triangle.

Animals can also be classified according to this scheme as desert animals, as stress tolerators, having burrows to escape extreme conditions; insects that feed on annual plants as ruderals; and large vertebrate carnivores and herbivores in forests or grasslands as competitors.



Figure 3.10 Grime’s triangle of life history strategies in plants: ruderals (R), competitors (C), and stress tolerators (S). These strategies define the three points of the triangle. Ruderal would be found primarily in highly disturbed, low-stress environments, where competition is low (right-hand corner). Plants in late successional stages are subject to high amounts of competition but less disturbance (upper corner) and are known as competitors. Plants in habitats with high-stress level are most likely subject to less competition, and are termed stress tolerators (lower left corner). There are no plants known that are able to withstand high levels of all three conditions, and so there is no fourth plant strategy. Of course, many habitats fall between these extremes, and may contain plants with a combination of strategies, depending on the relative amounts of each of the three main driving factors – C-S (competitor stress tolerators strategists), C-R (competitor ruderal strategists), S-R (stress tolerators ruderal strategists) and C-S-R.





3.7 Home range and Territory


An animal species commonly restrict their activities to a definite area. The area in which an animal lives and moves on periodic basis for normal activities such as food gathering, shelter and mating is termed as home range. The concept of home range was introduced by W. H. Burt in 1943. There is a general relationship between body size and the size of an animal’s home range. In addition, for a given body size, the home range of carnivores is greater than that of herbivores.

There is a difference between terms ‘home range’ and ‘territory’. Territory (a term first introduced by Elliot Howard) is defined as that area of the habitat defended by individuals of a particular species against other members of the same or different species. Territories are usually held because they contain a food source or because they provide some site needed in breeding. In contrast to territory, home ranges are not defended or exclusively held and may overlap among individuals. Territories are defended and usually do not overlap. In the great majority of species, however, the home range is larger than the territory.

Although the concept of territories is most conspicuous in birds, it is now well known in insects, mollusks, crustaceans, mammals and others. An advantage of territories to the holders may include exclusive use of the resource, reduced predation and disease owing to the greater spacing from neighbours and others. Territories may vary considerably in size depending on what resource they contain. Also, they may be held for a very short time or for a longer time, depending on how long the resource is useful to the animal. Territories which are not held for food are usually very small. The size and number of territories in an area affect the population size.





References


Begon M, Harper JL and Townsend CL (1986), Ecology: Individuals, Populations and Communities. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.

Blackburn TM, Cassey P and Gaston KJ (2006), Variations on a theme: Sources of heterogeneity in the interspecific relationship between abundance and distribution. Journal of Animal Ecology, 75, 1426–1439.

Campbell NA et al. (2005), Biology, 7th ed. San Francisco CA: Pearson.

Chapman JL and Reiss MJ (2010), Ecology, Principles and Applications, 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press.

Grime JP (1977), Evidence for the existence of three primary strategies in plants and its relevance to ecological and evolutionary theory. American Naturalist, 111 (982): 1169–1194.

Hanski IA (1989), Metapopulation dynamics: Does it help to have more of the same? Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 4:113-114.

Kenyon C (2010), The genetics of ageing. Nature, 464, 504–512.

Kormondy EJ (1996), Concepts of Ecology, 4th ed. W.H. Prentice-Hall.

Miller GT and Spoolman SE (2009), Essentials of Ecology, 5th ed. Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning.

Murdoch WW (1994), Population regulation in theory and practice. Ecology, 75:271–287.

Odum EP and Barrett GW (2004), Fundamentals of Ecology, 5th ed. Cengage Learning.

Pianka ER (1970), r- and K-selection. American Naturalist, 102: 592–597.

Ranta E, Lundberg P and Kaitala V (2006), Ecology of Populations, Cambridge University Press.

Raven PH, Johnson GB, Mason KA, Losos JB, and Singer SR (2011), Biology, 9th ed. McGraw-Hill.

Ricklefs RE (1977), On the Evolution of Reproductive Strategies in Birds: Reproductive Effort. The American Naturalist, 111: 453–478.

Ricklefs RE (1990), Ecology, 3rd ed. W.H. Freeman and Company, New York.

Rockwood LL (2006), Introduction to Population Ecology, Blackwell Publishing.

Smith TM and Smith RL (2009), Elements of Ecology, 7th ed. San Francisco CA: Pearson Benjamin Cummings.

Stearns SC (1989), Trade-offs in life-history evolution, Functional Ecology 3, 259-268.

Stearns SC (1992), The evolution of life histories, Oxford University Press.

Stiling P (2015), Ecology: Global insights and investigations, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Education.

Wauters LA and Lens L (1995), Effects of food availability and density on red squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris) reproduction. Ecology, 76, 2460–2469.

Young TP (1981), A general model of comparative fecundity for semelparous and iteroparous life histories. American Naturalist, 118, 27–36.





Chapter 4


Community Ecology


An ecological community is a group of species that coexist in a space and time and interact with one another directly or indirectly. The term ‘community’ means different things to different ecologists. Most definitions of ecological communities include the idea of a collection of species found in a particular place. For instance, Whittaker (1975) defined ecological community as,

‘…an assemblage of populations of plants, animals, bacteria and fungi that live in an environment and interact with one another, forming together a distinctive living system with its own composition, structure, environmental relations, development and fu nction.’

Simply, an ecological community is a group of interacting species that inhabit a particular location at a particular time. Most communities are extraordinarily complex. However, the main features of ecological communities include the following.

Firstly, a community represents the biotic or a living component of the ecosystem. Organisms within a community include primary producers, consumers and decomposers. In terrestrial communities, the community structure is largely defined by the vegetation.

Secondly, considering the functional aspect, communities are made up of organisms with interlocking food chains and each species depends on many other species in a community which is taxonomically unrelated.

Thirdly, a community may be of any size. It can range from small pond communities to large tropical rainforests.

Community ecology is a field that examines the effects of abiotic and biotic features on community or assemblage structure. Community ecologists study the number of species and their relative abundance in a particular location and ask why the number of species and their abundance changes over time. They also do study communities in different locations and differences in the species diversity with location. In a broad sense, the goal of community ecology is to understand the origin and maintenance of biological diversity within communities.

A community is a group of interacting populations of different species present together in space, whereas assemblage is a taxonomically related group of species populations that occur together in space.



There are two contrasting concepts of the community – organismal and individualistic concepts. The organismal concept of communities (put forward by Clements, 1916) views the community as a unit, an association of species, in which each species is representing an interacting, integrated component of the whole and development of the community through time (a process termed succession) is viewed as the development of the organism. This type of community organization is commonly known as a closed community.

In contrast to Clements’s organismal concept of community, botanist H. A. Gleason (1926) proposed individualistic concept (or continuum concept) of community. According to the individualistic concept, each species in a community is distributed independently of others that co-occurs in a particular association. This type of community organization referred to as an open community. In fact, Gleason concluded that changes in species composition and abundance along environmental gradients occur so gradually that it is not practical to divide the species into associations. Unlike Clements, Gleason asserted that species distributions along environmental gradients do not form clusters but represent the independent responses of species.





4.1 Community structure


The number of species, their relative abundances and their correlation of occurrence in space and time define community structure. Community structure varies in time as well as in space. It is first constrained by the environmental tolerances of the species, which are then modified through direct and indirect interactions with other species. Variations in the physical environment influence the distribution and abundance. Species differ in the range of conditions they tolerate. As environmental conditions change in both time and space, the possible distribution and abundance of species also change.





4.1.1 Species composition


Communities may be large or small. In each community, there are diverse species. All these species are not present in equal number (or biomass). There are few species which by their large number (or biomass) dominate the habitat and control the growth of other species of the community. These species are called the dominant species. The dominant species are highly successful species in a particular habitat. Generally, in most of the communities, only a single species, being particularly conspicuous, is dominant, and in such case, the community is called by the name of dominant species, as for example, spruce forest community. In other community, there may be more than one dominant species.

If the activity of a species determines community structure in spite of their low abundance or biomass, that species is called a keystone species. The term keystone species was introduced by Robert Paine (1966) to describe the importance of the predatory starfish, Pisaster, on the intertidal community. Pisaster preyed on a variety of intertidal organisms, preventing any one species from becoming very common and outcompeting the others, thus promoting species richness. Note that a keystone species is not the same as a dominant species, one that has a large effect in a community because of its abundance or large biomass.

Keystone species plays a vital role in controlling the relative abundance of other species. The loss of a keystone species can lead to sharp population drops and extinction of other species that depend on it for certain services and causes serious disruption in the functioning of the community. The African elephant is an example of keystone species. By their feeding habits, elephants destroy shrubs and small trees and push woodland habitats towards open grassland. As more grasses invade the woodland habitats, the frequency of fires increases, which accelerates the conversion of woods to grassland.

Keystone species

These species have an influence on community structure and functions disproportionate to their numbers. Their removal initiates changes in community structure and often results in a significant loss of diversity.





4.1.2 Species diversity


Species diversity is one of the most important and basic characteristic of a community. The number of species and their relative abundance define species diversity of a community. It includes the number of species in a community (i.e. richness) and the relative abundance of each species (i.e. evenness). Species richness is simply the number of species in a community. But, among the array of species that make up the community, not all are equally abundant. We can find the relative abundance by counting all the individuals of each species within a community and determining what percentage each species contributes to the total number of individuals of all species. Communities in which the species are all more or less equal in abundance exhibit evenness, whereas communities with one or a few abundant species (i.e. present in large numbers) show dominance. Species evenness is highest when all species in a sample have the same abundance. Abundance patterns in communities can be examined by numbers of individuals per species, biomass per species, or percent cover per species.



Both numbers of species (species richness) and their relative abundance (species evenness) define species diversity. In table 4.1, two hypothetical communities– 1 and 2 – both have 5 species and 50 individuals. Species richness is the same in both communities. But the community–2 is dominated by one of the species, whereas, the community–1 has an equal abundance of each species. Although richness is same in both communities, evenness is higher in community-1 because there is an equal abundance of each species. Since species diversity depends on both species richness and evenness, the community-1 has higher species diversity as compared to community-2 because of higher evenness.

Table 4.1 Comparison of species richness and species evenness





On a spatial scale, it has been found that there are substantial differences in species diversity among habitats. R.H. Whittaker (1972) described three levels of species diversity in term of species richness over spatial scales: alpha, beta and gamma diversity. Alpha diversity refers to the species diversity within a particular habitat or ecosystem (within-habitat diversity). It is expressed as the number of species per unit area. If we compare species diversity among habitats or ecosystems, it is called beta diversity (between-habitat diversity). It can be used to measure the change in species diversity among habitats; thus, it can reflect the extent of habitat selection or specialization. Gamma diversity is the total species diversity in a landscape (regional diversity). It combines alpha diversity and beta diversity. Unlike the alpha and gamma diversity, the exact interpretation and quantification of beta diversity varies substantially. Originally, beta diversity was defined as the ratio between gamma and alpha diversity. Today, one commonly used measure of beta diversity is the Sørensen dissimilarity index, which captures spatial turnover as well as differences in diversity between sites.

Let us consider a hypothetical example to understand alpha, beta and gamma diversity. Suppose there are three habitats— habitat 1, 2 and 3. The number of species in these three habitats are six, five and six, respectively. Now, we can find out alpha, beta and gamma diversity.



Spatial and temporal comparisons of communities provide information about the things that cause differences in species composition and abundance patterns. A spatial comparison refers to comparing similar communities that occur in different locations. This allows an ecologist to test if there are differences in climate, landscape features, geology, or habitats that occur with different species composition. The species richness and evenness of communities change with time. A temporal comparison refers to comparing the same community at different times. Change may occur following disturbance events, or change may occur due to stochasticity in assemblages.

A common method for comparing the species richness and abundance between communities involves plotting the relative abundance of each species against rank. ‘Rank’ is defined by the order of species from the most to the least abundant. The abundance of the most common species appears on the extreme left and the rarest species on the extreme right along the x-axis. Thus, the most abundant species is plotted first along the x-axis, with the corresponding value on the y-axis being the value of relative abundance. This process is continued until all species are plotted. The resulting graph is called a rank-abundance plot (or Whittaker plot). It is a graphical plot of numbers of individuals per species (relative abundance) against the rank of species in the community.

The rank-abundance plot visually depicts both species richness and species evenness. Species richness can be observed as the number of different species on the graph, representing how many species are ranked. Species evenness is reflected in the slope of the curve: a steep slope indicates low evenness, where high-ranking species have much higher abundances than low-ranking species, while a shallow slope indicates high evenness among different species. A rank-abundance plot can be drawn for the number of individuals in a community, biomass of individuals, ground area covered by plants and other variables all plotted against rank abundance.



Figure 4.1 Rank-abundance curves for the two forest communities. In the rank-abundance plot, the abundance of each species is plotted on a logarithmic scale against the species’ rank, in order from the most abundant to least abundant species. The x-axis represents the abundance rank. The most abundant species is given rank 1, the second most abundant is 2 and so on. The y-axis represents the relative abundance. Relative abundance is expressed on a log10 axis. In this plot, richness and evenness of two forest communities are plotted. The forest community 1 (dark blue line) has a higher species richness (length of curve) and evenness (slope of curve) than the forest community 2 (light blue line).



Diversity indices are a mathematical measure of the number of species (species richness) in an area and the relative abundance of individuals among those species (species evenness).



Rank-abundance plots are graphical representations of numbers of individuals per species against rank of species in the community.





4.1.3 Diversity index


A diversity index is a mathematical measure of species diversity in a community. It is a measure of the number of species in an area and the relative abundance of individuals among those species. That is, it takes into account the number of species present (species richness) as well as the abundance of each species (species evenness). A variety of indices have been used to estimate species diversity. We can divide them into two broad categories: dominance indices and information statistic indices. Dominance indices are more influenced by the abundance of common or dominant species. A widely used dominance index is Simpson’s diversity index. Information statistic indices are more influenced by the numbers of rare species. Most commonly used information statistic index is the Shannon diversity index.





Simpson’s diversity index


Simpson’s diversity index is a simple mathematical measure that characterizes species diversity in a community. The term Simpson’s diversity index can actually refer to any one of two closely related indices – Simpson’s index and Simpson’s index of diversity.

Simpson’s index (D) is a measure of the species diversity of an ecosystem based on the concept of dominance. It measures the probability that two individuals randomly selected from a sample will belong to the same species. It is actually a measurement of dominance. There are two versions of the formula for calculating D.



where, Pi = the relative abundance of each species (n/N).

n = total number of individuals of a particular species in the sample.

N = total number of individuals of all species present in the sample.



D is a measure of dominance, so as D increases, diversity (in the sense of evenness) decreases. The value of D ranges between 0 and 1. With this index, 0 represents an infinite diversity and 1, no diversity. That is, the bigger the value of D, the lower the diversity.

Simpson’s index is usually reported as its complement 1-D called Simpson’s index of diversity. The value of this index also ranges between 0 and 1, but now, the greater the value, the greater the sample diversity. In this case, the index represents the probability that two individuals randomly selected from a sample will belong to different species.

To understand Simpson’s diversity index, let us take an example of a forest community which has five different tree species. The numbers of trees of each tree species are given below.



In this example, we can find the value of Simpson’s index.





Shannon diversity index


Shannon diversity index (or Shannon-Wiener index) is another index that is commonly used to characterize species diversity in a community. It is a measure of the species diversity of a community based on information theory i.e. on the idea that greater diversity corresponds to a greater uncertainty in picking at random an individual of a particular species. Like Simpson’s index, Shannon diversity index accounts for both richness and evenness of the species present. As the Shannon index increases, both the richness and the evenness of the community increase. It is given by the following formula:



Here S = Total number of species in the sample (species richness).

Pi = Relative abundance of each species, calculated as the proportion of individuals of a given species to the total number of individuals in the community (n/N).

n = Total number of individuals of a particular species in the sample.

N = Total number of individuals of all species present in the sample.

How to calculate the Shannon diversity index of a community, let us take an example of a forest community which has five different tree species. The number of trees of each species is given below.



In this example, we can find the value of Shannon diversity index.



In the above example, even the rarest species, maple, contributes some value to the index. If a community had many such rare species, their contributions would accumulate. This makes the Shannon diversity index very valuable to conservation biologists, who often study rare species and their importance to the community.





Pielou’s evenness index


Pielou’s evenness index (J’) is a diversity index, which quantifies how equal the community is numerically i.e. evenness of community. It is the ratio of observed diversity (H’) to the maximum possible diversity of a community with the same species richness (H’max). For any information statistic index, the maximum diversity of a community (H’max) is found when all species are equally abundant.



The observed diversity (H’) is derived from the Shannon diversity index. H’max is the maximum possible value of H’. The values lie between 0 and 1.





Box 4.1 Quantifying species richness : Species accumulation curves




A species accumulation curve (or collector’s curve) is used to estimate the number of different species (i.e. species richness) in a particular area. It is a graph which records the cumulative number of species in a particular area observed or collected during the survey. During the process of data collection, additional species are added to the pool of all previously observed or collected species.

Let us take example to understand this. Suppose, we have to measure the total number of different tree species in an area. For this, we first delineate the area where the estimate of species richness is to be made. After that, a number of smaller sample areas (plots) within the large delineated area are to be selected, and a survey is conducted within the sample areas (plots).

In the following table, a list of tree species identified in ten sample areas (plots), each of 20 × 20 meters in size. The samples are presented from left to right in the order they have been collected. Using this data we can construct an accumulation curve for this site. The number of unique tree species surveyed in the first plot is 5 (first sample). The number of different tree species in the second plot is 6 (second sample). The number of unique tree species in these combined samples is 8, as the two samples have 3 species in common. We can continue this process until all samples (N = 10) are included.

Table 4.2 Tree species surveyed on ten 20 × 20 meters sample plots





We plot the total number of different tree species encountered as a function of the number of samples taken. The result would be a species accumulation curve. It records the total number of species revealed during the survey, as additional sample units are added to the pool of all previously collected samples. The curve will rise somewhat rapidly at first, as the more abundant species are included in the samples, and then more slowly as increasingly rarer species are included in the additional samples. In principle, an asymptote will eventually be reached, and no further species will be added.

A species rarefaction curve is used to estimate species richness as a function of the number of individuals sampled. A rarefaction curve answers the question “how many species would a smaller sample include? Say we had two samples, ‘A’ with total 100 individuals and those 100 individuals belong to 9 different species and sample ‘B’ with 25 individuals belong to 4 species. Rarefaction answers the question “How many species would we expect in sample A if we had caught only 25 individuals in all instead of 100?” The species diversity of two samples, containing 100 and 25 individuals respectively, can be compared directly by rarefying the larger sample down to 25 individuals. Rarefaction generates the expected number of species in a small collection of samples drawn at random from the larger total samples.

The main difference between rarefaction and accumulation curves is that rarefaction curves are based on the number of individuals sampled, while accumulation curves are based on the total sampling effort. This means that rarefaction curves are more sensitive to changes in the abundance of species, while accumulation curves are more sensitive to changes in the diversity of species. Rarefaction focuses on how species richness changes with varying sample sizes, while accumulation focuses on how the cumulative species count increases with additional sampling effort.



Figure 4.2 Sample-based species accumulation and rarefaction curves (curves constructed from a survey of 25 samples). The jagged line is the species accumulation curve. The cumulative number of species (y-axis) is plotted as a function of the cumulative number of samples (x-axis), pooled in random order. This curve is not smooth. The smooth, dark black line is the sample-based rarefaction curve for the same data set. Accumulation curve is built from the left to the right, as they are further extended by additional sampling, i.e. if we have additional samples, we can draw the curve more to the right. In contrast, rarefaction curve is built from the right to the left, as the full dataset is increasingly ‘rarefied’. (Gotelli and Colwell, 2001).



Individual-based and sample-based sampling approach

We have seen how a data can be represented by either an accumulating or a rarefying approach. But before representing data, we need to collect it i.e. we need to sample it. In this case, sampling approach can be individual-based and sample-based. In individual-based approach, information is collected from observed individuals. In this approach, the basic units are individuals, ideally sampled randomly and independently, counted and identified to species. In case of sample-based approach, the sampling unit is not an individual, but a quadrat, plot or a fixed period of survey time. It is these sampling units, and not the individual organisms, that are sampled randomly and independently. The number of individuals for each species appearing within each sampling unit can be measured or approximated, we refer to the resulting data as ‘sample-based data’.





4.1.4 Species-area curve


A positive relationship exists between area and species diversity. Generally, large areas support more species than small areas do. The species-area relationship describes the general pattern of increase in species richness with increasing area of observation. In other words, it describes how the number of species in an area depends on the size of that area. Large areas contain more species than small areas because they can support larger populations and a greater range of habitats. The species-area relationship can be approximated by a power function of the form (proposed by Arrhenius in 1920 and modified by Gleason in 1922):



where, S is the number of species and A is the area. c and z represent constants that depend on the type of species being considered and the type of habitat involved. The exponent z is generally small, in the range of 0.2 or 0.3.

The species-area relationship usually is portrayed graphically by plotting the logarithm of species number (S) versus the logarithm of area (A). After log-transformation, species-area relationship becomes linear.



Figure 4.3 Species–area curves show the relationship between the number of species and the size of an area. A positive relationship exists between area and number of species. Generally, larger areas support more species than small areas.



There are two explanations for this. One is that the larger an area, the more habitat variation (i.e. heterogeneity) it has. Hence, more species will find suitable niches to occupy. This is called the habitat heterogeneity hypothesis. Species diversity tends to increase with habitat heterogeneity. Larger size is more likely to contain variations in topography and soils that give rise to a greater diversity of plant life (both taxonomic and structural), which in turn will create a wide array of habitats for animal species. The greater the area, the greater will be the number of potential home ranges (and territories).

Size also relates to the difference between the edge and the interior environments of a habitat. Large habitat has very distinct edge and interior environments and thus more heterogeneity within habitat. The minimum size of habitat needed to maintain differences in interior and edge environments.

The alternative explanation came from MacArthur and Wilson that species richness increases with area due to decreasing extinction rates. On larger areas, extinction rates are lower because a greater area generally contains a wider array of resources and habitats. For this reason, large islands can support more individuals of each species as well as meet the needs of a wider variety of species. The lower rate of extinction on larger areas results in a higher number of species as compared to smaller areas.





4.1.5 Disturbance and species diversity


A disturbance, in an ecological sense, is an event, such as a storm, fire, flood, drought, overgrazing, or human activity that changes a community by removing organisms from it or altering resource availability. It influences species coexistence and the maintenance of bio-diversity. Disturbance events are characterized by their frequency and intensity. Intensity is measured by the proportion of total biomass, or population of a species, that the disturbance kills or eliminates. It is influenced by the magnitude of the physical force involved, such as the strength of the wind or the amount of energy released during a fire. Frequency is the mean number of disturbances that occur within a particular time interval.

Diversity is significantly affected by disturbance. Species diversity has been found low at low intensities or frequencies of disturbance because of competitive exclusion. In such case, competitively dominant species exclude competitively inferior species. Similarly, at high intensities or frequencies of disturbance, species diversity has been found low, because only good colonizers or highly tolerant species can persist. Both theoretically and experimentally it has been demonstrated that species diversity is higher at intermediate intensities or frequencies of disturbance due to a mix of good colonizer and good competitor species. At an intermediate intensities or frequencies of disturbance, colonization can occur, but competitive exclusion is held to a minimum and thus, diversity is at a maximum. This is referred to as the intermediate disturbance hypothesis, proposed independently by Michael Huston and by Joseph Connell.



Figure 4.4 The intermediate disturbance hypothesis. a. Species diversity is low at low intensities or frequencies of disturbance because of competitive exclusion; b. species diversity is higher at intermediate intensities or frequencies of disturbance due to a combination of good colonizers as well as good competitive species; c. species diversity is low at high intensities or frequencies of disturbance because only good colonizers or disturbance tolerant species can survive.





4.2 Community interactions


Species within ecological communities interact with each other, resulting in a complex web of relationships. These interactions may be direct or indirect. These interactions are often diffuse, involving several species, and one species may be influenced by interactions with many different species. The meaningful interactions among species within the community can be illustrated through food webs. A food web represents the feeding relationships and species interactions in an ecosystem. It’s important to note that a food web is different from a food chain. In nature, food chains are not isolated. Most ecosystems contain several interconnected food chains that collectively form a food web. A food chain is a linear sequence of feeding relationships, whereas a food web represents the complex relationships between different food chains.



Figure 4.5 A hypothetical food web. Each circle represents a species, and the arrows from the consumed to the consumer are termed links. The species in the webs are distinguished by whether they are basal species, intermediate species, or top predators.



The distribution of species and links is called the topology of the food web. The complexity of a food web can vary greatly, and we can express the complexity by measuring the two most important parameters – connectance and linkage density. Connectance measures the number of feeding or trophic links between species. The connectance in a food web is the ratio of an actual number of observed unidirectional links and the total number of possible unidirectional links. Food webs of different communities differ in their degree of connectance.



A food web consisting of S species, there will be S (S-1)/2 possible unidirectional links (the link between any two species is in only one direction), excluding cannibalism (if cannibalism is allowed then S2). Suppose, in a simple food web, there are four species and three links. Hence, the number of possible links is 4 (4 – 1)/2 i.e. 6 and the connectance is 3/6 or 0.5. A fundamental feature of any food web is the number of links in the pathways that run from basal species to top predators. The average number of links per species is called linkage density. It is a ratio of links and the number of species in the food web. The linkage density in a food web provides one measure of community complexity. The relation between food web connectance and food web stability has been extensively studied on a wide variety of ecosystems, using empirical and theoretical approaches. The outcomes of these studies gave a scattered picture: some found a positive relation between connectance and stability, others found a negative relation, and some found no relation.



Food webs describe the relationships among species in an ecosystem, but the relationships vary in their importance to energy flow and dynamics of species populations. Based on different ways in which species influence one another, Robert Paine proposed three types of food webs. Connectedness webs (or topological food webs) emphasize feeding relationships among species. Energy flow webs quantify energy flow from one species to another. Functional webs (or interaction food webs) represent the influence of one species on the growth rate of other species’ populations.





4.3 Community: Functional classification


Species within a community can be classified into functional groups. By aggregating species into a smaller number of functional groups, researchers can explore the processes controlling community structure in more general terms.

The grouping of species into trophic levels is a functional classification. Trophic levels include primary producers and consumers. Thus, plants are grouped together as producers, all herbivores together form primary consumer and so on. The trophic structure of a community is determined by the feeding relationships between organisms. It defines groups of species that derive their energy in a similar manner. With the exception of most primary producers, many species acquire energy from more than one trophic level, making it difficult to unambiguously assign species to a particular trophic level. While trophic levels are a useful abstraction, and have played a prominent role in the development of ecological theory, the problem of assigning real species to a particular trophic level can limit the concept’s operational utility. The structure of food chains suggests that the productivity and abundance of populations at any given trophic level are controlled (limited) by the productivity and abundance of populations in the trophic level below them. This phenomenon is called bottom-up control. Plant population densities control the abundance of herbivore populations, which in turn control the densities of carnivore populations in the next trophic level. However, top-down control also occurs in which predator populations control the abundance of prey species.

Another approach is to subdivide each trophic level into groups of species that exploit a common resource in a similar fashion. Groups of species that exploit the same resources in a similar way are called guilds. For example, hummingbirds and other nectar-feeding birds form a guild of species that exploit the common resource of flowering plants in a similar fashion. The term was originally coined by Dick Root (1967) in his studies of birds with the following definition:

A guild is defined as a group of species that exploit the same class of environmental resources in a similar way. This term groups together species without regard to taxonomic position that overlap significantly in their niche requirements. The guild has a position comparable in the classification of exploitation patterns to the genus in phylogenetic schemes.

Although some authors have described guild in different ways. According to them if taxonomically related species are found in the same habitat, they should be called a guild. But, guilds are not restricted to taxonomically related species, which depend only on the similarity of resource use.

The concept of guilds for the functional grouping of species based on sharing similar functions within the community or exploiting the same resource (e.g. grazing herbivores, pollinators). Because species within a guild exploiting the same resource, there is potential for strong interactions between the members.

Howard Odum (1956) classified communities based on community metabolism, on the ratio of gross production (P) to community respiration (R). According to this scheme, a stabilized system is one in which the ratio of production to respiration is unity that is, where P/R = 1. A community in which production exceeds respiration, P/R > 1, is considered autotrophic community; and one in which respiratory demand exceeds production – that is, P/R < 1 – is said to be heterotrophic community. In the autotrophic community, biological fertility is based on current production; in the heterotrophic community, it is based on part production, organic matter accumulated over a period of time and often imported from another ecosystem.





4.4 Diversity-Stability-Complexity relationships


Broadly, community stability refers to how ecological communities respond to disturbance. It can be defined as the ability of a community to resist change or recover from it. However, there is a lack of consensus about how ecological stability should be defined. In ecology, ‘stability’ can be analyzed by considering two parameters: resistance and resilience. Resistance refers to how tolerant a community is toward a disturbance before it changes. It describes the ability to resist disturbances. On the other hand, resilience refers to how quickly a community can return to its former state after a disturbance. It describes the ability of a community to return to its original state quickly following displacement. These two kinds of stability may be mutually exclusive; in other words, it is difficult to develop both at the same time. For example, a pine forest is quite resistant to fire, but if it does burn, it will recover very slowly or perhaps never (low resilience). In contrast, a grassland is very easily burned (low resistance) but recovers quickly in a few years (high resilience). In general, resistance is associated with the dominance of K-selected and resilience with r-selected species.





Diversity and stability


A ecological community is a set of interacting populations of different species. Its diversity is commonly understood to be positively correlated with the number of species it contains (richness), and how evenly individuals are distributed among these species (evenness). Are diverse communities — ones that have more species — more stable than species-poor communities? Charles Elton (1958) proposed the diversity-stability hypothesis, which stated that greater diversity led to greater ecosystem stability, greater resistance to invasion by exotic species, and higher productivity. He mentioned that species-poor communities (like island communities) are much more vulnerable to invading species than species-rich communities (like mainland communities).

Resilience

Speed of return to equilibrium after a disturbance.



Resistance

Degree of change after a disturbance.



To understand this, let us consider a community with very few species in which each predator depends on a very few prey species. The chance extinction of single prey species would then be expected to lead to the extinction of its predator. This, in turn, will lead to the extinction of that predator’s predator and so on. By contrast, in a community with many species and complex food webs, we might predict that the chance extinction of a single species would have less. It might be expected to lead to changes in the population sizes of other species, but not to complete extinctions.

This view received considerable support from other influential ecologists (Odum 1953; MacArthur 1955). They reasoned that if a given species preys on several others, its population size will fluctuate less in response to environmental variations affecting one of its prey than it would if the species in question ate fewer prey species. Similarly, if a species has many predators, its population will vary less in response to exogenous changes in one predator’s population size.

Diversity-stability paradox: While the common view is that ecosystems with high levels of diversity tend to be more stable, some field studies and theoretical work have challenged this perspective. In 1973, Robert May, a physicist turned mathematical ecologist, proposed a different idea, suggesting that the more diverse an ecosystem is, the less stable it becomes. He employed a mathematical model with linear interactions between the species to rigorously investigate the relationship between diversity and stability. By using linear stability analysis, May found that diversity tends to destabilize community dynamics. Therefore, it is the nature of the interactions between the species, rather than simply the diversity of species, that determines the stability of a community. In some grasslands where diversity decreases the stability of individual plant populations, it nevertheless increases the stability of the ecosystem as a whole.





Complexity and stability


Complexity is defined in terms of community dynamics and is a function of the magnitude of direct and indirect interactions between community components. These interactions can be horizontal (such as competitive interactions occurring among species at the same trophic level) or vertical (occurring between different trophic levels). The number of species alone doesn’t solely determine complexity; what matters is how many species interact and how strongly they interact. In a highly diverse community, some species may interact little, resulting in low complexity, and vice versa. Ecologists have proposed various mathematical models that prioritize different properties (such as richness, evenness, connectance, etc.) when assessing diversity and complexity. In general, as the number of species in a community increases, the frequency and strength of interactions also increase, leading to greater complexity.

Intuitively, complex communities are often considered stable because the impact of sudden population changes in one species is buffered by the large number of interacting species, preventing drastic effects on the entire community. For instance, a forest ecosystem with a large biotic community can better withstand a fire compared to a grassland ecosystem with a smaller biotic community.

Nevertheless, there is a contrary perspective in ecology that argues an increase in complexity may lead to a decrease in community stability. According to this perspective, complex random systems are less likely to recover from small perturbations compared to simpler ones. This viewpoint finds support in the work of Robert May, who extensively explored the relationship between complexity and stability in random ecosystems. May’s analytical results led him to the conclusion that, in general mathematical models of multispecies communities, complexity tends to foster instability. Ecosystem complexity was defined as where S is species richness, C is connectance (the probability that any two species will interact with each other) and σ is the standard deviation of interaction strength. May predicted that a system could be stable only if the criterion was satisfied, where expresses the magnitude of intraspecific competition. May’s stability criterion indirectly predicts that for complex systems to persist, interaction strength should be weaker in species-rich and highly connected systems.





Box 4.2 Species diversity and ecosystem function




Does the loss of species impair ecosystem functions? By ‘ecosystem function’ we mean the activities, processes, or properties of ecosystems that are influenced by its biota. A diverse array of hypotheses has been proposed to link ecosystem function with species diversity.

The rivet hypothesis (Paul and Ann Ehrlich,1981) suggests that every species plays a role in ecosystem function and that all species have an equal and additive effect on function; hence, all species matter. Losing a species in an ecosystem is analogous to losing a rivet from an airplane.

The redundancy hypothesis (Brian Walker, 1992) predicts that species that play the same roles in a community can compensate for each other if some are lost under particular conditions. The species are said to be redundant because they could simply be eliminated or replaced by others with no loss in function. In this scenario, the loss of a species does not affect ecosystem functions unless the species is of critical importance.



Figure 4.6 Graphical representations of the possible relationships between species diversity (richness) and ecosystem functions (or community services). The two solid dots represent the endpoints of a continuum of species richness. The first dot is at the origin, where there are no species and no community services. The second dot represents natural levels of species richness. In understanding these different hypotheses, we start at the far right-hand side of the figures, where there are natural levels of species richness, and we move toward the left, losing species and seeing what happens to community services. (Modified from Naeem et al., 2002.)



The keystone hypothesis predicts that ecosystem functions plummet as soon as a key or important member of the community is removed. Keystone species influences the community structure and functions disproportionately to their numbers. Thus, as species richness declines even slightly from its natural levels, community services are reduced immediately.

The idiosyncratic hypothesis addresses the possibility that ecosystem function changes as the number of species increases or decreases, but that the direction of change is not predictable. Changing the number of species influences ecosystem processes, but no obvious pattern is evident; hence, the role of biodiversity is unpredictable.





4.5 Plant communities


The form and structure of terrestrial communities are defined primarily by their vegetation. Plants commonly provide most of the biomass and the physical structure of communities. The massive contribution that plants make in determining the character of a community is not just a measure of their role as the primary producers, it is also a result of their slowness to decompose. Animal bodies decompose much more quickly. Ecologists often classify and name terrestrial communities based on the dominant plant growth forms and their associated physical structure: forests, woodlands, shrublands or grassland communities. A ‘plant community’ is an association of plant species within a designated geographical unit. A wide variety of biotic and abiotic factors such as soil type, topography, climate and human disturbance controls the abundance and biomass of plant species in ecological communities over time. Typical plant communities range from forests and woodlands dominated by trees, to heaths dominated by shrubs and grasslands dominated by grasses.

The assessment of community characters from their outer appearance is called physiognomy. It is a combination of the external appearance of vegetation, its vertical structure, and the growth forms of the dominant taxa. The general appearance of vegetation can be determined by the features such as height, canopy cover, shape, life forms, leaf traits and phenology of dominant species. On the basis of appearance, it may be described as a grassland, forest etc. The physiognomy of a community can be described in a number of ways, each assessing somewhat different aspects.





Life-forms


The form and structure of terrestrial plant communities are determined by the nature of the vegetation. Vegetation may be classified according to life form (or growth form). A life-form is characterized by the adaptation to certain ecological conditions. Its study is an important part of vegetation description. The most widely used vascular plant life-form classification system was formulated by Danish biogeographer C. Raunkiaer (called Raunkiaer’s system). This system identifies life-forms based on a single criterion, that is, the location of perennating buds (shoot apical meristems) with respect to ground level. The location of buds indicates the degree of protection they receive from adverse climatic conditions. Using this single criterion, five major life-forms are recognized: phanerophytes, chamaephytes, hemicryptophytes, cryptophytes (or hidden plants) and therophytes. Cryptophytes are further subdivided into geophytes, helophytes and hydrophytes.

For example, in trees, buds are borne well above the ground in the air (>0.5 m), fully exposed to the wind, cold and drought; Raunkiaer categorized them under phanerophytes. By contrast, in many perennial herbs, buds are borne above ground but are protected from drought and cold in the dense mass of old leaves and shoots are categorized under chamaephytes. In hemicryptophytes, buds are present at the soil surface (i.e. at ground level) and in the soil (i.e. below ground level) in cryptophytes. Cryptophytes include geophytes (have stems that die back during unfavourable seasons, with the plant surviving as a bulb, rhizome, tuber or root bud), helophytes (plants in which surviving buds are buried in water-saturated soil, or below water-level) and hydrophytes (fully aquatic plants in which surviving buds are submerged, or buried in soil beneath water). A final major category is therophytes, which consists of annual plants that depend wholly on dormant seeds to carry their populations through seasons of drought and cold.

Table 4.3 Raunkiaer life-form classification system based on location of the perennating bud





Stratification


The life form of plants emphasizes height. A plant community conveys differences in the heights, or stratification, of the components. Trees are generally taller than shrubs, which are usually taller than herbs, and the latter taller than mosses and lichens. Tropical forests are characterized typically by a marked vertical stratification. Stratification results in the upper strata, or canopy, receiving a larger proportion of solar energy, and in instances of particularly dense foliage, little sunlight reaches the ground, reducing photosynthesis and plant growth at that level. Stratification is also seen in the underground plant parts, that is the root and the rhizome systems. Root systems of different plant species tap moisture and nutrients from different soil depths. This enables them to avoid competition and too much exploitation of a particular soil layer.

Sociability refers to the nature of grouping of individual plants, that is, whether they grow singly, in patches, in colonies or evenly intermixed. Sociability expresses the degree of association between species.



Aquatic ecosystems also exhibit marked stratification. In lake ecosystems, light penetration, temperature and availability of oxygen vary with depth. For example, in terms of availability of light, a water body is divided into two layers: an upper lighted zone which is dominated by phytoplankton and where maximum photosynthesis occurs, and a lower layer in which decomposition is most active.

An ecotone is a zone of relatively rapid change between two communities. An ecocline, in contrast, is defined as a gradation from one community to another when there is no sharp boundary between the two. Alternatively, we can say, It represents a more gradual gradient of change between two communities.





Vitality and Vigour


Vitality is related to the condition of a plant and its capacity to complete its life cycle, while the vigour refers to the health or development within a certain stage. A number of criteria may be used in determining the vigour of plants such as the rate and total amount of growth especially in height; rapidity of growth renewal in spring or following mowing or grazing; area of foliage, color and turgidity of leaves and stems; degree of damage caused by diseases or insects; time of appearance and number and height of flower stalks; rate of growth and extent of root system, appearance and development of new stems and leaves.





Periodicity


It refers to the seasonal changes in the community. Periodicity is a strongly fixed character in plants. Different species of plants have different periods of seed germination, vegetative growth, flowering and fruiting, leaf fall, seed and fruit dispersal. A study of the date and time of these events is termed as phenology. It is the calendar of events in the life history of a plant. The phenology of different species present in a community may differ from each other. It is these phenological changes which give a definite look to a community. The appearance of the community as a whole at different seasons is called aspection.





4.6 Community gradient and boundaries


The composition of biotic communities changes along environmental gradients. It is often difficult to determine where one community ends and the next begins. Many communities grade continuously into each other with no sharp boundaries. For example, if two forests, pine forest and spruce forest are nearby, one cannot see the boundaries between them. There are, however, instances where clear, sharp boundaries between the communities or ecosystems are seen, especially where the physical environment changes abruptly- for example, at the transition between aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. The transition zone of vegetation separating two different types of communities (e.g. between forest and grassland) is called ecotone. ‘An ecotone is the zone of transition between adjacent ecological systems having a set of characteristics uniquely defined by space and time scales and by the strength of the interactions between the systems’.



It is a region where the influence of two different patterns of environment works together and hence the vegetation of ecotones is highly specialized. An ecotone may be narrow or wide. It has condition intermediate to adjacent ecosystems. A general characteristic of ecotone is that it has sufficiently greater number of species and high diversity as compared to the neighboring communities. The phenomenon of increased species diversity at the boundary (edge) is called the edge effect and is essentially due to the wider range of suitable environmental conditions. It was first defined by Odum (1958) as the tendency for increased population density and species richness at the junction zone between two communities. It is influenced by the area of transition zone (length and width) and by the degree of contrast between adjoining communities. In general, the greater the contrast between adjoining communities, the greater the diversity of species. Therefore, a border between forest and grassland should support more species than would a border between a young and a mature forest. Environmental conditions at edge enable certain species to colonize for reproduction or survival. Species that occur primarily or most abundantly at the edge for the purposes of reproduction or survival is known as edge species.





4.7 Equilibrium theory of island biogeography


Biogeography is the study of the geographical distribution of species and the reason for their pattern of distribution. Ecologists Robert MacArthur and E.O. Wilson, proposed the equilibrium theory of island biogeography. According to this theory, the level of species diversity on habitat islands arises as a balance between the processes of colonization (immigration) and extinction of species. By ‘islands’ we mean not only oceanic islands, but also habitat islands on land, such as the peaks of mountains and isolated springs in the desert. Any isolated habitat, totally separated from others of its kind, can be considered as an island. The oceanic islands can be formed in two basic ways: by the disappearance of a connecting land from the mainland (either the sea rises and floods an area in between or if joining land is eroded or sinks) or by land rising from the sea (usually form by volcanic activity on the ocean floor gradually building up igneous material until it reaches above sea level).



The number of species found on an island, according to MacArthur and Wilson, was due to two contrasting processes of immigration and extinction. The theory proposes that the number of species on any island is determined by a balance between the rate at which new species colonize it (i.e. the rate of immigration of species from the mainland to the island) and the rate at which populations of established species become extinct (i.e. the rate of extinction of species on the island). The rate at which species might become extinct on the island would be related to the number that has become residents. When an island is nearly empty, the extinction rate is necessarily low because few species are available to become extinct. As more species inhabit an island, extinction rates on the island increase because of the greater likelihood of competitive exclusion. At the same time, as the number of species on the island increases, the immigration rate of new species decreases. Hence, the rate at which additional species will establish populations will be high when the island is relatively empty, and the rate at which resident populations go extinct will be high when the island is relatively full. Over time, the countervailing forces of extinction and immigration result in an equilibrium level of species richness. At equilibrium species richness of an island, immigration balances extinction and richness remains roughly constant in terms of the number of species in the community, but not the identity of the species involved. Two physical features of the island further affect immigration and extinction rates: its size and its distance from the mainland. The ‘mainland’ is that place where new immigrant species originally inhabited.

The theory of island biogeography states that the number of species of a given taxon (insects, birds, or mammals) present on an island or within a patch represents a dynamic equilibrium between the rate of immigration of new colonizing species of that taxon and the rate of extinction of previously established species.





Figure 4.7 The equilibrium number of species on an island represents a balance between the immigration of new species and the extinction of species already there. According to the theory of island biogeography, immigration rate declines with increasing species richness while extinction rate increases.





Figure 4.8 Immigration rates are distance related. Islands near a mainland have a higher immigration rate than do islands distant from a mainland. Extinction rates relate to area and are higher on small islands than on large ones.



Effect of size: It is well established that the number of species on islands decreases as island area decreases. Small islands have higher extinction rates, as they generally contain fewer resources and less diverse habitats for colonizing species. Larger islands reduces the probability of extinction, as they contain larger habitat areas and more resources for colonizing species. The lower rate of extinction on larger islands results in a higher equilibrium number of species as compared to smaller islands.

Effect of distance: The expected number of species on an island is affected not only by the area of the island, but also by the distance of the island from the source of species i.e. mainland. Islands that are more isolated are less likely to receive immigrants than islands that are less isolated. The greater the distance between the island and the mainland, the less the likelihood that many immigrants will successfully complete the journey. The result is a decrease in the equilibrium number of species. Thus, for two islands of equal size, an island close to mainland generally has a higher immigration rate than one farther away.



Figure 4.9 A. Effect of island size: Large islands have a larger equilibrium number of species than small islands because extinction rates lower on large islands. B. Effect of distance from mainland: Near islands tend to have larger equilibrium numbers of species than far islands because immigration rates to near islands are higher. If the island is close to the mainland, it will be easy for species to reach species will arrive quickly, so the emigration rate will be very high. If the island far from mainland, then fewer species will reach it and the rate of immigration will be much lower.





4.8 Ecological interdependence and interactions


Organisms grow, reproduce and die. They are affected by the conditions in which they live, and by the resources that they obtain. But no organism lives in isolation. Under natural conditions organisms live together influencing each other’s life directly or indirectly. Members of biotic community are dependent on one another. The interdependence is reflected in their interactions, mainly for food, space, reproduction and protection. These interactions are important for the survival of different species and the community as a group.

Effect of interactions between members of an ecological community can be classified within two broad categories, direct effects and indirect effects. The first of these, direct effects, as the name implies, deals with the direct effect of one individual on another and not mediated or transmitted through a third individual. Pollination of a flower carried out by bee is an example of direct effect. Indirect effects occur when the influence of one species, the donor, is transmitted through a second species, the transmitter, to a third species, the receiver. The observed effect is indirect because the donor influences the receiver through an intermediate species. Thus, indirect effects consist of a sequence of two direct effect steps. There are two main ways by which an indirect effect can occur. The first is known as an interaction chain, in which a donor species affect the abundance of a transmitter and has an effect on a recipient. The second, interaction modification, occurs when the donor species alters some attributes of the transmitter, such as behaviour and has an effect on a recipient.

Interactions having direct effect between populations of species in a community are broadly categorized into positive, negative or neutral interaction, depending on the nature of the effect on the interacting organisms. In neutral interaction (or neutralism), interacting species have no effect on each other. An interaction in which either both participating species or at least one of the participants gets benefits and neither is harmed is called positive interaction (also called facilitation) whereas, an interaction in which either both participating species or one of the participants gets harmed is called negative interaction.

Table 4.4 Classic categories of direct interactions in ecological communities





The sign (+, –, 0) represents the net effect of one species on the other species, either positive, negative, or neutral. The positive effect of one species on another as +, a detrimental effect as –, and no effect as 0.





Positive interaction


Mutualism


Mutualism is a symbiotic relationship between members of two different species in which both members of the association benefited. On the basis of this relationship, individuals of both species enhance their survival, growth, or reproduction. Mutualistic relationships involve diverse interactions. Mutualisms can be characterized by the degree of dependency, the kinds of benefits received, the degree of specificity and duration of the interactions.

Mutualisms can vary in the degree of dependency between mutualists. Based on this, mutualisms can be obligate or facultative. In obligate mutualism, both organisms benefit by living in close association, and the relationship is obligatory (i.e. neither can survive without each other). Obligate mutualists cannot survive or reproduce without the mutualistic interaction. In facultative mutualism (also called protocooperation), mutualists benefit by living in close association, but the relationship is not obligatory. The cooperating species do not depend on each other for survival. One good example is the mutualistic association between a coelenterate, sea anemone — Adamsia palliata and a hermit crab – Pagurus prideaux. The sea anemone is carried by the crab to fresh feeding sites and crab in turn is said to be protected from its enemies by sea anemone.

The term symbiosis is sometimes used in the same sense as mutualism. ‘Symbiosis’ (termed used by de Barry in 1879) simply means ‘living together’. In narrowest sense, it is used to describe an association in which two species are deriving mutual benefit. However, now this term is used in a broad sense to describe all types of interactions (positive, negative or neutral). So, symbiosis is a close ecological relationship between the individuals of two (or more) different species.

The duration of intimacy among mutualistic interactions and also the degree of specificity of mutualistic interactions varies from one interaction to another. The mutualistic interactions can range from one-to-one, species-specific associations (termed specialists) to association with a wide diversity of mutualistic partners (generalists). Mutualisms can also be subdivided according to the services provided, regardless of whether the participants are obligate or facultative mutualists. Based on the nature of service involved, mutualisms can be dispersive, defensive and resource-based mutualism. Dispersive mutualism involves mutualistic association in which one partner species distributing pollens or seeds of another species and in return receives resources for growth. Defensive mutualism involves mutualistic association in which one partner provides protection to other partner against herbivores or parasites in exchange for a place to live or for nutrients needed for growth. Resource-based mutualism involves interactions where resources (such as nutrients) obtained by one mutualist is made available to another.

There are many classic examples of mutualistic associations in nature. Reef-forming corals of the tropical waters provide an excellent example of resource-based mutualism. Coral reefs are a special subtype of ocean floor ecosystem. One fascinating feature of shallow water, reef-building corals is their mutualistic relationship with photosynthetic algae called zooxanthellae, which live in their tissues. The coral provides the algae with a protected environment and the compounds they need for photosynthesis. In return, the algae produce oxygen and help the coral to remove wastes.

Many nitrogen-fixing bacteria (such as Rhizobium and Bradyrhizobium, collectively called rhizobia) live in root nodules of legumes. The plant partners of rhizobia belong to the Fabaceae or Leguminosae family (commonly known as the legume or pea family). In this mutualistic symbiosis, the bacteria provide nitrogen sources for plant growth in return for photosynthates from the host. Depending on the host plant the symbiotic fate of bacteria can either be reversible or irreversible.

Lichens are a mutualistic association of photoautotrophic algae and heterotrophic fungi. The algal partner (phycobiont or photobiont) is typically unicellular or multicellular green algae or cyanobacteria. About 90% of all known lichens have a green alga as a symbiont. The fungal partner (mycobiont) may be a member of ascomycetes (mostly) or member of basidiomycetes (in a few cases). About 98% of the lichen-forming fungal species belong to the ascomycetes. In a lichen which represents a mutualistic relationship, the photobiont provides carbon compounds by performing photosynthesis; the cyanobacteria also fix nitrogen and provide organic nitrogen. The mycobiont provides their photosynthetic partners with a suitable environment for growth. The physical arrangement of hyphae allows gas exchange, protects the photosynthetic partner, and retains water and minerals.

Mutualistic association between fungi and plant roots are called mycorrhizae (mycorrhizae means fungus roots). About 90% of seed plants have mutualistic associations with fungi that live on or in the root tissue. Mycorrhizal fungi (fungi that form mycorrhizae) delivers inorganic nutrients such as phosphate, calcium and water to plants, which they are able to extract more efficiently from the soil than the host. In exchange, the plants supply the fungi with organic nutrients.





Commensalism


Commensalism (means ‘at table together’) is a symbiotic relationship between two species in which one species benefits and the other neither benefits nor is harmed. Often, the host species provides a home and/or transportation for the other species. Commensalism is much more difficult to demonstrate than mutualism. For true commensalism, the second species must be unaffected by the presence of the first. Ecologists have adopted three terms to describe different types of commensalism. These are inquilinism (occurs when one species uses other species for shelter), phoresy (occurs when one organism uses a second organism for transportation), metabiosis (occurs when an organism uses something produced by the first, usually after its death). One very common example of commensalism is epiphytes (e.g. some tropical orchids) grow in branches of tropical trees. Epiphytes use other plants for support and increased exposure to sunlight and rain. Similarly, several woody climbers (lianas) take the support of the trees for exposing their canopy above ground without doing any harm to the tree itself.





Negative interaction


Predation


The term ‘ predation’ is defined as the consumption of one living organism (the prey) by another (the predator) excluding scavengers and decomposers. It is an act of capturing, killing and eating. The organism which does the act of predation is called a predator. The second organism which is killed and eaten is called prey. Predation is generally linked to carnivorous animals and predator is generally larger in size compared to the prey. Although the term predator is typically associated with animals that feed on other animals, herbivory is also a form of predation in which animals prey on autotrophs. When the predator is a primary consumer (usually an animal), and the prey is a primary producer (plant), the interaction is termed herbivory.

Predation is a direct and complex interaction. It plays a crucial role in ecosystems by influencing various ecological processes, community structure, and evolutionary processes. Here are some key roles of predation:

Energy flow: Predation plays a crucial role in the transfer of energy across trophic levels within an ecosystem. Predators obtain energy by consuming prey, transferring the energy stored in prey biomass to themselves.

Regulation of prey populations: Predation is important for the regulation of prey populations in any ecosystem. Without the presence of predators, prey species exhibit uncontrolled population growth, leading to imbalances that can cause instability within the ecosystem.

Maintaining species diversity: Predators play a crucial role in maintaining species diversity within a community by reducing the intensity of competition among competing prey species. This phenomenon has been demonstrated in a field experiment conducted in the rocky intertidal communities of the American Pacific Coast, where the starfish Pisaster serves as a significant predator. In this experiment, the removal of all starfish from an enclosed intertidal area resulted in the extinction of more than 10 species of invertebrates within a year due to increased interspecific competition.

Evolutionary pressure: Predation acts as a powerful selective force in evolution. It drives adaptations in both predators and prey, leading to the development of various defense mechanisms, such as camouflage and mimicry.





Box 4.3 Avoiding predation




As predators possess adaptations for capturing prey, prey also has adaptations that help them avoid being eaten. Any characteristic that enables individual prey to avoid being detected and captured by a predator increase its fitness. Animal species have evolved a wide range of characteristics to avoid being detected, selected and captured by predators. These characteristics are collectively referred to as predator defenses. These defenses include chemical defenses, cryptic coloration, warning coloration, mimicry and other defenses.

Cryptic coloration (or camouflage) includes colors and patterns that allow prey to blend into the background. This makes prey difficult to spot because the color and patterns of prey resembles to those in the visual background.

Besides such advanced hiding strategies, some animals do just the opposite and appear in bright colors that are easily visible. Intensive colors are usually a warning sign of well-protected toxic organisms. Prey can avoid an attack by bright coloration as a sign of toxicity. This is termed as aposematic coloration (or warning coloration). Such warning signals are the opposite of camouflage but are also widespread.

Some prey species gain significant protection by mimicking the appearance of other species. Mimicry is a phenomenon whereby an individual of one species gains an advantage by resembling an individual of a different species. There are at least two types of mimicry. In Müllerian mimicry, named after F. Müller, several groups of organisms gain an advantage by looking like one another. This mimicry occurs among organisms in which all the mimetic species are offensive and obnoxious. The classic example is the general similarity among bees, wasps and hornets. Müllerian mimicry requires that all the species be similar in appearance and distinctly colored. In Batesian mimicry, a vulnerable organism (termed mimic) gains a selective advantage by looking like a dangerous or distasteful organism (termed model). The classic example of Batesian mimicry are the monarch (Danaus plexippus) and viceroy (Limenitis archippus) butterflies. Monarch butterflies feed on milkweed plants, obtaining toxic chemicals called cardiac glycosides, which the monarchs store in their bodies. When a bird tries to eat a monarch, it becomes sick. Thereafter, the bird will not only avoid eating monarchs, but it will also avoid eating any butterflies that look anything like monarchs.

Many animals have developed physical defenses against predators. For example, the shells of tortoises are a strong means of defense against most predators. Similarly, many beetles have a tough exoskeleton that protects them from attack from other arthropod predators such as spiders.

As prey have evolved ways of avoiding predators, predators have evolved better ways of hunting. Failure to capture prey results in reduced reproduction and increased mortality of predators. Therefore, natural selection also produces smarter and more skilled predators. As prey species evolve characteristics to avoid being caught, predators evolve more effective means to capture them.

Unlike animals, plants cannot escape from their predators, presenting a significant challenge. Consequently, plants have evolved a diverse range of physical and chemical defenses against herbivory.

Physical defenses: Plants have developed physical structures such as thorns, spines, and prickles to deter herbivores from feeding on them. Thorns, like those found on Acacia and Cactus plants, are common examples of physical defensive structures.

Chemical defenses: Plants produce a wide array of chemical compounds that can be toxic, distasteful, or repellent to herbivores. These chemicals can induce sickness in herbivores when consumed, inhibit feeding or digestion, disrupt reproduction, or even cause fatality. An illustrative example is the Calotropis weed, which grows in abandoned fields. This plant produces highly poisonous cardiac glycosides that prevent cattle or goats from grazing on it.





Parasitism


Parasitism is a relationship between two organisms in which one species (parasite) benefits for growth and reproduction and the other species (host) is harmed. The host is the organism from which the parasite derives benefits. A parasite is an organism that obtains its nutrients from one or a few host individuals, normally causing harm but not causing death immediately.

In many ways, host-parasite and prey-predator relationship are similar, the parasite and predator are benefited while host and prey are negatively affected. But there are few fundamental differences.

Predators live on capital whereas parasites live on interest. Parasites, like the predators, limit the population of the host species, but they are generally host-specific, and do not have choice or alternatives like predators. They are smaller in size and have higher biotic or reproductive potential compared to the predators. Parasites have poor means of dispersal and require specialized structures to reach or invade the host. Predators, on the other hand, are quite mobile and capable of capturing the prey.

Parasitoid is different from parasite. A parasitoid is an organism that lives the entire life attached to or within a single host. In contrast to a true parasite, a parasitoid ultimately sterilizes, kills, and sometimes consumes the host.

Parasites can be classified on the basis of size as microparasites and macroparasites. Microparasites include viruses, bacteria and protozoans. They are characterized by small size and a short generation time. Macroparasites include flatworms, roundworms, flukes, lice, fleas and ticks. They are relatively large and have a comparatively long generation time.

Parasites exhibit diverse life cycles. In a direct life cycle, the parasite completes its entire life cycle within a single host species. In an indirect life cycle, the parasite requires multiple host species to complete its life cycle. The host in which the parasites reach their sexually mature stage is called the definitive host (primary host), while other hosts where the parasites complete non-reproductive stages are referred to as intermediate hosts (secondary hosts). The secondary host harbours the parasite only for a short transition period during which some developmental stages are completed, but sexual reproduction does not occur. Parasites may require one, two, or even three intermediate hosts.

In some cases, an organism can serve as both a vector and an intermediate host. A vector is an organism that transmits a parasite from one host to another, while an intermediate host is an organism that supports some developmental stages of a parasite without reaching its full reproductive stage. Some vectors play no other role than as a carrier. In the case of the malarial parasite, the mosquito acts as both a vector and an intermediate host. The primary host of the malarial parasite is the human. As a vector, the mosquito transmits the malarial parasite from an infected human to a healthy individual. When the mosquito takes a blood meal from an infected person, it ingests the malarial parasites present in the person’s blood. The parasites then undergo a series of developmental stages within the mosquito, eventually reaching the infective stage. Similarly, in the case of Trypanosomes, humans act as the primary host, as they harbor the adult stage of the parasite. However, the parasite needs a tsetse fly as an intermediate host to undergo certain developmental stages and become infective to humans. The tsetse fly serves as a vector, transmitting the Trypanosomes from one human host to another.

Hosts are the habitats for parasites. Parasites can be classified into ectoparasites and endoparasites depending on either they live within the host or on the host. Parasites that live inside the body of the host are called endoparasites (e.g. hookworms that live in the host’s gut) and those that live on the surface of the hosts are called ectoparasites (e.g. some mites). Endoparasite can exist in one of two forms: intercellular or intracellular. A parasite that feeds on another parasite is termed epiparasite and relationship referred to as hyperparasitism.

Parasites can be temporary parasites and permanent parasites. Temporary parasites are the parasites which come in contact with host for a brief period, e.g. female mosquitoes (Culex, Anopheles, Aedes), bedbug (Cimex), sandfly (Phlebotomus), tsetse fly (Glossina) whereas permanent parasites remain in contact with the host throughout their life, e.g. Entamoeba histolytica, Ascaris lumbricoides, Taenia solium etc.





Box 4.4 Host-parasite coevolution




Coevolution is the process by which ecologically interacting species, evolve in tandem by exerting selection pressures on each other. It involves an evolutionary change in a trait of the individuals in one population in response to a trait of the individuals in a second population, followed by an evolutionary response by the second population to the change in the first. Examples of coevolutionary systems include host and parasites, predators and prey, and mutualistic or symbiotic interactions. Coevolution in parasites and hosts is antagonistic, unlike the mutualistic coevolution of ants and caterpillars or of flowering plants and pollinators.

Coevolution that is driven by antagonistic interactions, so-called ‘antagonistic coevolution’ can be defined as ‘reciprocal adaptation and counter-adaptation of two interacting species for which fitness is negatively correlated’. In other words, an adaptation that increases fitness in one species will decrease the fitness of the other species. Theoretical and empirical studies of antagonistic coevolution have generally focused on two distinct mechanisms, one driven by negative frequency-dependent selection and the other by positive directional selection. These two mechanisms are expected to have fundamentally different influences on important evolutionary phenomena (e.g. the maintenance of genetic variation and sex).

Negative frequency-dependent selection: Red Queen coevolution

Frequency-dependent selection is defined as a situation where fitness is dependent upon the frequency of a phenotype or genotype in a population. In case of negative frequency-dependent selection, the fitness of a phenotype or genotype increases as its frequency in a population decreases. On the other hand, in case of positive frequency-dependent selection, the fitness of a phenotype or genotype increases as its frequency in a population increases.

Negative frequency-dependent selection is believed to be a primary driver of coevolution between biological antagonists. According to this selection, the parasite should adapt to the most common host genotype, because it can then infect a large number of hosts. In turn, a rare host genotype may then be favoured by selection, its frequency will increase and eventually it becomes common. Subsequently, the parasite should adapt to the former infrequent genotype. Coevolution determined by negative frequency-dependent selection is rapid. It maintains high genetic diversity by favouring uncommon alleles. Negative frequency-dependent selection is considered by many evolutionary biologists to be a particularly important and interesting form of natural selection because, unlike directional and stabilizing selection, negative frequency-dependent selection favours rare genotypes and can thus maintain high levels of genetic diversity.

Positive directional selection: Arms race coevolution

If an allele provides a fitness benefit, its frequency will increase within a population – the selection is a positive directional selection. Under positive directional selection, relative fitness increases as the value of a trait increases. Dawkins and Krebs (1970) suggested that reciprocal positive directional selection exerted by coevolving hosts and parasites could lead to a situation where hosts continually become more resistant to parasitism while parasites respond by becoming more virulent or evolving new mechanisms of evading host immunity (i.e. Arms race coevolution). ‘Arms race’ is a specific form of coevolution that is characterized by increased levels of defense and counterdefense in antagonistic interactions. The process is considered to be slower in comparison to negative frequency-dependent selection. In contrast to Arms race coevolution, Red Queen coevolution, synonymous with negative frequency-dependent selection, occur when rare host genotypes have a selective advantage over common ones.





Amensalism


In commensalism, one organism benefits while the other is unaffected. The opposite of commensalism is amensalism, where one organism is harmed while the other is unaffected. Amensalism takes place when one individual is negatively affected by interaction with another individual who is not affected by the relationship. A good example of this interaction is when one organism produces an antibiotic against another organism. Many molds, including Penicillium, secrete chemicals that kill other bacteria in their vicinity.

Amensalism is different from allelopathy. Allelopathy is a biological interaction in which an organism produces one or more biochemicals that influence the germination, growth, survival and reproduction of other organisms. These biochemicals are known as allelochemicals (or allelochemics) and can have beneficial (positive allelopathy) or harmful (negative allelopathy) effects on the organisms. Allelochemicals are secondary metabolites produced by plants and other organisms. For example, black walnut, Juglans nigra, produces a chemical called juglone from its roots, killing roots of neighboring plants. This phenomenon is termed as allelopathy, and the chemicals are known as allelochemicals. Although allelopathy is also a chemical effect of one organism on another through the release of chemicals into the environment, but it is different form amensalism, where one organism remain unaffected while the other a harmed (0, –). But allelopathy may also be seen has a positive interaction.





Competition


Competition occurs when two organisms compete for the same resource, resulting in reduced fitness in the competing individuals. In a competition between two species, both suffer adversely. Usually, competition occurs when resources are in short supply. Here, the term resource is used in a broad sense. All things required by an organism for survival, growth, and reproduction are ‘resources’ for it. It includes not only food but also space, mates, light, etc. required by an organism. Competition can be:

Interspecific competition



Intraspecific competition





Interspecific competition occurs between individuals of two different species. The strength of interspecific competition is greater between more closely related species or species in similar guilds. The strength of interspecific competition also increases with decreased resources. Interspecific competition may be real competition and apparent competition.

Real competition: In case of real competition, growth and survival of one species is negatively affected either directly (interference competition) or indirectly (exploitation competition). Interference competition (or direct competition) is observed when two species come into direct contact with each other, such as fighting or defending a territory. The most common example of interference competition is the fight over territories or food items among animals. In this case, individuals interact directly with each other, and one individual will actually prevent another from exploiting the resources. In exploitation competition (or indirect competition), organisms compete indirectly (i.e. without coming in direct contact) through the consumption of a shared resource such as food, with each obtaining as much as it can. Exploitation occurs only when the resource in question is in limited supply.



Apparent competition: It is an indirect competition. It occurs when two individuals that do not directly compete for resources affect each other indirectly by being prey for the same predator. Let us understand this form of competition with the help of an example. Consider a hawk (predator) that preys both on squirrels and mice. In this relationship, if the squirrel population increases, then the mouse population may be positively affected since more squirrels will be available as prey for the hawks. However, an increased squirrel population may eventually lead to a higher population of hawks requiring more prey, thus, negatively affecting the mice through increased predation pressure as the squirrel population declines. The opposite effect could also occur through a decrease in food resources for the predator. If the squirrel population decreases, it can indirectly lead to a reduction in the mouse population since they will be the more abundant food source for the hawks. In nature, apparent competition are generally difficult to identify, often because of the complexity of indirect interactions that involve multiple species.



Figure 4.10 Apparent competition refers to an indirect negative interaction between individuals. In this figure, predation pressure on one prey is linked to another prey. Increase in abundance of one prey (S) have negative effects on the other prey (M) by sustaining higher predator population. This leads to apparent competition between prey S and M (–,–). The (+) symbol indicates a positive effect on the species at the head of the arrow, the (–) symbol indicates negative effects. Hawk (H) feed both squirrels (S) and mice (M). Higher population size of squirrels supports more hawks population. Higher population of hawks require more prey. It indirectly increases the predation pressure on the mice. This increased negative pressure develops as the squirrel population declines. It indirectly leads to a reduction in the mouse population. This leads to apparent competition between S and M.



Intraspecific competition occurs between individuals of the same species. Individuals of the same species have very similar requirements for survival, growth and reproduction. Hence, intraspecific competition typically leads to decreased resource intake per individual, and thus to decreased individual growth and development. These may lead, in turn, to decrease in survivorship and fecundity. Generally, the intraspecific competition is more intense than interspecific competition. Although there may be age differences or sex differences in resource utilizations, the requirement of individuals of the same species are very similar; hence, they compete more fiercely. Intraspecific competition may be interference competition or exploitation competition.





The interaction compass


Interactions between two individuals are often defined by their interaction outcomes; that is, the positive, neutral, or negative effects. While the relationships between large carnivores and their prey are easily placed in one of the categories of direct effects, many associations between two organisms or species involve multiple types of interaction, which may shift along a continuum from one category to another. Recently direct effects have been more accurately portrayed as an interaction compass by Holland and DeAngelis (2009). They have developed a general theory for transitions between outcomes based on consumer-resource (C-R) interactions in which one or both species exploit the other as a resource. Depending on biotic and abiotic factors affecting the individuals, the true relationship may fall in between the set categories, and even shift between categories over time. For example, a well-documented mutualism is the ant-plant interaction. Plants provide domatia and/or nectar to the ants and receive protection from insect herbivores in return. However, ants may also castrate the flowers and fruits of the plant, skewing plant resource partitioning to growth rather than reproduction and thereby increasing nectaries and domatia. If the ants become too aggressive in their pruning behaviours, the relationship between the ants and plant may shift from mutualism to parasitism.



Figure 4.11 The interaction compass, in which the main types of direct effects are represented as points on the compass, but interactions between individuals or species can fall at any point along the continuum as positive and negative effects change (adapted from Holland and DeAngelis, Ecology Letters, 2009).





4.9 Lotka-Volterra model


The Lotka-Volterra model of interspecific competition is a simple mathematical model representing the interaction between two competing species. This mathematical model was developed by two people working independently – Alfred Lotka (1925), an insurance actuary and Vito Volterra (1926), a mathematical physicist. On the basis of this model, the losers of competitive interactions can be predicted. The Lotka-Volterra equation for interspecific competition is based on the Verhulst-Pearl logistic growth equation:



In the logistic equation, a rate of population growth is limited by intraspecific competition (members of the same species competing with one another). However, this equation can be modified to include the effect of interspecific competition as well as intraspecific competition. The Lotka-Volterra model was developed to allow ecologists to predict the potential outcome when two species are in competition for the same resources. Basically, the model attempts to account for the effect that the presence of one species will have on the population growth of the other species, relative to the competitive effect that two members of the same species would have on each other.

The logistic equation and Lotka-Volterra equations for two species (species 1 and species 2).



The Lotka-Volterra equation for species 1 in presence of species 2:



The Lotka-Volterra equation for species 2 in presence of species 1:



Where,

N1 and N2 = population of species 1 and 2, respectively.

K1 and K2 = carrying capacity of system for each species in the absence of the other.

t = time

r1 and r2 = intrinsic rate of increase of species 1 and 2, respectively.

α12 = is a competition coefficient representing the effect of one individual of species 2 on the growth of species 1 (the first number of the subscript always refers to the species being affected).

α21 = is a competition coefficient representing the effect of one individual of species 1 on the growth of species 2.

The competition coefficient is a constant quantifying the negative effect of an individual of a species on the population growth of other species. The value of the competition coefficient is the ratio of the competitive effects of each species. For example, if one individual of species 1 had the same competitive effect on the population level of species 1 as ten individuals of species 2, then the competition coefficient would be 1/10 = 0.1.

When α12 <1, the effect of species 2 on species 1 (interspecific competition) is less than the effect of species 1 on its own members (intraspecific competition). Conversely, when α12 >1, the effect of species 2 on species 1 is greater than the effect of species 1 on its own members.

The Lotka–Volterra equations take a few assumptions under consideration:

Intrinsic rate of increase, competition coefficient and carrying capacity are all constants.



Every individual within each population is identical.



The populations are not allowed to diversify.



The environment (habitat) is homogeneous.





The Lotka-Volterra competition model describes the outcome of competition between two species over ecological time scale. If the values for each equation are known, then the equation can be used to predict the potential outcome of a competition (i.e. whether they can co-exist or one will eventually exclude the other).

To understand the predictions of the model, it is helpful to look at graphs that show how the size of each population increases or decreases when we start with different combinations of species abundances. These graphs are called state-space graphs, in which the population size of species 1 is plotted on the x-axis and the population size of species 2 is plotted on the y-axis. Each point in a state-space graph represents a combination of abundances of the two species. For each species there is a straight line on the graph called a zero isocline.

The zero isocline for each species states that at any given point along that line the population size does not change, i.e. dN/dt = 0. The two graphs show the zero isoclines for species 1 (black line) and species 2 (grey line). Any point above the zero isocline indicates that the population of that species is decreasing; any point below the isocline that the population is increasing.



Figure 4.12 There are two lines drawn on the state-space graphs. These lines join points where there is no change in population size with time, i.e. dN/dt = 0. They are called zero isoclines and there is one for each species: the black line is for species 1 (dN1/dt = 0) while the grey line is for species 2 (dN2/dt = 0). Arrows indicate direction of population change.



We can map out the regions of increase and decrease in the figure for species 1 and 2 if we can draw its zero isocline.



This is true if, r1 = 0 or N1 = 0 or if K1 – N1 – α12N2 = 0 then,



This equation indicates that competition has reduced the carrying capacity.



Note that the zero isoclines divide each graph into two parts. Below and to the left of the isocline the population size increases because the combined abundances of both species are less than the carrying capacity of the one, while above and to the right the population size decreases because the combined abundances are greater than the carrying capacity. For the graph of the isocline of species 1, the isocline intersects the graph on the x-axis when N1 reaches its carrying capacity (K1) and no individuals of species 2 are present. The isocline intersects the graph on the y-axis at K1/α12, when the carrying capacity of species 1 is filled by the equivalent number of individuals of species 2 and no individuals of species 1 are present.

Similarly, based on an equivalent derivation, we can map out the regions of increase and decrease in the figure for species 2.





Scenarios


The two zero isoclines can be juxtaposed in four different ways, depending on the relative values of α and K for each species. The four possible competitive situations, defined by the relative positions of the isoclines, are given below.

Scenario 1: The two isoclines do not cross. The isocline for species 1 is above and to the right of the isocline for species 2.



Rearranging these gives us



In this scenario, species 1 is a strong interspecific competitor, while species 2 is a weak interspecific competitor. Hence, species 1 goes to carrying capacity K1 and species 2 is competitively excluded by species 1.

Scenario 2: The two isoclines do not cross. The isocline for species 2 is above and to the right of the isocline for species 1.



Rearranging these gives us



In this scenario, species 2 is a strong interspecific competitor, while species 1 is a weak interspecific competitor. Hence, species 2 goes to carrying capacity K2 and species 1 is competitively excluded by species 2.



Scenario 3: The case of stable coexistence

The isoclines cross one another, but for both species carrying capacities are lower than the other’s carrying capacity divided by the competition coefficient. Rather than outcompeting one another, the two species are able to coexist at stable equilibrium point. An equilibrium point occurs where the isoclines cross.



Rearranging these gives us



In this case, both species have less competitive effect on each other i.e. weak interspecific competition. Coexistence occurs when intraspecific competition is greater than interspecific competition. The outcome of this type of competition is the stable coexistence of both species.

Scenario 4: The case of unstable coexistence

The isoclines of the two species cross one another. Here, the carrying capacity of species 1 (K1) is higher than the carrying capacity of species 2 divided by the competition coefficient (K2/α21), and the carrying capacity of species 2 (K2) is higher than the carrying capacity of species 1 divided by the competition coefficient (K1/α12). There is an unstable equilibrium point where the isoclines intersect.



Rearranging these gives us



In this case, individuals of both species have a greater competitive effect on individuals of the other species. Competitive exclusion occurs when interspecific competition is greater than intraspecific competition. The outcome of this type of competition is the unstable coexistence between species 1 and species 2.



If a line is drawn between the two carrying capacities (K1 and K2), the position of equilibrium point either above or below that line differentiates stable from and unstable coexistence.





Dynamics of the predator-prey system


Lotka-Volterra model also explores predator-prey dynamics and tells us about the changes in prey and predator population with time. This model comprises a pair of differential equations (one for the prey population and another for the predator population) that describe predator-prey dynamics in their simplest case (one predator population, one prey population). The Lotka-Volterra equations take a few assumptions under consideration:

No intraspecific competition in prey population.



Predator not dependent on alternative prey.



Predator consumption has no saturation point.



No other environmental influence.



No accidental death of predator.



Prey population decrease only due to predation.





Box 4.5 Interpreting graph




Let us understand how we can interpret the outcome of competition on the graph with combined isoclines for species 1 and 2. On the graph shown here, the diagonal lines are called zero isoclines. Values of N1 and N2 that fall below the zero isoclines, population growth is positive. For values of N1 and N2 above the zero isoclines, population growth is negative. Arrows are used to represent the direction of population change for any point. For the zero isoclines of species 1, the arrows are parallel to the x-axis. For species 2, the arrows are parallel to the y-axis. Now, when you are considering any point on the graph that represents the combined values of species 1 and 2, two arrows must be plotted to represent the direction of change for both populations. Let us understand this by considering point A on the graph. The black arrow represents the change in species 1, and the grey arrow shows the corresponding change in species 2. The future (predicted) values of N1 and N2 will therefore lie in the direction of the arrow. Therefore, the next point representing the combined values of N1 and N2 must lie somewhere between the two arrows and is represented by the dashed arrow. Now, you find out the future values of N1 and N2 with respect to point B on the graph.





We begin by looking at what happens to the prey population in the absence of predator, the prey will exponentially grow according to



where N1 is the size of the prey population and r is its intrinsic rate of increase.

The rate at which the prey will be consumed by the predator will depend on the frequency of predator-prey encounters and the predator efficiency (p). Encounters increase with the increase in the predator population (N2) and the prey population (N1). The predation efficiency is a measure of the percentage of encounters actually ending with the capture and consumption of the prey by the predator. Thus, in the presence of a predator, the growth rate of prey population will turn into:



The change in predator’s population depends on the efficiency at which a consumed prey is converted into the production of a predator (a) and the natural decrease of predator population due to its intrinsic mortality rate (d). The predator mortality rate is assumed to be constant. The rate of change in the predator population is



In this simple model, parameters such as the mortality of prey population due to factors other than predation are ignored. More complex models incorporate additional parameters to obtain a closer approximation to real systems.

The Lotka–Volterra equations for predator and prey population growth therefore explicitly link the two populations, each functioning as a density-dependent regulator on the other. Predators regulate the growth of the prey population by functioning as a source of density-dependent mortality. The prey population functions as a source of density-dependent regulation on the predator population.

In the absence of predators (or at very low predator density), the prey population will grow exponentially (dN1/dt = r N1). As the predator population increases, prey mortality will increase. Eventually, the mortality rate due to predation (pN1 N2) will equal to the inherent growth rate of the prey population (rN1). At this point, the net population growth for the prey species will be zero (dN1/dt = 0).



The growth rate of the prey population will be zero when the number of predators is equal to the intrinsic rate of increase of the prey population (r) divided by the efficiency of predation (p). If the predator population exceeds this value, the growth rate of the prey will become negative, and the population size declines. The mortality due to predation will be greater than the exponential increase of the prey population.

Likewise, we can examine the influence of prey population size on the growth rate of the predator population. The growth rate of the predator population will be zero when the growth rate of predator population is equal to the rate of mortality:



The growth rate of the predator population will be zero when the size of the prey population equals the mortality rate of the predator population divided by the product of the efficiency of predation (p) and the production efficiency of captured prey into new predators (a).

We can examine these results graphically using two axes that represent the population sizes of the prey (x-axis) and predator (y-axis). The properties of this model can be investigated by finding zero isoclines. There are separate zero isoclines for the predators and prey, both of which are drawn on a graph of prey population (x-axis) against predator population (y-axis). Each is a line joining those combinations of predator and prey population that lead either to an unchanging prey population (dN1/dt = 0; prey zero isocline) or an unchanging predator population (dN2/dt = 0; predator zero isocline).



Figure 4.13 Zero isoclines (dN/dt = 0) for the prey and predator populations. Note that the zero isocline for the prey population is defined by a fixed number of predators, and the zero isocline for the predator population is defined by a fixed number of prey. Arrows show the direction of change in population size relative to the isoclines. The prey zero isocline: the number of prey increases at low predator densities and decreases at high predator densities. The predator zero isocline: the number of predators increases when prey numbers are high and decreases when prey numbers are low.



Mathematical modeling generates expectation of cyclic fluctuations in population size of both prey and predator, a fall in the number of preys determining a subsequent fall in the number of predators; this, in turn, will allow the prey population to recover, thus providing predators with a new opportunity to grow in number; and so on.



Figure 4.14 A. When prey and predator isoclines are combined, coupled oscillations result. When the zero isoclines are combined, the arrows can also be combined, and these joint arrows progress in anticlock-wise circles. A minus sign indicates population decline, and a plus sign indicates population increase. This trajectory shows the cyclic nature of the predator-prey interaction. B. By plotting the changes in size for both the predator and prey populations through time, we can see that the two populations continuously cycle out of phase with each other, and the density of predators lags behind that of prey. Adapted from Begon, et al., 1996.





4.10 Ecological niche


All living organisms have a range of environmental conditions under which they can survive, grow, reproduce and function. This range of environmental conditions is not the same for all organisms. A set of environmental conditions and resources under which a species can survive, grow, reproduce and function define the ecological niche.

The term ‘niche’ was used for the first time by Grinnell is frequently misunderstood and misused. It is often used loosely to describe the sort of place in which an organism lives. Strictly, however, the place in which a particular organism lives is its habitat. Niche is different from habitat. It is not simply a place where an organism lives. It is the sum total of all the ecological requisites and activities of a species. It includes not only the physical space occupied by an organism but also its functional role in the community (its trophic position) and its position in environmental gradients of temperature, moisture, pH, soil, and other conditions of existence. These three aspects of the niche can be conveniently designated as the spatial niche, the trophic niche and the n-dimensional hypervolume niche.

Odum (1959) defined the ecological niche as ‘the position or status of an organism within its community and ecosystem resulting from the organism’s structural adaptations, physiological responses, and specific behavior (inherited and/or learned).’ He emphasized that ‘the ecological niche of an organism depends not only on where it lives but also on what it does.’ The place an organism lives, or where one would go to find it, is its habitat. For Odum the habitat is the organism’s ‘address,’ whereas the niche is its ‘profession.’



Grinnell used the term niche in the sense of the microhabitat to describe the ultimate distributional unit, within which each species is held by its structural and instinctive limitations. Hence, his version of the concept is now called a spatial (or habitat) niche. Charles Elton used the term niche in the sense of the ‘functional status of an organism in its community.’ Because Elton emphasized the trophic position of an organism, his version of the concept is designated as a trophic niche. The concept of the n-dimensional hypervolume niche was first described by American ecologist Hutchinson (1957). He defined a niche as a multidimensional space called an n-dimensional hypervolume, where n is the number of dimensions that make up the niche within which an organism can survive, grow and reproduce. In other words, the n dimensions correspond to independent environmental variables that affect the survival of that organism. Temperature, for instance, limits the growth and survival of all organisms, but different organisms tolerate different ranges of temperature. This range is one dimension of an organism’s ecological niche. An organism’s environment cannot be defined by only one or two environmental variables i.e. one or two dimensions. But there are many such dimensions that determine the organism’s position in the environmental gradient, an n-dimensional hypervolume. Clearly, the real niche of a species must be multidimensional. Hence, each organism has an activity space, a range of environmental conditions and resource qualities within which it can live.



Figure 4.15 Graph showing the 2-dimensional position of an organism in the environmental gradient considering two independent environmental variables (defining two dimensions) – temp and pH. Organisms survive, grow, and reproduce only within certain limits. This graph shows the temperature range (one dimension) and the organism’s pH range (second dimension). According to the n-dimensional hypervolume niche concept, all independent variables relevant to the organism’s life must be included, resulting in an n-dimensional hypervolume.



Fundamental niche and realized niche

Usually, a species has a larger ecological niche in the absence of competitors and predators than it has in their presence. In other words, there are certain combinations of conditions and resources that can allow a species to maintain a viable population, but only if it is not being adversely affected by enemies. This led Hutchinson to distinguish between the fundamental and the realized niche.



Figure 4.16 The fundamental niche of a species describes all possible combinations of resources and conditions under which a species can grow, survive and reproduce. The realized niche describes the more limited set of resources and conditions under which a species can grow, survive and reproduce in the presence of competitors and predators.



The fundamental niche (sometimes referred to as the physiological niche or pre-interactive niche) is the maximum theoretical inhabited hypervolume which a species can occupy in the absence of interactions with other species. In other words, it is the full range of environmental variables and resources that a species can possibly tolerate and use in the absence of competitors and predators i.e. free from any sort of interference from other species. The fundamental niche is thus a hypothetical, idealized niche in which the organism encounters no interactions with other species and in which its physical environment is optimal.

The fundamental niche is the ecological niche in the absence of interactions with other species, whereas the realized niche is that the portion of the fundamental niche that a species actually occupies as a result of interactions with other species.





Figure 4.17 Fundamental and realized niche of barnacles. Chthamalus stellatus and Semibalanus balanoides are two species of barnacles that grow in the intertidal zone of the rocky shores. Semibalanus and Chthamalus compete. Chthamalus occurs in the upper intertidal zone and Semibalanus was restricted to the lower intertidal zone. In the absence of Semibalanus, the potential distribution of Chthamalus extends over the entire intertidal zone (upper and lower intertidal zone). Hence, the entire intertidal zone we can consider as the fundamental niche of Chthamalus. But in the presence of Semibalanus, it occupies only the upper intertidal zone. Semibalanus outcompetes and excludes Chthamalus from the lower zones. So, for Chthamalus upper intertidal zone is the realized niche.



On the other hand, the portion of the fundamental niche that a species actually exploits as a result of interactions with other species as the realized niche (or post-interactive niche). It is the actual smaller hypervolume that a species occupies under interference and predation from the other species. Because of interspecific interactions, the realized niche of a species is often smaller than its fundamental niche. Realized niches of most organisms change both in time and from place to place as physical and biotic environments vary.





Box 4.6 Niche paradox




The niche concept has been defined in several different ways and remains one of the most confusing topics in ecology. Grinnell described the niche as a place that a species occupies in the environment. Elton’s view of the niche differed from Grinnell’s in that it focused on the functional status of a species in its community. However, Hutchinson defined the niche of a species as the sum of all the physical and biological variables required to survive, reproduce and grow. According to Hutchinson’s niche concept, the realized niche is the part of the fundamental niche occupied by a species in the presence of negative interspecific interactions (such as predation, competition and parasitism). Thus, because of negative interspecific interactions, the realized niche of a species is often smaller than its fundamental niche. But many ecologists have an opinion that positive interactions are largely ignored until recently in describing the size of the realized niche. Positive interaction occurs when the presence of one species enhances the growth, survival, or reproduction of the interacting partner. A series of studies have highlighted that the realized niche can be larger than the fundamental niche if there are positive interactions between interacting species (Bruno et al., 2003).



Ecologist uses the concept of niche to characterize species in terms of their similarity in resource use. An important measure of this includes niche overlap. The sharing of niche space by two or more species is called niche overlap. It occurs when two species use the same resources or other environmental variables. It is an index of similarity between the resource utilization of two species. The degree and type of niche overlap can be used to assess interspecific competition. Overlap is complete when two organisms have identical niches. Usually, niches overlap only partially, with some resources being shared and others being used exclusively by each species.



Figure 4.18 Schematic representation of the concept of niche overlap. It occurs when members of two different species use the same resources. Usually, niches overlap occurs partially, with some resources being shared and others being used exclusively by each species.



Niche width (also called niche breadth or niche size) describes the extent of the realized niche occupied by an organism. This area is defined by suitable environmental condition and available resources appropriate to that species as well as interspecific interactions. Some organisms have smaller niches than others. It is a comparative feature. We can only say that a given organism has a niche that is narrower or broader than that of some other organismic unit. Effects of interspecific competition on niche breadth are complex and under different conditions may actually favour either niche contraction or niche expansion.



Scientists use the niche width of species to classify them broadly as generalists or specialists. Generalist species have broad niches. They can live in many different places, eat a variety of foods, and often tolerate a wide range of environmental conditions. Flies, cockroaches, mice, rats and humans are generalist species. These species usually exploit more food types, occupy diverse habitats and build up larger populations. In contrast, specialist species occupy narrow niches. They may be able to live in only one type of habitat, use one or a few types of food, or tolerate a narrow range of climatic and other environmental conditions. This makes specialists more prone to extinction when environmental conditions change.

Organisms that occupy the same or similar niches in different geographical regions are called ecological equivalents. The idea of ‘ecological equivalents’ was first stressed by Grinnell in 1924. Species that occupy same equivalent niches and occur in widely separated regions are generally taxonomically much different. A grassland community develops wherever there is a grassland climate but the species of grasses (the producer) and grazers (herbivores) may be quite different especially where regions are widely separated.





Ecological compression


As more species invade a habitat, interspecific competition forces any single species to decrease the range of habitats it exploits. These adjustments are those that take place in ecological time, during the lifetime of the organism concerned. In the presence of a greater number of competitive species in a habitat, each species search for foods on a smaller part of the total available habitat. This is termed ecological compression. It means as a greater number of species make use of habitat, the habitat used by each species shrinks. This results in species specialization in habitat occupancy and feeding habit. This consequently reduces niche overlapping. However, the range of food items eaten by each species remains constant i.e. within the reduced habitat searched by each species, a full range of food items may still be present. An animal will accept any prey item worth eating no matter the intensity of competition, but the animal will choose the foraging area based on the magnitude of competition. The actual diet may become more concentrated, but the range of food items will not change. Hence, MacArthur and Pianka argued, the range of food items taken by a species should be independent of the number of competing species present. Ecological compression takes place on a shorter time-scale and does not involve heritable change. Thus, the compression hypothesis predicts that during a short-term, non-evolutionary time, habitats used would shrink with increased competition while the range of foods eaten would expand or remain the same.



Figure 4.19 Diagrammatic illustration of the compression hypothesis. As more species invade a habitat, interspecific competition forces any single species to decrease the range of habitats it exploits; however, the range of foods eaten should either increase or remain more or less constant.





4.11 Effect of competition


Competitive exclusion principle


Competitive exclusion principle (also termed as Gause’s principle) can be stated as:

‘If two competing species coexist in a stable, homogeneous environment, then they do so as a result of differentiation of their realized niches. If, however, there is no such differentiation, or if it is precluded by the habitat, then one competing species will eliminate or exclude the other.’

In the simplest form, this principle states that two species competing for the same resource cannot coexist indefinitely. Competitive exclusion principle is based on the studies carried out by Ecologist G. F. Gause on the three species of paramecium - P. aurelia, P. caudatum and P. bursaria. All three species fed on bacteria and yeast. Gause determined the growth pattern of each species by culturing separately. When cultured separately, population of all three Paramecium species followed a logistic growth pattern. When Gause grew P. aurelia and P. caudatum together, P. caudatum always declined to the point of extinction. In mixed culture, both species utilized bacteria as food occurred more in the oxygen-rich upper part of the culture tube. By contrast, when Gause cultured P. bursaria and P. caudatum (or P. aurelia) together, neither went extinct. However, the population of each were much less compared to when they have grown alone because some competition occurred between them. In this experiment, Gause discovered that P. bursaria was better able to utilize the yeast in the lower part of the culture tubes and P. aurelia or P. caudatum on bacteria in the upper part of the culture tube. From these experiments, Gause concluded that species with exactly the same requirements cannot live together for long in the same place by using the same limiting resources, that is, occupying the same niche. His conclusion later termed the competitive exclusion principle by Garrett Hardin (1960), essentially means that complete competitors cannot coexist. Species may avoid competitive exclusion by partitioning resources as happened in case of P. bursaria and P. caudatum. Gause’s principle of competitive exclusion can be restated as:

‘No two species can occupy the same niche indefinitely when resources are limiting. Two species can coexist on a long-term basis, either resources must not be limited or their niches will always differ in one or more features; otherwise, one species will out-compete the other, and the extinction of the second species will inevitably result.’



Figure 4.20 The growth of three species of paramecium in separate cultures and in mixed cultures. P. aurelia, P. caudatum and P. bursaria, three closely related ciliate protozoans, when grown in separate cultures, exhibited typical sigmoid population growth and maintained a constant population level in a culture medium that was maintained with a fixed density of food items. When two protozoans- P. aurelia and P. caudatum - were placed in the same culture, however, P. aurelia alone survived after 16 days. Neither organism attacked the other or secreted harmful substances; P. aurelia populations simply had a more rapid growth rate (higher intrinsic rate of increase) and thus ‘out-competed’ P. caudatum for the limited amount of food under the existing conditions (a clear case of exploitation competition). By contrast, when P. bursaria and P. caudatum (or P. aurelia) cultured together, neither went extinct. Adapted from Gause GF (1934), The Struggle for Existence.



The outcome of competition can vary with changes in the biotic and abiotic environments. An effect of environment on the outcome of competition was demonstrated by Park (1948, 1954). He found that competitive ability of species is greatly influenced by abiotic environment. He carried out a long series of laboratory experiments on two species of flour beetle, Tribolium confusum and Tribolium castaneum, and found that in mixed cultures which of the two species survived and which became extinct depending on the environmental conditions. When conditions were hot (34°C) and humid (70% relative humidity), T. confusum always went extinct. However, when conditions were cooler (24°C) and drier (30% relative humidity), T. castaneum always became extinct. However, the result was not always absolute. Under some environmental conditions, it could not always be predicted which species would go extinct. Sometimes one species survived, sometimes the other.



Figure 4.21 Competitive ability can be influenced by the abiotic environment. Biologist Thomas Park cultured two different species of flour beetles, Tribolium castaneum and Tribolium confusum, together at varied temperature and moisture. Results of competition between two flour beetles show that each species usually performs better in a given habitat; for example, T. confusum does better in dry conditions.





Competitive exclusion and coexistence


The species coexistence is rooted in the competitive exclusion principle, which states that two species competing for the same resource cannot coexist. The species that is better at gaining the limiting resource will eventually eliminate the inferior competitor. If a superior and an inferior competitor are placed into a habitat at initially equal abundance, the former will inevitably eliminate the latter. Differences between species in their competitive ability drive the superior to dominance and the inferior to exclusion. If complete competitors drive one another to local extinction, then how two very related species will coexist?

One answer to reduce interspecific competition between species and thus competitive exclusion of inferior species is the niche differentiation. For example, the niche differences of the two rodent species may include differences in the size of seeds consumed – one rodent tends to consume larger seeds and other smaller seeds. By niche differentiation two rodent species can reduce competition for food and coexist.





Resource partitioning


Niche differentiation may take a variety of forms, of which resource partitioning is most common. Because the degree of competition is assumed to depend upon the degree of niche overlap, hence, some species evolve to reduce niche overlap through resource partitioning.

The term ‘resource partitioning’ describes the niche differentiation, both in space and time that enables similar species to coexist in a community. It refers to the state of reduced overlap in resource use between coexisting species. By consuming slightly different forms of a limiting resource or using the same limiting resource at a different place, individuals of different species compete less with one another (interspecific competition). Through resource partitioning in temporal scale, species are also able to manage to coexist by using the same limiting resources at different times. The assumption is that competition among species that are active at different times would be less intense than if the same set of species attempted to use the same resource at the same time. Resource partitioning is often viewed as a product of the coevolution of characteristics that function to reduce competition. Thus, competing species can decrease competition for limiting resource

By using different resources



By using the same resources but in different places



By using the same resources but in different times





Figure 4.22 The process of competitive exclusion and resource partitioning (adapted from Friedland et al, Environmental science, WH Freeman and Company).



Adaptations of some insect-eating bird species to reduce competition by feeding in different portions of the same tree species and by feeding on different insect species is a well-studied example of resource partitioning and coexistence. Robert MacArthur (1958) examined coexistence between five species of warblers (all belonged to the genus Dendroica) feeding in spruce trees. Each warbler species prefers to feed at a different regions of the tree. He found that all species vary to some degree in how they capture resources, although there is some overlap in use. MacArthur divided the trees into different zones – vertical zones (one zone of 10 feet height) and horizontal zones – and recorded the feeding positions of the different warblers in each. He found that bird species occupied different zones vertically and horizontally in the tree and each probably fed on a different range of insects. In this way, by consuming insects from different regions of the same tree, individuals of different species compete less with one another (interspecific competition). MacArthur also recorded details of the warbler’s foraging habits and discovered that they differed too.



Figure 4.23 Resource partitioning and coexistence. Trees are showing the vertical and horizontal zones of foraging activity for each species of warbler. Among five species of warblers feeding in spruce trees, each warbler species prefers to feed at different zones of the tree. By resource partitioning, bird species reduce competition and increase coexistence.





Character displacement


If complete competitors drive one another to local extinction, how can closely related species coexist in the same habitat? Why do closely related species differ from each other phenotypically? How different do two species have to be to coexist? Answer of these questions present in the evolutionary phenomenon called character displacement. It is a phenomenon in which two species that live together in the same environment tend to diverge in those characteristics that overlap. As we know, interspecific competition reduces the fitness of competing individuals. Those individuals that compete less have higher fitness than individuals that compete more. Over a time scale long enough for natural selection to occur, populations of different species competing for the same resources develop morphological, behavioural or physiological adaptations through natural selection that allow them to reduce or avoid competition and increase fitness. The result of this natural selection is a shift in the distribution of those traits that overlap within the competing population(s). Such shift in morphological, behavioural or physiological characteristics of the species is referred to as character displacement.

The theory of character displacement was first explicitly developed by W. L. Brown and E. O. Wilson in 1956. The idea underlying this theory is quite simple: suppose two very similar species come into contact, if resources are limiting, the species are likely to compete strongly. One possible outcome is competitive exclusion: the superior competitor will triumph and the inferior one will become extinct. But an alternative possibility is that natural selection will favour, in each population, those individuals whose phenotype allows them to use resources not used by members of the other species. The result may be that the populations diverge in phenotype and resource use (hence the term ‘displacement’), thus reducing resource competition and permitting coexistence. The phenomenon of character displacement is observed over evolutionary time scale and does involve heritable change. In character displacement, competitor species can have evolutionary effects on each other that result in the divergence of resource-exploiting traits (ecological character displacement) or reproductive traits (reproductive character displacement). The ecological character displacement involves character displacement in traits associated with resource use e.g. morphological structures such as beaks and jaws; whereas reproductive character displacement involves character displacement in traits associated with reproduction e.g. sexual signals or female mate preferences.



Figure 4.24 The process of character displacement. A. Initially, two species encounter each other and overlap in phenotypes associated with resource use or reproduction (indicated here by the two overlapping bell-shaped curves). Character displacement arises when individuals most dissimilar from the average resource-use or reproductive phenotypes of another species are more successful at acquiring resources or reproduction than other members of their population. Consequently, B. the most divergent individuals should experience highest fitness and the two species should tend to evolve to be less like the other.



Hutchinson (1959) examined the sizes of mouthparts or other body parts important in feeding and compared their sizes between species when they were sympatric, which means occurring in the same geographic area, and allopatric, which means occurring in different geographic areas. Hutchinson’s hypothesis was that when species were sympatric, each species tended to specialize in different types of food. This was reflected by differences in the size of body parts associated with feeding, also called feeding characters. The tendency for two species to diverge in morphology and thus resource use because of competition is called ecological character displacement.

The best-known case of character displacement was reported in two species of Darwin’s finches G. fuliginosa and G. fortis. These two species from separate islands (i.e. allopatric), have beaks of intermediate depth (beak depth 9-11 mm in G. fuliginosa and 9-12 mm in G. fortis) and exploit a wider variety of seeds. There is no interspecific competition for common limiting resources. But these species occurring together (i.e. sympatric), have beaks of different depth. G. fuliginosa (7-9 mm) has a much narrower beak than G. fortis (10-16 mm). Differences in character in the sympatric condition is due to competition. The competition for common resources between these two species imposes directional selection on each species’ resource use and associated phenotypic characters, leading to a divergence between species in these traits and a reduction in competition.

Certain criteria should meet for any character displaying character displacement or not. We cannot say character displacement for any character differences in two different species living together. First, differences in character states should be related to differences in resource use and the change in character in sympatric conditions should be greater than expected by chance. Second, the resource distributions should be the same in sympatry and allopatry, i.e. the environment similar in both places. Apart from the above two criteria, resources should be limiting and there must be interspecific competition for resources. Finally, differences must have evolved in situ and heritable.



Figure 4.25 Character displacement in Darwin’s finches. These two species of finches (genus Geospiza) have beaks of similar size when allopatric, but different size when sympatric. The first two graphs show beak sizes in allopatric population of G. fuliginosa and G. fortis. The third graph shows beak sizes in sympatric population, where two species occur together. Due to character displacement individuals of the two species differ more if they are sampled from a place where both species are present i.e. sympatric than do individuals sampled from places where only one of the species is present i.e. allopatric (from Lack, 1947).





4.12 Ecological succession


Ecological succession is a universal process of natural change in the community structure (species composition and species abundance) on an ecological time scale i.e. temporal change in the community’s structure (specifically, changes in species dominance). Ecological communities consist of living organisms; hence, they are not static entities. They are dynamic and undergo continuous structural and functional changes. An important characteristic of all communities is that their structure constantly changes in response to the changing environmental conditions. The nature of change is parallel with the changes in the physical environment. Hence, most ecological succession displays a gradual and fairly predictable change in the community structure in a given area. These changes finally lead to a community that is in near equilibrium with the environment and that is called a climax community. Climax community marks the endpoint of succession. The whole sequence of communities that replace one another in the successional process is termed sere (from the word series). It is the series of successional stages at a particular site advancing towards its climax community. The temporary successional community in a sere is called seral stages. The initial seral stage is termed the pioneer stage and its community as the pioneer community. In many cases more than one seral stage evolves until a climax community (final endpoint of the succession) is attained. Each seral stage is a snapshot of a continuum that is changing over time, but each has its characteristic species composition. Eventually, succession slows as the community reaches a steady equilibrium with the environment i.e. climax stage.



The ecological succession can be broadly classified into two kinds on the basis of the nature of habitat from which primary succession starts – hydrarch and xerarch. Succession initiated with the establishment of pioneer communities in an aquatic body is termed hydrarch succession. The series of aquatic communities appears in aquatic bodies leading to climax community is termed hydrosere. Succession initiated with the establishment of pioneer communities in dry land and on the rock is termed xerarch succession and the whole sequence of communities that replace one another leading to climax community are called xerosere. Two common situations in xerosere are lithosere (development of communities on fresh rock surface) and psammosere (development of communities on sand).





Pattern of succession


Ecological succession may be viewed as the development of a community from its inception (the ‘pioneer’ stage), through a series of recognizable intermediate seral stages, each almost equivalent to a community in its own right, to a climax. It is regarded as a process resulting in the greater stability of the community, and the climax community is considered the most stable community that can exist in that particular environment. While ecologists today recognize that successional processes are less predictable than those proposed by Clements in the 1920s, several of his predicted patterns are generally considered to hold true for successional process. Eugene Odum, an ecosystem ecologist, described several predictable differences between early and late-successional stages. For example, during succession, the early-successional species (often referred to as pioneer species) are usually characterized by high growth rates, smaller size, high degree of dispersal, and high rates of per capita population growth. In contrast, the late-successional species generally have lower rates of dispersal and colonization, slower per capita growth rates, and they are larger and longer-lived. Similarly, Fakhri Bazzaz characterized early and late successional systems based on the physiology of plants associated with these stages. Early successional plants tend to have high rates of photosynthesis and respiration, high rates of resource uptake and high light compensation points, whereas late-successional plants often have opposite characteristics. In the table 4.5, we have described the trends of changes during the early and late stages of succession with respect to community structure, life history, nutrient cycling, selection pressure, overall homeostasis and community energetics.

Table 4.5 Trends of changes in early and late-successional stages





If a nutrient cycle is closed, nutrients are returned to a nutrient pool and tightly recycled within a system.



During succession, the maturation and development of communities have been characterized by Eugene Odum (1969) as a ‘strategy’ of increased control of the physical environment that provides maximum protection from environmental perturbations. The four major structural and functional attributes of ecological succession (increase in species diversity, increase in structural complexity, increase in organic matter, and tendency toward metabolic stability) are, in a sense, both causes and effects of the very processes of change and the eventual stability that generally characterize ecosystems.





Species diversity and succession


The processes of species colonization and replacement drive succession. During the successional process, in addition to shifts in species dominance, species diversity also changes. Colonization by new species increases species richness. Species replacement typically results from competition or an inability of a species to tolerate existing environmental conditions. Species replacement over time acts to decrease species richness. Although higher species diversity occurs in late-successional stages but during the successional process, it fluctuates. Peaks in diversity tend to occur during succession stages that correspond to the transition period.

There is also a relationship between the frequency of disturbance and species richness during the process of succession. If the frequency of disturbance is high, then later successional species will never have the opportunity to colonize the site. Under this scenario, diversity will remain low. When a disturbance is absent or low, later successional species will displace earlier ones and species diversity will decline. At an intermediate frequency of disturbance, colonization occurs and competitive exclusion will be low. Hence, all species will coexist, and diversity will be maximum.





Types of ecological succession


Primary and secondary succession


Succession occurring in new habitats developed by the processes like volcanism and glaciation, where no community existed before is called primary succession. In primary succession, the previously unoccupied habitat is first colonized by a few pioneer species which are often microbes, lichens and mosses. It requires species to colonize the area from outside. Soil develops gradually as rocks weather and organic matter accumulates from the decomposed remains of the early colonizers. Pioneers that initiate primary succession must be able to establish and grow on substrates that are nutrient poor and that often have unfavorable moisture conditions. The most extreme sites are exposed unweathered rock surfaces. Here, colonization may be limited to cyanobacteria, lichens and bryophytes, with no further vegetation development. Sites richer in mineral nutrients, which may contain some residual organic soil, such as the depositional zones of glacial moraines, are often colonized by herbaceous species and grasses with faster growth rates. Primary succession proceeds slowly because early colonists often must transform the environment before other species can become established.

Secondary succession occurs at a site from where an already developed community has been destroyed by some natural disturbance such as fire or flooding; or by human activity and a series of communities subsequently develop at the site. Disturbance starts, directs and may stop or redirect succession. It is characterized by its frequency, extent and magnitude. In this case, disturbance is defined as any process that results in the removal (either partial or complete) of the existing vegetation (community).

Hence, secondary succession is the development of biotic communities after the complete or partial destruction of the existing community. For example, the forests destroyed by fire and excessive lumbering may be reoccupied by herbs in the initial stages. The reappearance and establishment of communities in such areas is secondary succession. Primary and secondary succession are not always clearly distinguishable. There are numerous examples that are difficult to categorize as either primary or secondary succession. For example, volcanic lava clearly buries soil and biota, but the effect of volcanic eruption depends on the depth of deposition following the eruption.

The secondary succession starts on a well-developed soil already formed at the site. Hence this form of succession is relatively faster as compared to primary succession which may often require hundreds of years. Secondary succession is more common type of succession as compared to primary succession.

Some successional processes may differ from primary and secondary succession. Although ecological succession is linear in most cases extending from pioneer to climax stage. However, some succession do not exhibit linear progression, instead have a cyclic pattern. Cyclic succession means that community goes through several seral stages, is disturbed by some disturbance and starts over again. The community is set back to the early successional stage by some naturally reoccurring events or forces, so that the community never reaches the climax stage for that physical environment.





Autogenic and allogenic succession


The changes in environmental conditions that bring about temporal change in community structures are varied. They can, however, be grouped into two general classes: allogenic and autogenic.

Autogenic (self-generated) succession is self-driven, resulting from the interaction between organisms and their environment. In this case, environmental change responsible for successional changes is a direct result of the presence and activities of organisms within the community.

Allogenic (externally generated) succession occurs as a result of the changes brought about in the community by external agencies such as storms and fire and not by the internal interactions within existing community itself.





Autotrophic and heterotrophic succession


The succession where initially the photoautotrophs are much greater in quantity than the heterotrophs, is known as autotrophic succession i.e. succession begins with P > R. Such a succession takes place in a medium rich in inorganic substances. In heterotrophic succession, the heterotrophs, like animals and fungi are present in greater quantity in the initial stages i.e. succession begins with P < R. It begins, prominently in an organic environment, and there is a progressive decline in the energy content.





Progressive and retrogressive succession


The kind of succession that takes place from simple and few forms to complex and several kinds of forms are known as progressive succession. A change from grassland community to forest community is an example of progressive succession. In some cases, the reverse situation is seen, that is called retrogressive. In retrogressive succession, the community becomes simplistic and contains fewer species and less biomass over time. For example, a forest changing into a grassland community is an example of retrogressive succession.





Mechanism of succession


According to Clements, succession is a process involving several steps. These steps or processes are: nudation, invasion or migration, ecesis, aggregation, competition, reaction and stabilization – climax.

Nudation

Succession begins with the development of a bare area without any form of life.

Invasion or migration

Many species invade or reach a new site from any other area. The seeds, spores or other propagules of the plant-species reach the bare area. This process is known as migration, and is generally brought about by air, water and various other agents.

Ecesis

After reaching the new area, the process of successful establishment of the species as a result of adjustment with the conditions prevailing there is known as ecesis. Ecesis is considered to be complete, if the plant is able to sexually reproduce in that particular area.

Aggregation

After successful establishment of a species as a result of reproduction, the individuals of the species increase in number. So, as compared to earlier stages, there are a larger number of individuals of a species that have aggregated in the given area.

Competition

The aggregation of individuals in an area leads to interspecific and intraspecific competition. The competition is usually for water, particularly when there is a shortage of water; nutrients, particularly when they are in short supply; radiant energy, if one plant grows in the shade of another plant; carbon dioxide; oxygen and space.

Reaction

The mechanism of modification of the environment, through the influence of living organisms on it is known as a reaction. As a result of the reaction, changes take place in soil, water, light conditions, temperature and many other factors of the environment. The environment thus gets modified, and becomes unsuitable for the existing community, and is eventually replaced by another community. The old occupants are ousted and fresh migrants establish themselves.

Stabilization—Climax

The whole process of succession results in stabilization of the vegetation which is now in complete harmony (i.e. steady state) with the environment of that place. And it is likely to persist as long as the climatic and physiographic conditions remain unchanged. The soil is fully occupied by plants and the community is closed. This final community is not replaced and is known as climax community and the stage as climax stage.





Concept of climax community


Succession continues until the addition of new species to the sere and the exclusion of established species no longer change in a community. When no other combination of species is successful in replacing it then it is termed as a climax community. It is one that is self-perpetuating for relatively long periods and one in which the dynamic changes not only occur but are necessary for the maintenance of the community. A climax community is supposed to remain unchanged with time. It is the most stable and conservational ecological community.

It was Clements who used the term climax to describe the idealized endpoint of succession. The climax community is in equilibrium with its environment and represents a steady-state of community structure and function. Three major theories have been proposed to define, identify and interpret the climax communities. These theories are monoclimax theory, polyclimax theory and climax pattern theory.

The monoclimax theory (or climatic climax theory) was proposed by Frederic Clements. This theory recognizes only one climax, determined solely by climate, no matter how great the variety of environmental conditions is at the start. Each climax is a direct expression of its climate: the climate is the cause; the climax is the effect, which in turn reacts upon the climate. Clements’s idea that a region had only one true climax forced ecologists to recognize a variety of more or less stable communities but different from regional climatic climax by giving name like:

Preclimax: In certain areas different climax communities develop under similar climatic conditions. If the community has life forms lower than those in the expected climatic climax, it is called preclimax.

Postclimax: A community that has life forms higher than those in the expected climatic climax.

Subclimax: The stage in succession just preceding the climatic climax is subclimax.

Disclimax: When a stable community, which is not the climatic climax for the given site, is maintained by man or his domestic animals, it is designated as disclimax (disturbance climax).

The polyclimax theory was proposed by Arthur G. Tansley. The theory considers that the climax community of a region consists of not just one type, but a mosaic of climaxes controlled by several factors such as climate, soil conditions, topography, fire and animal activity. Thus, a single climatic area could easily contain a number of climax communities. Tansley recognized following climax types:

Climatic (regional) climax: A climax which is determined by the general climate of the region.

Edaphic (local) climax: A climax which is determined by the soil properties (such as soil moisture, soil nutrients) and topography of the region.

Fire climax: A climax which is resulted from repeated fire.

R.H. Whittaker (1953) proposed a variation of the polyclimax idea, the climax pattern theory. This conceives a continuity of climax types, varying gradually along environmental gradients and not necessarily separable into discrete climaxes. This emphasises that a natural community is adapted to the whole pattern of environmental factors in which it exists. In addition to climatic factors, e.g. wind, there are a whole range of edaphic factors, fire, and biotic factors, including grazing, disease and mutualistic and competitive interactions. Whereas the monoclimax theory allows one climatic climax in a region and the polyclimax theory allows several climaxes in the same area, the climax pattern hypothesis allows a continuity of climax types, varying gradually along environmental gradients and not neatly packaged into discrete climax types.





Models of succession


J. H. Connell and R. O. Slayter (1977) outlined three different models to explain the ecological processes of community change during succession. These models are facilitation model, tolerance model and inhibition model.

Facilitation model

The classical model that explains the mechanisms of succession is the facilitation model. According to this model, certain pioneer species with qualities ideal for early succession colonize the newly exposed landforms after an ecological disturbance. These initial species modify the site, making it more suitable for invasion by other species, for example, by carrying out the earliest stages of soil development. Once established, the later-successional species eliminate the pioneers through competition. This ecological dynamic proceeds through a progression of stages in which earlier species are eliminated by later species, until the climax stage is reached. This model seems to be the most appropriate in explaining changes in many primary successions, but less so for secondary successions.



Figure 4.26 Facilitation model. It is based on the assumption that species of a previous stage are replaced by the succeeding stage. At each stage, the species modify their own environment to make it progressively less suitable for themselves and increasingly more suitable for succeeding species. (‘+’ indicates facilitation and circular arrow indicates that the species replaces itself). A, B, C and D represent four species.



Tolerance model

According to tolerance model, new pioneer species neither inhibit nor facilitate the growth and success of other species i.e. a species invades a new habitat and becomes established independently of the presence or absence of other species. All species in the succession are capable of establishing on a newly disturbed site, although with varying successes in terms of the rapid attainment of a large population size and biomass. In contrast with the facilitation model, the early occupants of the site do not change environmental conditions in ways that favour the subsequent invasion of later-successional species. Rather, with increasing time, the various species sort themselves out through their differing tolerances of the successionally increasing intensity of biological stresses associated with competition.



Figure 4.27 Tolerance model. In this model, the presence of early successional species is not essential, that is, any species can start succession. Some species are competitively superior and they eventually predominate in the climax community. Species that are more tolerant of limited resources, replace the other species. Succession proceeds either by the invasion of later species or by a thinning out of the initial colonists, depending on the starting conditions. In the figure, the capital letters A-D represent dominant species and circular arrow indicates that the species replaces itself.



In the tolerance model, competition-intolerant species are relatively successful in early successional stages when site conditions are characterized by a free availability of resources. However, these species are eliminated later on because they are not as competitive as later species, which eventually develop a climax community.

Inhibition model

A third suggested mechanism of succession is the inhibition model, in which the pioneer species resist invasion and remain until they are replaced because of competition, predation or disturbance. As with the tolerance model, both early and later-successional species can establish populations soon after disturbance. However, some early species make the site less suitable for the development of other species. For example, some plants are known to secrete toxic biochemical into the soil (these are called allelochemicals), which inhibits the establishment and growth of other species. Eventually, however, the inhibitory species die, and this creates opportunities that later-successional species can exploit. This succession model depends on who arrives first and successional pattern is not orderly. These gradual changes eventually culminate in the development of the climax community.



Figure 4.28 Inhibition model. According to this model, succession is very heterogeneous because the development at any one site depends on who establishes there first. Species replacement is not necessarily orderly because each species tries to exclude or suppress any new colonists. Inhibition is the opposite of facilitation - it explains the loss of species as the community changes. Inhibition can lead to communities that become resistant to invasion. In the figure, the capital letters A-D represent dominant species. In this model, all replacements are possible and much depends on who establishes there first.



All three of these models – facilitation, tolerance and inhibition – can be supported by selected evidence from many ecological studies. Although these models differ significantly in their predictions about the organizing principles of successional dynamics, it appears that none of them is correct all of the time.





References


Agrawal AA (1998), Induced responses to herbivory and increased plant performance. Science, 279, 1201–1202.

Begon M, Townsend CR and Harper JL (2006), Ecology, From individuals to ecosystems, 4th ed. Blackwell Publishing.

Bonan GB (2008), Ecological Climatology: Concept and Applications, 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press.

Brady NC and Weil RR (2002), The Nature and Properties of Soils, 13th ed. Pearson Education, Inc.

Brown JKM and Tellier A (2011), Plant-parasite coevolution: Bridging the gap between genetics and ecology. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 49, 345–367.

Brown WL and Wilson EO (1956), Character displacement. Systematic Zoology, 5:49–64.

Bruno JF, Stachowicz JJ and Bertness MD (2003), Inclusion of facilitation into ecological theory. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 18, 119-125.

Chapman JL and Reiss MJ (2010), Ecology, Principles and Applications, 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press.

Chesson P (2000), Mechanisms of maintenance of species diversity. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 31, 343–366.

Clements FE (1936), Nature and structure of the climax. Journal of Ecology, 24, 252-84.

Connell JH and Slayter RO (1977), Mechanisms of Succession in Natural Communities and Their Role in Community Stability and Organization, American Naturalist, Vol. 111, No. 982, 1977, pp. 1119-1144.

Cory JS and Myers JH (2000), Direct and indirect ecological effects of biological control. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 15, 137–139.

Courchamp F, Berec L and Gascoigne J (2008), Allee Effects in Ecology and Conservation. Oxford University Press. Oxford, UK.

Dawkins R and Krebs JR (1979), Arms races between and within species, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B,205,489–511.

Ehrlich PR and Raven PH (1964), Butterflies and plants: a study in coevolution. Evolution, 18: 586–608.

Finke DL and Snyder WE (2008), Niche partitioning increases resource exploitation by diverse communities. Science, 321: 1488–1490.

Freeland JR, Kirk H and Petersen SD (2011), Molecular Ecology, 2nd ed. Wiley-Blackwell.

Friedland et al. (2012), Environmental Science. W. H. Freeman and Company.

Gause GF (1934), The Struggle for Existence. Williams and Wilkins Company, Baltimore.

Gilg O et al. (2003), Cyclic dynamics in a simple vertebrate predator-prey community. Science 302, 866–868.

Gliessman SR (2008), Agroecology: The Ecology of Sustainable Food Systems, 3rd ed. CRC Press.

Gopal B and Goel U (1993), Competition and allelopathy in aquatic plant communities. Botanical Review, 59:155-210.

Gotelli NJ and Colwell RK (2001), Quantifying biodiversity: Procedures and pitfalls in the measurement and comparison of species richness. Ecology Letters 4, 379–391.

Grant PR and Grant BR (2006), Evolution of character displacement in Darwin’s finches. Science, 313: 224–226.

Hairston NG, Smith FK and Slobodkin LB (1960), Community structure, population control and competition. American Naturalist, 94:421-425

Hardin GJ (1960), The competitive exclusion principle. Science, 131:1292-1297.

Holland JN and DeAngelis DL (2009), Consumer-resource theory predicts dynamic transitions between outcomes of interspecific interactions. Ecology Letters, 12, 1357–1366.

Holling CS (1973), Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 4:1-23.

Horn HS (1974), The ecology of secondary succession. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 5, 25-37.

Janzen DH (1976), Why bamboos wait so long to flower. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 7, 347–391.

Kormondy EJ (1996), Concepts of Ecology, 4th ed. W.H. Prentice-Hall.

Lack D (1947), Darwin’s Finches. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Levine JM and HilleRisLambers J (2009), The importance of niches for the maintenance of species diversity. Nature, 461, 254–257.

MacArthur RH and Wilson EO (1963), An equilibrium theory of insular zoogeography. Evolution, 17:373-387.

MacArthur RH and Wilson EO (2001), The Theory of Island Biogeography. Princeton University Press.

May R (1972), Will a large complex system be stable? Nature, 238, 413–414.

McNaughton SJ (1978), Stability and diversity of ecological communities. Nature, 274, 251–253.

Menge BA and Sutherland JP (1987), Community regulation: variation in disturbance, competition and predation in relation to environmental stress and recruitment. American Naturalist, 130, 730–757.

Miller GT and Spoolman SE (2009), Essentials of Ecology, 5th ed. Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning.

Miller GT Jr. (1988), Environmental Science, 2nd ed. Wadsworth, Belmont.

Naeem et al. (2002), Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning – Synthesis and Perspectives, Oxford University Press.

Odum EP (1969), The strategy of ecosystem development, Science, 164, 262-270.

Odum EP and Barrett GW (2004), Fundamentals of Ecology, 5th ed. Cengage Learning.

Paine RT (1966), Food web complexity and species diversity. American Naturalist, 100, 65–75.

Pianka ER (1970), r- and K-selection. American Naturalist, 102: 592–597.

Ranta E, Lundberg P and Kaitala V (2006), Ecology of Populations, Cambridge University Press.

Ricklefs RE (1990), Ecology, 3rd ed. W.H. Freeman and Company, New York.

Root RB (1967), The Niche Exploitation Pattern of the Blue-Gray Gnatcatcher. Ecological Monographs, 37, 317-350.

Sakai AK, Allendorf FW et al. (2001), The population biology of invasive species. Annual Review, 32, 305-332.

Tilman D and Downing JA (1994), Biodiversity and stability in grasslands. Nature, 367:363-365.

Tilman GD (1985), The resource-ratio hypothesis of succession. American Naturalist, 125, 827.

Valen LV (1976), Ecological Species, Multispecies and Oaks. Taxon, 25 (2/3):233-239

Vallero DA (2014), Fundamentals of Air Pollution, 4th ed. Academic Press.

Van VL (1965), Morphological variation and Width of ecological niche. American Naturalist, 99:377-390.

Weathers KC, Strayer DL and Likens GE (2013), Fundamentals of Ecosystem Science, Academic Press.

Whittaker RH (1972), Evolution and measurement of species diversity. Taxon, 21:213251.u





Chapter 5


Biodiversity


Biodiversity, short for biological diversity, refers to the sum total of all the variety and variability of life in a defined area. In contrast to the more specific term species diversity, the term biodiversity was coined to emphasize the many complex kinds of variations that exist within and among organisms at different levels of the organization. It refers to the totality of genes, species and ecosystems of a region. United Nations Earth Summit defined biological diversity as:

‘Biological diversity means the variability among living organisms from all sources including, inter alia (among other things), terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are a part; this includes diversity within species, between species and of ecosystems.’

Convention on Biological Diversity, 1992





5.1 Levels of biodiversity


Biodiversity includes three hierarchical levels: Genetic, species and ecosystem diversity.

Genetic diversity

Genetic diversity refers to the variation in the genetic composition of individuals within or among species. Genetic diversity enables populations to adapt to their environments and respond to natural selection. The extent of genetic variation serves as the raw material for speciation. Genetic diversity can be observed at multiple levels of biological organization, including kingdoms, phyla, families, as well as among species and within species. The most significant genetic diversity is typically observed between organisms from different kingdoms (e.g., plants versus animals), between phyla (e.g., arthropods versus chordates), between classes (e.g., birds versus reptiles), and so on.

Species diversity

According to the biological species concept, species are groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations that are reproductively isolated from other such groups. Hence, species diversity refers to the variety of species within a region, i.e., species richness. However, in the broader sense, species diversity includes not only species richness but also species evenness.

Taxonomic (or phylogenetic) diversity can also be considered a part of species diversity. Taxonomic diversity describes the genetic relationship between different groups of species. A more taxonomically diverse community is therefore considered genetically more diverse compared to the less taxonomically diverse community.

Ecosystem diversity

Ecosystems include not only all the species within them but also the abiotic factors that are characteristic of those ecosystems. For instance, in a desert ecosystem, factors like soil type, temperature range, rainfall patterns, and solar radiation shape not only the species that inhabit it, but also influence their physical characteristics, behaviours, and interactions. Ecosystem diversity is a fundamental aspect of biodiversity that describes the habitat diversity, the number of niches, and trophic levels within an ecosystem. All of these features collectively contribute to the overall species diversity within an ecosystem. Ecosystems that exhibit high levels of diversity in these aspects tend to support a greater variety of species. This is because a wide range of habitats, niches, and trophic levels can accommodate a larger number of species, each adapted to different conditions.





5.2 Gradients and Magnitude of biodiversity


Gradients of biodiversity


Biodiversity varies with changes in latitude or altitude. As we move from the poles to the equator, the biodiversity increases, and vice versa. The increase in species richness or biodiversity that occurs from the poles to the tropics often referred to as the latitudinal gradient in species diversity, is one of the most widely recognized patterns in ecology.

In general, species diversity decreases as we move away from the equator towards the poles. With very few exceptions, tropics (latitudinal range of 23.5° N to 23.5° S) harbour more species than temperate or polar areas. For example, Colombia located near the equator has nearly 1,400 species of birds while New York at 41° N has about 105 species and Greenland at 71° N only about 56 species. India, with much of its land area in the tropical latitudes, has more than 1,200 species of birds. The tropical Amazon rainforest in South America has the greatest biodiversity on the Earth – it is home to more than 40,000 species of plants.

Several hypothesis has been proposed to explain the latitudinal gradients of species richness. Among them, the following hypotheses are predominantly addressed.

Climatic hypothesis: This hypothesis states that the climate is responsible for latitudinal gradient in biodiversity. Two reasons are mainly considered in this hypothesis. 1. Few species may able to physiologically tolerate conditions at higher latitudes. 2. Lesser climate stability at higher latitudes may increase the extinction rate.

Evolutionary history hypothesis: Tropical communities are generally older than temperate or polar communities. Over the course of evolutionary time, species diversity may increase in a tropical community as more speciation events occur. It has been calculated that speciation has occurred about five times more in the tropics as near the poles.



Species-energy hypothesis: This hypothesis suggests that the amount of available energy limits the richness of the system. Thus, increased solar energy at low latitudes causes increased net primary productivity. The higher the net primary productivity the more individuals can be supported, and the more species there will be in an area.

Biotic hypotheses: According to this hypothesis ecological species interactions such as competition, predation, mutualism, and parasitism are stronger in the tropics and these interactions promote species coexistence and specialization of species, leading to greater speciation in the tropics.

Just like latitudinal variation, altitudinal variation also causes changes in the biodiversity. A decrease in species diversity occurs from lower to higher altitudes on a mountain. A 1000 m increase in altitude results in a temperature drop of about 6.5°C.The drop in temperature and greater seasonal variability at higher altitudes are major factors that contribute to the reduction in biodiversity.





Magnitude of biodiversity


Our planet exhibits remarkable diversity of life. However, determining the exact number of species on Earth is a challenging task. According to the IUCN in 2004, approximately 1.5 million plant and animal species have been described. However, this represents only a fraction of the total number of species that likely exist on our planet. There are varying estimates regarding the total number of species, with some extreme estimates ranging from 20 to 50 million. A more conservative estimate, proposed by biologist Robert May, suggests that global species diversity is around 7 million. It’s important to note that these estimates do not include prokaryotic species, as their numbers and diversity are still not fully understood by biologists. The known species are not evenly distributed among taxonomic groups. Animals account for over 70 percent of the described species, while plants (including algae and fungi) make up around 22 percent. Among animals, insects are the most diverse taxonomic group, comprising more than 70 percent of the total number of species. In other words, for every 10 animals on Earth, approximately 7 of them are insects.

Table 5.1 Approximate numbers of named species on the Earth





Now, a fundamental question arises: what are the reasons behind the extraordinary biodiversity found on Earth? The great biodiversity on Earth can be attributed to a combination of factors. One of the main factors is the long history of evolution and speciation, where diverse life forms have emerged and adapted to various habitats and environmental conditions over millions of years. Another significant factor is the presence of varied ecosystems throughout the planet. Each ecosystem possesses its own distinct conditions and niches, providing opportunities for a wide range of species to coexist and thrive. Other factors contributing to biodiversity include geographical factors, climate patterns, ecological interactions, and genetic variations within species.





Biodiversity of India


India is a megadiversity nation. A megadiverse nation is one that harbors the majority of the Earth’s species and is therefore considered extremely biodiverse. To qualify as a megadiverse country, a country must:

Have at least 5000 of the world’s plants as endemics.



Have marine ecosystems within its borders.





The principle criterion to be a megadiverse country is endemism. Till now, 17 countries have been identified as the megadiverse countries of the world, with a particular focus on endemic biodiversity. The identified megadiverse countries are: United States of America, Mexico, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela, Brazil, Democratic Republic of Congo, South Africa, Madagascar, India, Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines, Papua New Guinea, China and Australia.

India constitutes only 2.4% of the world’s land area but having 11% of flora and 6.5% of the fauna of the world. India contains 172, or 2.9%, of IUCN-designated threatened species. India has 350 species of mammals, 1,200 species of birds, 453 species of reptiles (fifth in the world) and 45,000 plant species, of which most are angiosperms. It is estimated that 18% of Indian plants are endemic to the country. Four of 36 globally identified biodiversity hotspots: The Himalayas, the Western Ghats, the Indo-Burma, and the Sundaland, are present in India.





5.3 Uses of biodiversity


At the ecosystem level, biodiversity provides the conditions to drive the processes that sustain the global economy – and our survival as a species. The benefits and services provided by ecosystems include:

Ecosystem services

Biodiversity is essential for the maintenance of ecosystem services and their sustainable utilization. These services include maintenance of gaseous composition of the atmosphere, climate control by forests and oceanic systems, natural pest control, pollination of plants by insects and birds, formation and protection of soil, conservation and purification of water and nutrient cycling etc.

Prevention and mitigation of natural disasters

Forests and grasslands protect landscapes against erosion, nutrient loss, and landslides through the binding action of roots. Ecosystems bordering regularly flooding rivers (floodplain forests and wetlands) help to absorb excess water and thus, reduce the damage caused by floods.

Source of economically important products

Food: About 150 crops feed most of the human population at present, but just 12 of them provide about 80% of food energy (with wheat, rice, maize and potato alone providing about 60%). Also, about 30 mammalian and bird species are used extensively, but just 15 of them account for over 90 percent of global livestock production. Biodiversity increases the range of food products suitable for human consumption. Wild biodiversity provides a wide variety of important foodstuffs, including fruits, meats, nuts, mushrooms, honey, spices and flavourings. These wild foods are especially important when agricultural supplies fail. Indeed, wild biodiversity guards against the failure of even the most advanced agricultural systems. For example, the productivity of many of the developed world’s agricultural crops is maintained through the regular assimilation of new genes from wild relatives of these crops. These wild genes offer resistance to the pests and diseases that pose an ever-evolving threat to harvests.

Medicines: Biodiversity is also a rich source of substances with therapeutic properties like morphine (used as an analgesic), quinine (used for the treatment of malaria) and taxol (an anticancer drug). A significant proportion of drugs are derived, directly or indirectly, from biological sources. Moreover, only a small proportion of the total diversity of organisms has been thoroughly investigated for potential sources of new drugs.

Industrial materials: A wide range of industrial materials are derived directly from biological resources. These include building materials, fibers, dyes, resins, gums, adhesives, rubber and oil. There is enormous potential of obtaining economically important materials from a wider diversity of organisms.

Aesthetic and cultural benefits

Biodiversity has also great aesthetic value. Aesthetic aspects include ecotourism, bird–watching, wildlife, pet keeping, gardening etc. The beauty of nature is something many people are enthralled by. There is something within the natural environment which people really connect to, and gives them an immense sense of satisfaction when they experience nature. For some, there are cultural or spiritual meanings attached to the landscape, whereas for others it is simply the aesthetic quality of the natural environment which they enjoy so much.





Consequences of biodiversity loss


There is considerable evidence that contemporary biodiversity decline will lead to subsequent decline in the functioning and stability of ecosystem. Biodiversity experiments have tested whether biodiversity declines will influence ecosystem functioning or stability by manipulating some components of biodiversity, such as the number of species, and measuring various types of ecosystem functioning or stability. These studies have been conducted in lab, grassland, forest, marine and freshwater ecosystems. From these studies, it is clear that ecosystem functioning often depends on species richness, species composition and also on species evenness and genetic diversity. Furthermore, stability often depends on species richness and species composition. Thus, contemporary changes in biodiversity will most likely lead to subsequent changes in ecosystem properties. Further investigation at large spatio-temporal scales in managed ecosystems is needed to improve our understanding of the consequences of biodiversity declines.





5.4 Threats to biodiversity


The most obvious manifestation of biodiversity loss is the extinction of species. Although this is a natural phenomenon, as species have been going extinct since life began, what’s concerning is the current rate at which species are dying out. Since the total number of species on Earth can only be estimated, determining the exact rate of current species loss is difficult. Working from the conservative estimate that the Earth is home to 10 million species in total, it is estimated that between 0.2 and 0.6 percent of species are being lost every year. This rate is at least 10,000 times greater than the ‘background’ or natural rate of species extinction, as estimated using the fossil record. The main causes of biodiversity loss are considered under the following headings:

Habitat loss and fragmentation

‘ Habitat’ means the place or type of site where an organism or population naturally occurs. When a natural habitat, such as a forest or wetland, is altered so dramatically that it no longer supports the species it originally sustained. Plant and animal populations are destroyed or displaced, leading to a loss of biodiversity. It is called habitat loss (or habitat destruction). Habitat destruction is different from habitat degradation. According to IUCN, a decline in species-specific habitat quality that leads to reduced survival and/or reproductive success in a population is called ‘habitat degradation’. Habitat fragmentation is the ‘breaking apart’ of continuous habitat into distinct pieces. The loss of habitats is the primary reason for the loss of biodiversity. When people cut down trees, fill a wetland, plough grassland or burn a forest, the natural habitat of a species is changed or destroyed. These changes can kill or force out many plants, animals and microorganisms as well as disrupt complex interactions among the species. With the fragmentation of a large forest tract, species occupying deeper parts of forest are the first to disappear.

Introduction of invasive species

An invasive species, also referred to as introduced, exotic, or non-native species, can be any kind of living organism that is not native to an ecosystem and which has a tendency to change the structure and function of the ecosystem. These species grow and reproduce quickly, and spread aggressively, with potential to cause harm. Invasive species are capable of causing extinctions of native plants and animals by competing with them for limited resources and altering habitats. Thus, leading to loss of biodiversity.

The sudden introduction of invasive species to a given ecosystem (especially on islands and in freshwater habitats) causes disastrous consequences for native species. Such introductions are usually the result of human activities. The accidental introduction of an Atlantic comb jellyfish species to the Black Sea is a well-known example. These invaders have out-competed native fauna, and now comprise some 95 percent of the Black Sea’s total biomass. Another notable example is the Nile perch (a large freshwater fish) introduced into Lake Victoria in East Africa. As a voracious predator, the Nile perch rapidly proliferated and began preying on the lake’s native fish species, particularly the cichlid fish that were unique to Lake Victoria. The population explosion of Nile perch caused a significant decline in the native fish populations, leading to the extinction of numerous cichlid species.

Native species

A species or lower taxon living within its natural range (past or present) including the area which it can reach and occupy using its natural dispersal systems. Alternatively we can say, species that live in their historical range, typically where they have lived for thousands or millions of years.



Indigenous species is equivalent to native species.



Endemic species

Any species whose range is restricted to a limited geographical area.



In India, you might be also familiar with the environmental damage and threat posed to our native species by invasive weed species such as carrot grass (Parthenium hysterophorus, native to the Central and South America), Lantana (Lantana camara, native to Central and South America), and water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes, native to South America).

Overexploitation

The term overexploitation refers to the human activities connected with excessive capturing and harvesting (hunting, fishing, farming) of organisms. According to IUCN, it is an exploitation of (removal of individuals or biomass from) a natural population at a rate greater than the population is able to match with its own recruitment, thus tending to drive the population towards extinction. Overexploitation of a particular species reduces the size of its population to the extent that it becomes vulnerable to extinction. Many species extinctions in the last 500 years, such as the Steller’s sea cow and the passenger pigeon, were caused by overexploitation by humans. The decline of the Earth’s largest terrestrial animal, the African elephant, is a classic example of the impact of overhunting. Largely because of the trade in ivory, elephant populations have been declining in most of Africa. Overexploitation can also result from incidental exploitation (catching species accidentally while harvesting other target species).

Climate change and pollution

The link between climate change and biodiversity has long been established. Although throughout Earth’s history the climate has always changed but rapid climate change due to man made activities affect species ability to adapt and so biodiversity loss increases. In addition to global warming, more frequent extreme weather and changing patterns of rainfall and drought have significant impacts on biodiversity. Some species may benefit from rapid climate change but most species will not find it as beneficial as they will not be able to adapt.





Box 5.1 Biological invasion




Biological invasion is a natural phenomenon. It refers to the colonization of new areas by invasive species. Species living outside their historical range and affect the structure and function of the introduced area are called invasive species. Several terms have been used in the scientific literature to name these species – introduced, non-indigenous, non-native, exotic, immigrant and alien species.

Multiple factors contribute to biological invasions. It primarily depends on the invader’s attributes, biotic characteristics and environmental conditions of the introduced site. Invader’s attributes include specific life-history traits such as rapid growth rate, high reproductive capacity, high competitiveness, high dispersal ability, phenotypic plasticity and ability to survive on various food types and in a wide range of environmental conditions.

All ecosystems are not equally vulnerable to biological invasion. Apart from the invader’s attributes, the introduced site’s biotic characteristics and environmental conditions play a significant role. To explain the differences in vulnerability to biological invasion in different types of ecosystems, several hypotheses (more than 30) have been proposed. Among them, the following hypotheses are predominantly addressed.

Biotic resistance hypothesis: According to this hypothesis, ecosystems will have greater resistance to invasion with high native species richness compared to ecosystems with low richness. It is a special formulation of the diversity-stability hypothesis (Elton, 1958), according to which ecosystems with high biodiversity are more stable than ecosystems with low biodiversity. The biotic resistance hypothesis (or diversity-invasibility hypothesis) predicts a negative correlation between native species diversity and invasibility. Several theoretical, experimental and observational studies have supported negative relationships between diversity and invasibility in many ecosystem types. However, a number of studies on large ecosystems have also reported the opposite pattern, i.e. a positive correlation between native species diversity and invasibility, leading to the formulation of the acceptance hypothesis. Therefore, the spatial scale has been considered to be an important factor in explaining this ‘invasion paradox.’

Disturbance-mediated hypothesis: This hypothesis states that the invasion success of invasive species is higher in highly disturbed ecosystems than in relatively undisturbed ecosystems. Disturbance provides invasive species an equal or improved chance of success to colonize and establish.

Environmental heterogeneity hypothesis: Ecosystems can host higher species diversity when they contain a variety of niches and high environmental. Heterogeneity in key environmental factors, such as temperature, water, nutrients, sunlight and physical disturbances, plays a definite role in community-level resistance to new invasions, as well as in their outcome and the severity of their impacts.





5.5 Extinction of species


Extinction is a natural process. Extinction (the complete disappearance of a species from Earth) is an important part of the evolution of life on Earth. The current diversity of species is a product of the processes of extinction and speciation operating throughout the previous 3.8 billion years of life. It is assumed that between 5 and 50 billion species have lived at some time during the history of the Earth. The fossil record indicates that of all the species that have ever lived on Earth, about 99.9% have gone extinct. It is also reasonable to assume that those that are extant now will eventually meet the same fate. Although extinction is inevitable, but has not occurred at a constant pace through the Earth’s history and also not the same for all species.

The average life-span of a species in the fossil record is around 4 million years. The background extinction rate (also known as the normal extinction rate) is about 0.1 species per million species per year. Scientists estimate we’re now losing species at 1,000 to 10,000 times the background rate. Nobody really knows how many species are in danger of becoming extinct. According to one estimate, in the past 500 years, approximately 1,000 species have gone extinct. Extinction rate has increased mainly due to human-induced habitat loss, invasive species and overexploitation and climate change. No one disputes, however, that the extinction rate for species in recent times has been far higher than this. In the past 100 years, approximately 20 species of mammals and over 40 species of birds have become extinct. The term biodiversity crisis is often used to describe this elevated loss of species.

Mass extinction

There have been several periods in the Earth’s geological history when a large number of species became extinct because of catastrophes or rapid environmental change. Mass extinction describes a statistically significant departure from background extinction rates. Scientists have been able to identify five major mass extinctions in Earth’s history, each of which led to a loss of more than 70 percent of animal species. Asteroidal collisions, volcanic eruption, climatic cooling, sea-level changes and changes in habitat area caused by plate-tectonic movements are the five potentially general theories of mass extinction. The end cretaceous extinction wiped out the dinosaurs, along with ~70% of all life on Earth. A widely accepted theory is that it was due to the collision of an asteroid. This mass extinction killed the dinosaurs. The impact would have ejected enormous amounts of debris into the atmosphere, causing global temperatures to drop. The impact may have also caused local fires, earthquakes, tsunamis, and acid rain.





Susceptibility to extinction


Susceptibility to extinction is not same for all species. Some species are more susceptible to extinction than others. The susceptibility of species to extinction is related to various life history characteristics that influence the species’ vulnerability to human activities as well as natural catastrophes.

A species with a geographically widespread distribution is referred to as ubiquitous, whereas a species found to occur naturally in a single geographic area and no place else is said to be endemic to that location. Endemic species are particularly susceptible to extinction because a loss of habitat in the one geographic region will result in a complete loss of habitat for the species. In general, the species with following characteristics are more susceptible to extinction:

Large body size: Larger species often have lower reproductive rates and require more resources to sustain themselves. This makes them more vulnerable to environmental changes and habitat loss because they need larger areas to find food and shelter.



Small population size: Species with small populations are more susceptible to inbreeding, which reduces genetic variability, making them less adaptable to changing conditions and more vulnerable to disease outbreaks or natural disasters.



Low reproductive rate: Species with low reproductive rates produce fewer offspring, which means they have fewer opportunities to replace individuals that die. This makes it difficult for their populations to recover if they experience a decline.



Feeding at high trophic levels: Species that occupy high trophic levels in the food chain often have smaller populations because there is less energy available at higher trophic levels. When their prey populations decline, these species are directly affected.



Fixed migratory routes: Species with fixed migratory routes can be especially vulnerable because they rely on specific habitats and pathways during their migrations. Any disruption or alteration to these routes can have devastating consequences.



Narrow range of distribution: Species with a limited geographical distribution are more vulnerable because they have fewer places to go if their habitat deteriorates or if they face threats in their limited range.



High specialization: Highly specialized species are often less adaptable to changing conditions because they have evolved to exploit specific ecological niches. If those niches are disrupted, these species can struggle to survive.



Poor dispersal rate: Species with limited dispersal abilities find it challenging to colonize new areas or migrate to more suitable habitats when their current habitat becomes inhabitable.





5.6 IUCN Red List categories and criteria


The IUCN is an organization working in the field of nature conservation and sustainable use of natural resources. The IUCN Red List categories and criteria are clearly defined system for classifying species which are at high risk of global extinction. It is based upon precise criteria to evaluate the risk of extinction of thousands of species and subspecies. Species are classified by the IUCN Red List into nine groups based on criteria such as rate of decline, population size, area of geographic distribution, and degree of population distribution and fragmentation.



The IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature) is a global organization dedicated to the conservation of natural resources and the promotion of their sustainable use. Founded in 1948, it was formerly known as the International Union for the Protection of Nature (1948–1956) and later as the World Conservation Union (1990– 2008). Its headquarter is located in Gland, Switzerland. In 1969, India joined IUCN as a state member, represented by the Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change (MoEFCC).





Extinct


A species is extinct when there is no reasonable doubt that the last individual has died. Example: Dodo (flightless bird) and Passenger pigeon (bird).





Extinct in the wild


A species living only in cultivation (plants) or in captivity (animals) or as a naturalized population (or populations) outside its historic range (exist solely in zoos, aquariums, botanical gardens, or seed banks). As of 2022, the IUCN listed 40 animal species as extinct in the wild. Examples: Alagoas curassow (bird), Hawaiian crow (bird), Scimitar oryx (mammal).





Threatened species


Endangered species are commonly classified into three primary categories: critically endangered, endangered, and vulnerable. The IUCN Red List utilizes a specific set of five quantitative criteria to ascertain a species’ threat status and assign it to the suitable category. These criteria comprehensively consider factors like population size, geographic range, and the likelihood of extinction, providing a well-rounded assessment of a species’ conservation status.

IUCN Red List of threatened species

The IUCN Red List of threatened species is the world’s most comprehensive inventory of the global conservation status of plant and animal species. It uses a set of criteria to evaluate the extinction risk of thousands of species and subspecies. These criteria are relevant to all species and all regions of the world. It is based on an objective system for assessing the risk of extinction of a species based on past, present and projected threats. Species assessments are conducted following a standardized process using the rigorous IUCN Red List categories and criteria, ensuring the highest standards of scientific documentation, information management, expert review, and justification. There are eight IUCN Red List categories based on criteria linked to population trend, size and structure and geographic range. Species listed as critically endangered, endangered or vulnerable are collectively described as threatened.



The IUCN criteria for threatened species

Population size reduction (in 10 years or 3 generations)



Geographic range



Population size (only in terms of mature individuals)



Small or restricted population



Probability of extinction.





Most of the criteria also include subcriteria that must be used to justify more specifically the listing of a taxon under a particular category. Each species should be evaluated against all the criteria. Even though some criteria will be inappropriate for certain species. The relevant factor is whether any one criterion is met or all are met. Because it will never be clear in advance which criteria are appropriate for a particular species, each species should be evaluated against all the criteria.



Each species should be evaluated against all the criteria. Even though some criteria will be inappropriate for certain species. The relevant factor is whether any one criterion is met or all are met. Because it will never be clear in advance which criteria are appropriate for a particular species, each species should be evaluated against all the criteria.

Critically endangered: A species is critically endangered when facing an extremely high risk of extinction in the wild in the immediate future. Gharial, Great Indian bustard, Ganges shark and Pygmy hog are few examples of critically endangered species. To be defined as critically endangered, a species must meet any of the following criteria.

Population reduction 80-90% population decline

Geographic range Extent of occurrence: <100 km2

Area of occupancy: <10 km2

Population size Less than 250 mature individuals

Extinction probability At least 50% within 10 years or 3 generations.



Critically endangered species represent a genetically closed system that results in an increased chance of inbreeding and homozygosity. Increased homozygosity causes loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding depression that leads to reduced offspring fitness.

Endangered: An endangered species is one whose numbers are so small that it is at risk of extinction. A few well-known examples of endangered species include red panda, snow leopard, bengal tiger, one-horned rhinoceros and blackbuck. To be defined as endangered, a species must meet any of the following criteria.

Population reduction 50-70% population decline

Geographic range Extent of occurrence: <5,000 km2

Area of occupancy: <500 km2

Population size Less than 2,500 mature individuals

Extinction probability At least 20% within 20 years or 5 generations.



Vulnerable: A species is vulnerable when it is not critically endangered or endangered, but is facing a high risk of becoming endangered in the near future.

Population reduction 30-50% population decline

Geographic range Extent of occurrence: <20,000 km2

Area of occupancy: <2,000 km2

Population size Less than 10,000 mature individuals

Extinction probability At least 10% within 100 years.



Rare species

Species that are geographically specific, or habitat specific, or have naturally small populations. Rarity can be described on the basis of three separate characteristics:

1. Geographic range.

Some species are rare because they are found only in a small geographic area.

2. Habitat specificity.

Species that occur only in specific, uncommon types of habitat such as caves or desert springs.

3. Local population size.

Some species occur at low population densities wherever they are found.



According to the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2009, out of the 47,677 species assessed, 17,291 are threatened, of which 8,492 are critically endangered, 6,195 are endangered, and 2,604 are vulnerable. The list reveals that 21% of all known mammals, 30% of all known amphibians, 12% of all known birds, 28% of all known reptiles, 37% of all known freshwater fishes, 70% of all known plants, and 35% of all known invertebrates assessed so far are under threat.





Near threatened


A category which indicates that a taxon has been evaluated against the Red List criteria does not qualify for critically endangered, endangered and vulnerable status now but it is close to qualify or likely to qualify for a threatened category in the near future. Polar bears, giraffes, and white rhinos are examples of species listed as near threatened.





Least concern


A category which indicates that a taxon has been evaluated against the Red List criteria and does not qualify for critically endangered, endangered, vulnerable or near threatened. Widespread and abundant taxa are included in this category.





Data deficient


A category which indicates there is inadequate information to make a direct, or indirect, assessment of a taxon’s risk of extinction based on its distribution and/or population status.

Table 5.2 Numbers of threatened species by major groups of organisms (1996–2021)





Changes in number of threatened species from year to year should not be directly interpreted as trends in the status of biodiversity. The figures displayed above reflect increased assessment efforts by IUCN and its Partners over time, rather than genuine changes in numbers of threatened species. For a clearer view of genuine trends in the status of biodiversity please refer to the IUCN Red List Index.





5.7 Conservation of biodiversity


Biodiversity is a source of significant economic, aesthetic, health and cultural benefits which form the foundation for sustainable development. However, there is a general scientific consensus that the world is rapidly becoming less biologically diverse in terms of genes, species and ecosystems. The reason for this is clearly anthropogenic. The scale of human impact on biological diversity has been increasing exponentially primarily because of world-wide patterns of consumption, production, trade; agricultural, industrial and settlement development; and human population growth.

Neither the economic nor the ecosystem value of biodiversity is as yet well understood. In particular, there is insufficient knowledge of the interdependence of species within ecosystems and the impact of the extinction of one species on others. Hence, reducing the rate of biodiversity loss and conserving still existing biodiversity as the basis of sustainable development remains a major global challenge.

Conservation is the protection, preservation, management or restoration of wildlife and natural resources such as forests and water. Through the conservation of biodiversity, the survival of many species and habitats which are threatened due to human activities can be ensured.

‘Conservation of biodiversity is an active management of the biosphere to ensure the survival of the maximum diversity of species and the maintenance of genetic variability within species. It includes the maintenance of biosphere function e.g. nutrient cycling and ecosystem function. The term also includes the concept of sustainable resource use so that the environment may yield the greatest sustainable benefit to current generations while maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of future generations. Conservation of species and biological processes must be simultaneous with conservation of abiotic resources or it is unlikely to succeed.’

IUCN, 1992.


Ex-situ and in-situ conservation

Conservation is the planned management of natural resources, to retain the balance in nature and retain diversity. Conservation efforts can be grouped into the following two categories: in-situ conservation (maintenance of biodiversity in natural habitat) and ex-situ conservation (conservation of biodiversity outside natural habitat).

Conservation biology is the science of maintaining the Earth’s biological diversity. Conservation biology, said to be a ‘mission-oriented crisis discipline’, is a multidisciplinary science that has developed to address the loss of biological diversity. Conservation biology has two central goals: 1. to evaluate human impacts on biological diversity and 2. to develop practical approaches to prevent the extinction of species.



In-situ (‘on-site’) conservation includes conservation of habitats and ecosystems where organisms naturally occur i.e. on-site conservation. The conservation of organisms in Biosphere Reserves (terrestrial and marine), National parks, Wildlife sanctuaries, Sacred groves, Biodiversity hotspots are all examples of in-situ conservation.

Ex-situ (‘off site’) conservation is a set of conservation strategies involving the transfer of a target species away from its native habitat to a place of safety, such as a zoological garden, botanical garden or seed bank. Its primary objective is to support conservation by ensuring the survival of threatened species and the maintenance of associated genetic diversity. To do so, ex-situ institutions preserve the genetic or reproductive material of a target species or take care of the living target species for the purpose of reintroduction. Thus, there is a fundamental difference between these two strategies: ex-situ conservation involves the sampling, transfer, and storage of target taxa from the target area, whereas in-situ conservation involves the designation, management, and monitoring of target taxa where they are encountered.



Figure 5.1 Overview of basic conservation schemes.



A gene bank is also a type of ex-situ conservation facility, play a crucial role in collecting and storing genetic materials from a wide range of organisms. These materials can include seeds, pollen, embryos, sperm, eggs, tissue samples, and DNA samples. Gene banks are also known as germplasm banks. A seed bank is also a type of gene bank, used to preserves and stores seeds of various plant species. In general, the seeds of plant species are stored in environments at low temperature and humidity. In these conditions, their viability can be preserved for several decades.





Biodiversity Hotspots


The concept of biodiversity hotspots originated with British ecologist and writer Norman Myers in 1988. A biodiversity hotspot is a relatively small area with an exceptional concentration of endemic species and a large number of endangered and threatened species. To qualify as a hotspot, a region must meet two strict criteria: it must contain at least 1,500 species of vascular plants (>0.5 percent of the world’s total) as endemics, and it has to have lost at least 70 percent of its original habitat. Thus, hotspots are areas with the richest and most threatened reservoirs of plants and animals life on Earth. Norman Myers developed the hotspot concept to designate priority areas for in-situ conservation. A key criteria for determining a hotspot are:

Number of endemic species i.e. the species which are found nowhere else.



Degree of threat, which is measured in terms of habitat loss.





Currently, 36 biodiversity hotspots have been identified, most of which occur in tropical forests. They represent just 2.3% of Earth’s land surface, but between them, they contain around 50% of the world’s endemic plant species and 42% of all terrestrial vertebrates. Among 36 globally identified biodiversity hotspots, four partly fall within Indian political boundaries:

Himalaya: Includes the entire Indian Himalayan region (and also regions present in Pakistan, Tibet, Nepal, Bhutan, China and Myanmar).



Western Ghats: Includes entire Western Ghats (and Sri Lanka).



Indo-Burma: Includes entire North-Eastern India except Assam (and Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and southern China).



Sundaland: Includes Andaman-Nicobar Islands (and Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Philippines).





Biodiversity Hotspots





Flagship and Umbrella species


Terms umbrella species and flagship species are used within the context of conservation goals and have no strict ecological properties. A flagship species is a species chosen to represent an environmental cause, such as an ecosystem in need of conservation. These species are chosen for their vulnerability, attractiveness or distinctiveness in order to generate support and acknowledgment from the public at large. Thus, the concept of a flagship species holds that by giving publicity to a few key species, the support given to those species will successfully leverage conservation of entire ecosystems.

Umbrella species are species whose habitat requirements are so large that protecting them would protect many other species existing in the same habitat. Umbrella species are species selected for making conservation related decisions, typically because protecting these species indirectly protects many other species that make up the ecological community of its habitat. Typically umbrella species are relatively large animals and thus many umbrella species are also flagship species. However, the terms are not synonymous because it is their patterns of habitat use, not popularity, that make some species good umbrellas. In particular, umbrella species usually have large home ranges, and thus by protecting enough habitat for their populations, adequate habitat for many other species will also be protected.





Box 5.2 IUCN Protected Area Management Categories




The criteria used to define protected areas vary widely, depending on the objective and on the mechanisms behind the establishment of the protected area. They are usually locations of significant environmental, cultural or natural value that in most cases have some forms of management authority in place for their protection.

The IUCN has developed six Protected Area Management Categories that define protected areas according to their management objectives, which are internationally recognized by various national governments and the United Nations. The categories provide international standards for defining protected areas and encourage conservation planning according to their management aims.

IUCN Protected Area Management Categories

Category Ia Strict nature reserve

Category Ia is strictly protected areas set aside to protect biodiversity and also possibly geological/geomorphological features, where human visitation, use and impacts are strictly controlled and limited to ensure protection of the conservation values. Such protected areas can serve as indispensable reference areas for scientific research and monitoring.

Category Ib Wilderness area

Category Ib protected areas are usually large unmodified or slightly modified areas, retaining their natural character and influence without permanent or significant human habitation, which are protected and managed so as to preserve their natural condition.

Category Ib protected areas will generally be larger and less strictly protected from human visitation than category Ia.

Category II National park

Category II protected areas are large natural or near natural areas set aside to protect large-scale ecological processes, along with the complement of species and ecosystems characteristic of the area, which also provide a foundation for environmentally and culturally compatible, spiritual, scientific, educational, recreational and visitor opportunities.

Category Ib and II protected areas are often similar in size and in their aim to protect functioning ecosystems. But whereas II usually includes use by visitors, including supporting infrastructure, in Ib visitor use is more limited.

Category III Natural monument or feature

Category III protected areas are set aside to protect a specific natural monument, which can be a landform, sea mount, submarine cavern, geological feature such as a cave or even a living feature such as an ancient grove. They are generally quite small protected areas and often have high visitor value.

Management in category III is focused around a single natural feature, whereas in category II it is focused on maintaining a whole ecosystem.

Category IV Habitat/Species management area

Category IV protected areas aim to protect particular species or habitats and management reflects this priority. Many Category IV protected areas will need regular, active interventions to address the requirements of particular species or to maintain habitats, but this is not a requirement of the category.

Category IV protected areas protect fragments of ecosystems or habitats, which often require continual management intervention to maintain. These protected areas are also often established to protect particular species or habitats.

Category V Protected landscape/seascape

A protected area where the interaction of people and nature over time has produced an area of distinct character with significant, ecological, biological, cultural and scenic value: and where safeguarding the integrity of this interaction is vital to protecting and sustaining the area and its associated nature conservation and other values.

Category V protected areas are generally cultural landscapes or seascapes that have been altered by humans over hundreds or even thousands of years and that rely on continuing intervention to maintain their qualities including biodiversity.

Category VI Protected area with sustainable use of natural resources

Category VI protected areas conserve ecosystems and habitats together with associated cultural values and traditional natural resource management systems. They are generally large, with most of the area in a natural condition, where a proportion is under sustainable natural resource management and where low-level non-industrial use of natural resources compatible with nature conservation is seen as one of the main aims of the area.

Category VI protected areas contain natural areas where biodiversity conservation is linked with sustainable use of natural resources.





5.8 Protected Areas of India


Protected areas are those in which human occupation or at least the exploitation of resources is limited. The definition that has been widely accepted across regional and global frameworks has been provided by the IUCN in its categorization guidelines for protected areas. The definition is as follows:

‘A clearly defined geographical space, recognized, dedicated and managed, through legal or other effective means, to achieve the long-term conservation of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural values.’

There are several kinds of protected areas, which vary by level of protection depending on the enabling laws of each country or the regulations of the international organizations involved. The ‘protected area’ also includes marine protected areas, the boundaries of which will include some area of ocean, and transboundary protected areas that overlap multiple countries which remove the borders inside the area for conservation and economic purposes.

India has a network of 998 protected areas including 106 national parks, 567 wildlife sanctuaries, 105 conservation reserves and 220 community reserves covering a total of 1,73,629.52 km2 of geographical area of the country which is approximately 5.28% (National Wildlife Database, January, 2023).





National parks


National parks are protected areas, usually declared and owned by the central government. India’s first national park was established in 1936 as Hailey national park (now known as Jim Corbett national park) in Uttarakhand. At present, there are 106 national parks in India covering an area of 44,402.95 km2, which is 1.35% of the geographical area of the country.





Wildlife sanctuary


Any area other than area comprised with any reserve forest or the territorial waters can be notified by the State Government to constitute as a wildlife sanctuary if such area is of adequate ecological, faunal, floral, geomorphological, natural or zoological significance, for the purpose of protecting, propagating or developing wildlife or its environment. Some restricted human activities are allowed inside the sanctuary area. There are 567 existing wildlife sanctuaries in India covering an area of 122,564.86 km2, which is 3.73% of the geographical area of the country.





Conservation reserves and Community reserves


Conservation reserves and community reserves in India are terms denoting protected areas of India which typically act as buffer zones or connectors and migration corridors between established national parks, wildlife sanctuaries and reserved and protected forests of India. Such areas are designated as conservation reserves if they are uninhabited and completely owned by the Government of India but used for subsistence (livelihood) by communities and community reserves if part of the lands is privately owned. These protected area categories were first introduced in the Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Act, 2002.





Marine protected areas


The protected areas in India also include marine protected areas (MPAs), which encompass protected areas within seas, oceans, or estuaries. These areas are essentially spaces in the ocean where human activities are subject to stricter regulation than the surrounding waters, all for the purpose of conservation. In India, protected areas that are entirely or partially located within a 500-meter distance from the high tide line and the marine environment are considered part of the MPA network. These places receive special protection for their natural or historical marine resources, administered by local, state, territorial, indigenous, regional, or national authorities.





Biosphere reserves


Biosphere reserves are a special category of protected areas of land and/or coastal environments, where people are an integral components of the system. These are representative examples of natural biomes and contain unique biological communities. The concept of biosphere reserves was launched in 1971 as a part of UNESCO’s Man and Biosphere (MAB) programme. The first biosphere reserve of the world was established in 1979, since then the network of biosphere reserves has increased to 669 in 120 countries across the world (MAB, 2008).

The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) is an international non-governmental organization founded in 1961. It was formerly named the World Wildlife Fund. It is the world’s largest conservation organization, working in more than 100 countries, supporting around 1,300 conservation and environmental projects.



Biosphere reserves are nominated by national government and remain under the sovereign jurisdiction of the states where they are located. Presently, there are 18 biosphere reserves in India. These reserves are rich in biological and cultural diversity and encompass unique features of exceptionally pristine nature. The goal is to facilitate conservation of representative landscapes and their immense biological diversity and cultural heritage, foster economic and human development which is culturally and ecologically sustainable and to provide support for research, monitoring, education and information exchange.

Objectives of biosphere reserve

Each biosphere reserve is intended to fulfill three basic functions, which are complementary and mutually reinforcing:

A conservation function – to contribute to the conservation of landscapes, ecosystems and species variation.

A development function – to foster economic and human development which is socio-culturally and ecologically sustainable.

A logistic function – to provide support for research, monitoring, education and information exchange related to local, national and global issues of conservation and development (UNESCO, 2005).

Structure of biosphere reserve

Biosphere reserves have three interrelated zones that aim to fulfil three complementary and mutually reinforcing functions— core, buffer and transition zones.

Core zone: The natural or core zone represents an undisturbed or least disturbed area of representative ecosystem.

Buffer zone: The buffer zone surrounds the core zone, and is managed for research, education and training activities. It is an area peripheral to a core zone, where restrictions are placed upon resource use or special development measures are undertaken to enhance the conservation values of the area. Traditional activities including timber production, hunting, fishing and grazing are permitted.

Transition zone: The transition zone is the outermost part of the biosphere reserve where human activities, such as settlements, agriculture, forestry, recreation, and other economic uses, continue to coexist with the goal of conservation. The primary objective is to strike a balance between human needs and ecological sustainability, ensuring that both can thrive in harmony.



Man and the Biosphere Programme (MAB)

UNESCO’s MAB programme (launched in 1971) is an inter-governmental scientific programme that aims to establish a scientific basis for the improvement of relationships between people and their environments. It predicts the consequences of today’s actions on tomorrow’s world and thereby increases people’s ability to efficiently manage natural resources for the well-being of both human populations and the environment.



Table 5.3 List of designated biosphere reserves in India





Sacred groves


Sacred groves comprise of patches of forests of varying sizes that are protected by local communities because of their religious beliefs and traditional rituals that run through several generations. The degree of sanctity of the sacred forests varies from one grove to another. People believe that any kind of disturbance will offend the local deity (devata), causing diseases, natural calamities or failure of crops. For example, the Garo and the Khasi tribes of North-Eastern India completely prohibit any human interference in the sacred groves.





5.9 Biodiversity conservation: International and National efforts


Biodiversity is a wealth to which no value can be put. In the final analysis, the very survival of the human race is dependent on conservation of biodiversity. It is evident that this invaluable resource is being destroyed at an alarming rate due to several reasons. Measures are being taken up at national and international levels to address this issue. The Earth Summit produced a plan of action on a number of issues (Agenda 21) including conservation of biodiversity during the 21st century.





International conservation strategies


Conserving biodiversity is not an issue confined to any one country or community. It is a crucial global concern. Several international treaties and agreements are in place in the attempt to strengthen international participation and commitment towards conserving biodiversity. Some of these are:





Convention on Biological diversity


The convention on biological diversity (CBD), informally known as the Biodiversity Convention, was adopted during the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro on June 5, 1992. The concept of this convention took shape during discussions held by the Ad Hoc working group of experts on biological diversity under the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in November 1988. Subsequently, the CBD was opened for signature at the Earth Summit on June 5, 1992, and it came into force on December 29, 1993. The CBD is guided by three primary objectives:

The conservation of biological diversity.



The sustainable use of the components of biological diversity.



The fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources.





National Board for Wild-life (NBWL) is a statutory Board constituted on 22nd September 2003 under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. The NBWL is chaired by the Hon’ble Prime Minister. Primary function of the Board is to promote the conservation and development of wildlife and forests. It is a very important body because it serves as apex body to review all wildlife-related matters and approve projects in and around national parks and sanctuaries.





CITES


CITES (the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora), also known as the Washington Convention, is an international agreement to protect endangered plants and animals. It was drafted as a result of a resolution adopted in 1963 at a meeting of members of the IUCN. The convention was opened for signature in 1973 and CITES entered into force on 1 July 1975. Its aim is to ensure that international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants does not threaten the survival of the species in the wild, and it accords varying degrees of protection to more than 35,000 species of animals and plants. India became a party to CITES in 1976.





World Heritage Convention (WHC)


The convention concerning the protection of the world cultural and natural heritage commonly known as the ‘World Heritage Convention’, is an international treaty, adopted in 1972. The convention recognizes the way in which people interact with nature, and the fundamental need to preserve the balance between the two. The convention sets out the duties of states parties in identifying potential sites and their role in protecting and preserving them. By signing the convention, each country pledges to conserve not only the World Heritage sites situated on its territory, but also to protect its national heritage.

World Heritage sites are places on earth that are of Outstanding Universal Value (OUV) to humanity and therefore, have been inscribed on the World Heritage List to be protected for future generations. Places as diverse and unique as the Great Barrier Reef in Australia, Galapagos Islands in Ecuador and the Grand Canyon in the USA are examples of places inscribed on the World Heritage List. The World Heritage Convention 1, which has been ratified by 191 countries, was adopted by UNESCO’s General Conference in 1972, and came into force in 1975, for the identification, protection, conservation, presentation and transmission to future generations of the world cultural and natural heritage. The UNESCO World Heritage Centre is the secretariat to the WHC. Three organizations act as its advisory bodies: ICOMOS (International Council on Monuments and Sites), ICCROM (International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property), and IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature). Specifically, IUCN serves as the advisory body for natural heritage.





Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals


The Convention on Migratory Species (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, aims to conserve terrestrial, marine and avian migratory species throughout their range. Parties to the CMS work together to conserve migratory species and their habitats by providing strict protection for the most endangered migratory species, by concluding regional multilateral agreements for the conservation and management of specific species or categories of species, and by undertaking co-operative research and conservation activities.

National Green Tribunal

The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has been established in year 2010 under the NGT Act 2010 (an Act of the Parliament of India) for effective and expeditious disposal of cases relating to environmental protection and conservation of forests and other natural resources including enforcement of any legal right relating to environment and giving relief and compensation for damages to persons and property and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. It is a specialized body equipped with the necessary expertise to handle environmental disputes involving multi-disciplinary issues.





International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture


The objectives of the Treaty are the conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of their use, in harmony with the Convention on Biological Diversity, for sustainable agriculture and food security. The Treaty covers all plant genetic resources for food and agriculture, while its Multilateral System of Access and Benefit-sharing covers a specific list of 64 crops and forages. The Treaty also includes provisions on Farmers’ Rights.





Convention on Wetlands (Ramsar Convention)


The Ramsar Convention provides the framework for national action and international cooperation for the conservation and wise use of wetlands and their resources. The convention covers all aspects of wetland conservation and wise use, recognizing wetlands as ecosystems that are extremely important for biodiversity conservation in general and for the well-being of human communities.





International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC)


The IPPC aims to protect world plant resources, including cultivated and wild plants by preventing the introduction and spread of plant pests and promoting the appropriate measures for their control. The convention provides the mechanisms to develop the International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPMs), and to help countries to implement the ISPMs and the other obligations under the IPPC, by facilitating the national capacity development, national reporting and dispute settlement.

Mean species abundance (MSA) is an indicator of biodiversity intactness. It is defined as the average abundance of all species in a given area relative to their abundance in an undisturbed ecosystem. MSA is calculated by comparing the abundance of each species in a given area to its abundance in an undisturbed reference ecosystem. An MSA of 100% means that the ecosystem is completely intact, with all species present in their natural abundances.





Box 5.3 Living Planet Index and Bioprospecting




The Living Planet Index (LPI) is a measure of the state of global biological diversity based on population trends of vertebrate species from terrestrial, freshwater and marine habitats around the world. It does this in much the same way that a stock market index tracks the value of a set of shares or a retail price index tracks the cost of a basket of consumer goods. The LPI was developed to measure the changing state of the world’s biodiversity over time. It uses time-series data to calculate average rates of change in a large number of populations of terrestrial, freshwater and marine vertebrate species. The global LPI is based on scientific data from 14,152 monitored populations of 3,706 vertebrate species (mammals, birds, fishes, amphibians, reptiles) from around the world. From 1970 to 2012 the LPI shows a 58 percent overall decline in vertebrate population abundance.

The world’s biodiversity is declining at an alarming rate. Population sizes of vertebrate species have, on average, dropped by more than half in little more than 40 years. The data shows an average annual decline of 2 percent and there is no sign yet that this rate will decrease.

The global LPI is the aggregate of two indices – the temperate LPI (which includes polar species) and the tropical LPI – each of which is given equal weight. In each of these two indices, overall trends between terrestrial, freshwater and marine species’ populations are given equal weight.

Tropical and temperate species’ populations show different trends: the tropical LPI has declined by around 60 percent in less than 40 years, while the temperate LPI has increased by 29 percent over the same period. This difference is apparent for mammals, birds, amphibians and fishes, for terrestrial, marine and freshwater species.

Bioprospecting (or biodiversity prospecting) is the systematic search for biochemical and genetic information in nature in order to develop commercially-valuable products for pharmaceutical, agricultural, cosmetic and other applications. It entails the search for economically valuable genetic and biochemical resources from nature. So, in brief, bioprospecting means looking for ways to commercialize biodiversity.

The rationale behind bioprospecting is to extract the maximum commercial value from genetic resources and indigenous knowledge, while creating a fair compensation system that can benefit all. Thus, bioprospecting touches upon the conservation and sustainable use of biological resources and the rights of local and indigenous communities. The phases of bioprospecting start with sample collection, isolation, characterization and move to product development and commercialization. Bioprospecting is possible both in terrestrial and marine environments. Many molecules, such as trabectedin (an antitumor agent) and eribulin (used to treat breast cancer), were discovered from marine organisms.

Bioprospecting, when properly regulated, generates revenues that can be directly linked to the conservation of biodiversity and to the benefit of local communities. Benefits can be monetary and non-monetary. In addition, it can lead to the development of new products, including for example, new medicines. On the other hand, if not well managed, bioprospecting may create a number of problems, including environmental problems related to unauthorized (over-) exploitation and social and economic problems related to unfair sharing of benefits -or the total absence of benefit sharing- and to disrespect for the rights, knowledge and dignity of local communities. Bioprospecting may involve biopiracy. Biopiracy describes a practice in which indigenous knowledge of nature, originating with indigenous peoples, is used by others for profit, without permission from and with little or no compensation or recognition to the indigenous people themselves.

Nagoya Protocol: The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity (also known as the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit Sharing) is an international agreement which aims at sharing the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources in a fair and equitable way. It entered into force on 12 October, 2014. The Nagoya Protocol applies to the utilization of genetic resources and their derivatives that are covered by the CBD, and to the benefits arising from their utilization.

The objective of this Protocol is the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to technologies, and by appropriate funding, thereby contributing to the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components.





National conservation strategies


India has actively participated and contributed to various international initiatives. India signed the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), 1992 in Rio. Biodiversity was considered as a common concern of humankind. Due to ecological, genetic, economic, scientific, educational, cultural, recreational and aesthetic values of biological diversity, a large number of initiatives have been taken up at national level.





Biological Diversity Act


The Biological Diversity Act, 2002 is an Act of the Parliament of India for conservation of biological diversity in India. This was an attempt to realize the objectives enshrined in the Convention on Biological Diversity, 1992 which recognizes the sovereign rights of states to use their own biological resources. The Act aims at the conservation of biological resources and associated knowledge as well as facilitating access to them in a sustainable manner. To implement the provisions under the Act, a National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) has been constituted. The NBA is a statutory autonomous body, headquartered in Chennai, under the MoEFCC, Government of India established in 2003 to implement the provisions under the Act.





Wildlife (Protection) Act


The Government of India enacted Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 with the objective of effectively protecting the wildlife of this country and to control poaching, smuggling and illegal trade in wildlife and its derivatives. The Act was amended seven times (1982, 1986, 1991, 1993, 2002, 2006 and 2013) and punishment and penalty for offences under the Act have been made more stringent. The Ministry has proposed further amendments in the law by introducing more rigid measures to strengthen the Act. The objective is to provide protection to the listed endangered flora and fauna and ecologically important protected areas.

The Government of India constituted a statutory body, the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) on 6 June 2007, by amending the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. It is a statutory multi-disciplinary body established by the Government of India under the Ministry of Environment and Forests, to combat organized wildlife crime in the country. The Bureau has its headquarter in New Delhi.





Project Tiger and Project Elephant


Several special projects have also been launched by Government of India to save certain animal species which have been identified as needing concerted protection effort. These projects are designed to protect the species in situ, by protecting and conserving their natural habitat.

Project Tiger

Project Tiger is a wildlife conservation project initiated in India in 1972 to protect the tigers. It was launched on April 1, 1973 and has become one of the most successful wildlife conservation ventures. The main idea behind the project is to provide safe habitats for tigers where they could flourish as a species and hopefully reverse the startling decline in their population. Initially, the project started with 9 tiger reserves, covering an area of 16,339 km2, with a population of 268 tigers. At present, there are 49 tiger reserves, with a population of 2226 tigers. The selection of reserves was guided by representation of ecotypical wilderness areas across the biogeographic range of tiger distribution in the country.

Project Elephant

Elephant (Elephas maximus) is the largest terrestrial mammal of India. About 60% of the Asian elephant population is in India. Project Elephant was launched in 1992 by the Government of India, Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change to provide financial and technical support to major elephant bearing states in the country for protection of elephants, their habitats and corridors. Project Elephant was launched by the Government of India with following objectives:

To protect elephants, their habitat and corridors.



To address issues of man-animal conflict.



Welfare of captive elephants.





National Wildlife Action Plan


A road map to conserve wildlife of the country, in the form of an Action Plan, the first National Wildlife Action Plan (NWAP-1) was drafted and adopted in 1983. It was implemented from 1983 through 2001. On its completion and based on the new concerns and challenges viz. increased commercial use of natural resources, growth in human and livestock population, changes in the consumption patterns, rising interest in biodiversity conservation etc., the Plan was revised and a new Action Plan (NWAP-2) was put in place for the period 2002-2016. On the suggestion of National Board for Wildlife and based on evaluations of NWAP-2, a third National Wildlife Action Plan (NWAP-3) has been drafted and adopted for the period 2017-2031. The Plan is based on the premise that essential ecological processes that are governed, supported or strongly moderated by ecosystems, are essential for food production, health and other aspects of human survival and sustainable development. And maintenance of these ecosystems which can be termed as ‘Life Support Systems’ is vital for all societies regardless of their stage of development.





Box 5.4 Chipko movement




The Chipko movement (or chipko andolan) was primarily a forest conservation movement in India that began in 1973. The name of the movement comes from the word ‘embrace’, as the villagers hugged the trees, and prevented the contractors’ from felling them. The original ‘Chipko movement’ was started around 260 years back in the early part of the 18th century in Rajasthan by the Bishnoi community. A large group of villagers led by a lady called Amrita Devi laid down their lives in an effort to protect the trees from being felled on the orders of the King of Jodhpur. The Chipko movement of 1973 was one of the most famous among these. The first Chipko action took place spontaneously in April 1973 in the village of Mandal in the upper Alakananda valley and over the next five years spread to many districts of the Himalayas in Uttar Pradesh. It was sparked off by the government’s decision to allot a plot of forest area in the Alakananda valley to a sports goods company. With encouragement from a local NGO, DGSS (Dasoli Gram Swarajya Sangh), the women of the area, under the leadership of an activist, Chandi Prasad Bhatt, went into the forest and formed a circle around the trees preventing the men from cutting them down.





Forest Conservation Act


The Forest Conservation Act is a central act of parliament and was passed in 1980 for the conservation of forests and for matters connected therewith. The Act extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu & Kashmir and is in force from 25th October 1980. Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 is a unique piece of legislation, and a regulatory mechanism that reflects the collective will of the nation to protect its rich biodiversity and natural heritage and that permits only unavoidable use of forest land for various developmental purposes. Under this act, prior approval of central government is required before any reserved forest is declared as dereserved, or forest land is diverted to non-forest purposes. If diversion is permitted by the government, compensatory afforestation is required in an equivalent area if the land is available. If an equivalent land is not available, afforestation has to be done in degraded forest such that it is twice the extent of the area being de-forested. Later in 1988, forest conservation act was amended to incorporate strict penalization for violators.





5.10 Biogeographic classification of India


Biogeography is the study of geographical distributions of organisms, their respective habitats, and the environmental factors that underlie these distributions. In the context of India, biogeographic classification was meticulously carried out by Rodgers and Panwar in 1988. This classification identified 10 distinctive biogeographic zones within the country and each zone is further subdivided into biogeographic provinces, which total 27 in number.

Biogeographic zones represent substantial ecological units characterized by similar biomes, community structures, and species composition, such as the Himalayas and the Western Ghats. Meanwhile, biogeographic provinces, the secondary units within these zones, emphasize specific communities separated by dispersal barriers or gradual shifts in environmental factors. Biogeographic zones of India are 1. Trans-Himalaya, 2. Himalaya, 3. Indian desert, 4. Semi-arid, 5. Western ghats, 6. Deccan peninsula, 7. Gangetic plains, 8. Coast, 9. North-East, and 10. Islands

Trans-Himalaya

It encompasses high-altitude, cold, and arid mountainous areas situated in Ladakh, Jammu & Kashmir, North Sikkim, as well as the Lahaul and Spiti regions of Himachal Pradesh. It is characterized by extreme cold, sparse vegetation, and unique adaptations by wildlife to survive in such harsh environments. This zone is characterized by sparse alpine steppe vegetation, which hosts numerous endemic species. This zone is home to rare fauna, including Snow Leopard and the migratory Black-necked Crane. The biogeographic provinces within this region are categorized as follows:

1A: Himalaya – Ladakh Mountains (3.3%)

1B: Himalaya – Tibetan Plateau (2.2%)

1C: Trans-Himalaya Sikkim (<0.1%)



Himalaya

Encompassing the main Himalayan range, this zone features diverse ecosystems across various altitudes, ranging from alpine meadows to temperate forests and subtropical zones. Major wildlife in this region includes Ibex and the Red Panda. The biogeographic provinces within this region are categorized as follows:

2A: Himalaya – North West Himalaya (2.1%)

2B: Himalaya – West Himalaya (1.6%)

2C: Himalaya – Central Himalaya (0.2%)

2D: Himalaya – East Himalaya (2.5%)



Indian desert

Represented by the arid and semi-arid regions of Rajasthan and Gujrat. It is characterized by extreme temperatures, scarce vegetation, and specialized flora and fauna adapted to survive in arid conditions. Major wildlife in this region includes the Wild ass, Blackbuck, Flamingo, and Desert monitor. The biogeographic provinces within this region are categorized as follows:

3A: Desert – Thar (5.4%)

3B: Desert – Kachchh (1.1%)



Semi-arid

Adjacent to the Indian desert, this zone undergoes a transition from arid to more habitable environments, characterized by scrublands, wetlands, dry deciduous, hill, and thorn forests. Major wildlife in this region includes the Tiger, Asiatic lion, Great Indian bustard, and Gharial. The biogeographic provinces within this region are categorized as follows:

4A: Semi-arid – Punjab Plains (3.7%)

4B: Semi-arid – Gujarat, Rajputana (12.9%)



Western ghats

Running parallel to India’s western coast, this biodiversity hotspot is characterized by tropical forests and high levels of endemic species. Major wildlife in this region includes the Lion-tailed macaque, Malabar civet, Hornbill, and Draco. The biogeographic provinces within this region are categorized as follows:

5A: Western Ghats – Malabar Plains (2%)

5B: Western Ghats – Western Ghats Mountains (2%)



Deccan peninsula

Covering most of central and southern India, this zone includes diverse landscapes such as plateaus, hills, forests, and plains. The Deccan Plateau is characterized by rich biodiversity and various habitat types, including dry deciduous, thorn forests, wetlands, sub-tropical, and moist deciduous. Major wildlife in this region includes Swamp deer, Chital, and Elephant. The biogeographic provinces within this region are categorized as follows:

6A: Deccan Peninsular - Central Highlands (7.3%)

6B: Deccan Peninsular – Chota Nagpur (5.4%)

6C: Deccan Peninsular – Eastern Highlands (6.3%)

6D: Deccan Peninsular – Central Plateau (12.5%)

6E: Deccan Peninsular – Deccan South (10.4%)



Gangetic plains

Spanning across the northern parts of India, this region includes the fertile alluvial plains of the Ganges and its tributaries. It supports agriculture and diverse vegetation due to the rich soil and perennial rivers. Major wildlife in this zone includes the Rhino, Gangetic dolphin, and Nilgai. The biogeographic provinces within this region are categorized as follows:

7A: Gangetic Plain – Upper Gangetic Plains (6.3%)

7B: Gangetic Plain – Lower Gangetic Plains (4.5%)



Coasts

Representing the coastlines surrounding India, this zone includes mangroves, estuaries, and various coastal ecosystems. It supports unique marine life and diverse flora adapted to coastal environments. Major wildlife in this region includes the Dugong, Dolphin, Tiger, and Sand skink. The biogeographic provinces within this region are categorized as follows:

8A: Coasts – West Coast (0.6%)

8B: Coasts – East Coast (1.9%)

8C: Coasts – Lakshadweep (<0.1%)



North-East

Encompassing the states in the northeastern region, this zone is known for its rich biodiversity, including rainforests, hills, and diverse flora and fauna adapted to tropical and subtropical climates. Major wildlife in this region includes the Pygmy hog, Golden langur, and Yellow-backed Sunbird. The biogeographic provinces within this region are categorized as follows:

9A: North-East – Brahmaputra Valley (2%)

9B: North-East – North East Hills (3.2%)



Islands

Including the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal, these isolated regions have unique ecosystems with diverse marine life, coral reefs, and endemic species. Major wildlife in this region includes Dolphins, Narcondam Hornbill, and turtles. The biogeo-graphic provinces within this region are categorized as follows:

10A: Islands – Andamans (0.2%)

10B: Islands – Nicobar (0.1%)





References


Bascompte J and Sole RV (1996), Habitat fragmentation and extinction thresholds in spatially explicit models. Journal of Animal Ecology, 65, 465–473.

Butchart SHM et al. (2010), Global biodiversity: Indicators of recent declines, Science, 328, 1164–1168.

Caughley G (1994), Directions in conservation biology. Journal of Animal Ecology, 63, 215-244.

Chapin FS et al. (2000), Consequences of changing biodiversity, Nature, 405, 234–242.

Chapin FS, Schulze ED and Mooney HA (1992), Biodiversity and ecosystem processes. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 7:107-108.

Convention on Biological Diversity (1992), United Nations.

Côté SD (2005), Extirpation of a large black bear population by introduced white-tailed deer. Conservation Biology, 19: 1668–1671.

Dirzo R and Raven PH (2003), Global state of biodiversity and loss, Annual review environment and resources, 28, 137-167.

Fahrig L (1997), Relative effects of habitat loss and fragmentation on population extinction. Journal of Wildlife Management, 61:603-610.

Gibbs WW (2001), On the termination of species. Scientific American, 285: 40-49.

Grenier MB, McDonald DB, Buskirk SW (2007), Rapid population growth of a critically endangered carnivore. Science, 317: 779.

Higgs ES (1997), What is good ecological restoration? Conservation Biology, 11:338-348.

Huston M (1979), A general hypothesis of species diversity. American Naturalist, 133:81-101.

Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change: List of Designated Biosphere Reserves, Annual Report 2013-14.

Primack RB (1993), Essentials of conservation biology, Sunderland, MA: Sinauer & Associates.

Raup DM (1994), The role of extinction in evolution. Proceedings National Academy Science USA, 91, 6758-6763.

Singh JS and Chaturvedi RK (2017), Diversity of ecosystem types in India: a review. Proc Indian Natn Sci Acad 83, 569-594.

WRI, IUCN and UNEP (1992), Global biodiversity strategy. Washington, DC.





Chapter 6


Pollution


Pollution is any undesirable change in the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of the air, water and land that can harmfully affect the living organisms and the ecosystem as a whole. Any substance introduced into the environment that adversely affects the physical, chemical or biological properties of the environment that have a harmful effect on the ecosystem as a whole is termed as pollutant. There are three major types of environmental pollution: air pollution, water pollution and soil pollution.





6.1 Air pollution


Air pollution may be defined as any atmospheric condition in which substances are present at concentrations above their normal permissible levels to produce a measurable effect on man, animals, vegetation or materials. Substances mean any natural or anthropogenic (man-made) chemical compounds capable of being airborne. They may exist in the atmosphere as gases, liquid drops or solid particles.

According to Air (prevention and control) act, 1981, an air pollutant is any solid, liquid or gaseous substance (including noise) present in the atmosphere in such concentration as may be or tend to be injurious to human being or other living creatures or plants or property or environment.





6.1.1 Composition of air


Air is a heterogenous mixture of different gases that makes the atmosphere. Atmosphere is the gaseous mass or envelope surrounding the Earth and retained by the Earth’s gravitational field. The troposphere is the lowest portion of Earth’s atmosphere. It contains approximately 80% of the atmosphere’s mass. By volume, standard dry air contains 78.08% nitrogen, 20.9% oxygen, 0.9% argon, 0.040% carbon dioxide, and small amounts of other gases. There are two common ways by which one can represent the composition of air – percentage of gas by volume or percentage of the gas by mass. It is important to note that, the composition of different gases (in dry air) by mass is a fixed one whereas the percentage composition of the gases by volume or mass in wet air (i.e. air containing moisture) is dependent on humidity or the moisture in the air.

Table 6.1 Composition of clean, dry air (expressed in volume)





6.1.2 Sources of air pollution


There are two main sources of air pollution:

Natural sources (such as wind-blown dust, wildfires and volcanoes)

Man-made (or anthropogenic) sources

Man-made sources can be mobile or stationary in nature.

Mobile sources: These sources account for most of the air pollution and the primary mobile source of air pollution is the automobile.

Stationary sources: Air pollution sources that do not move from one location to another. It can be either point source or area source.

Point sources include pollution from power plants, oil refineries, emit large amounts of pollution from a single location.

Area sources include emissions from many smaller stationary sources present in an industrial, commercial and residential area.





6.1.3 Types of air pollutants


Air pollutant can be of natural origin or man-made. It can be classified on the following basis:

the physical state of the pollutant



the basis of origin



the occurrence and nature of the threat





Classification based on the physical state of the pollutant


According to the physical state of pollutant, pollutants may be gaseous and particulate in nature.

Gaseous pollutants include carbon dioxide, oxides of sulfur (SOx), oxides of nitrogen (NOx), carbon monoxide, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), chlorofluorocarbons, ammonia and other gases.

Particulate matters are tiny solid or liquid particles suspended in air.





Classification based on origin


Air pollutants can also be classified as either primary or secondary, based on origin.

Primary air pollutants are substances which are directly emitted into the atmosphere from natural and anthropogenic sources, such as sulfur dioxide from a volcanic eruption and the carbon monoxide gas from motor vehicles.

Secondary air pollutants are not emitted directly. Rather, they form in the air when primary pollutants react or interact in the atmosphere. Example of a secondary pollutant includes ozone, which is formed when hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen combine in the presence of sunlight.

The Clean Air Act is a United States federal law designed to control air pollution on a national level. It is administered by the US environmental protection agency (EPA).





Based on the occurrence and nature of the threat


Based on the occurrence and nature of the threat, air pollutants are classified into two classes – Criteria air pollutants and toxic air pollutants. These air pollutants have diverse chemical and physical properties.

Criteria air pollutants, as designated under the US Clean Air Act of 1971, include pollutants that are ubiquitous and are known or strongly suspected to be harmful to public health and the environment. Currently, six pollutants are designated as criteria air pollutants. These are tropospheric ground-level ozone, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5) and lead. For each of these pollutants, a primary health-based national ambient air quality standard (NAAQS) under the ‘clean air act’ has been established, which specifies the ‘safe’ level of the pollutant that can be present in the air.

Toxic air pollutants (also known as hazardous air pollutants or air toxics) are those pollutants that are not widespread but known or suspected to cause cancer or other serious health effects, such as reproductive or birth defects, or adverse environmental effects. Toxic air pollutants include a diverse set of pollutants and come from multiple sources. Examples of toxic air pollutants include benzene (which is found in gasoline), perchloroethylene (which is emitted from some dry-cleaning facilities) and methylene chloride (which is used as a solvent and paint stripper by a number of industries). Other listed air toxics include dioxin, asbestos, toluene and metals such as cadmium, mercury and chromium. About 70% of the pollutants classified as hazardous air pollutants fall into the category of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Any chemical compound based on carbon with a vapor pressure greater than 2 mm of mercury at 25°C are called VOCs. However, according to EPA, VOCs means any compound of carbon, excluding carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides or carbonates and ammonium carbonate, which participates in atmospheric photochemical reactions. VOCs are numerous, varied and ubiquitous. They include both man-made (anthropogenic VOCs, AVOCs) and naturally (biogenic VOCs, BVOCs) occurring chemical compounds. Based on the chemical nature, VOCs can be non-methane VOCs (NMVOCs), oxygenic VOCs (OVOCs) and others.





6.1.4 Criteria air pollutants


Criteria air pollutants are those air pollutants for which ambient air standards have been defined to protect human health and welfare. Six pollutants are designated as criteria air pollutants. These are carbon monoxide, lead, oxides of nitrogen, ground-level ozone, particulate matter and oxides of sulfur. These are the pollutants regulated by using two sets of criteria for pollutant standards. The first set of standards, also known as primary standard, is to protect human health. A second set of standards, also known as secondary standard, aims to protect environment and property.





Carbon monoxide


Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colorless, odourless and tasteless gas and the most abundant among the criteria pollutants. It is produced as a result of incomplete combustion of carbonaceous fuels. Incomplete combustion yields carbon monoxide instead of CO2. Vehicular emissions are the major source of carbon monoxide emission. It comprises ~70% of total carbon monoxide emissions. Carbon monoxide has greater affinity for hemoglobin than does oxygen. It readily binds with hemoglobin to form carboxyhemoglobin. Hence, it interferes with the blood’s ability to carry oxygen to the cells of the body.





Ozone


Ozone (O3) is a molecule composed of three atoms of oxygen. It occurs both in the Earth’s upper atmosphere (stratosphere) and lower atmosphere (troposphere).

Ozone can be good or bad, depending on where it is found. Stratospheric ozone is good ozone and occurs naturally in the stratosphere, where it forms a protective layer that shields us from the Sun’s harmful ultraviolet rays. Tropospheric ground-level ozone (or surface ozone) is a bad ozone. It is recognized to be a threat to human health and have a deleterious impact on vegetation. It is also an important tropospheric greenhouse gas.

Tropospheric ground-level ozone is not emitted directly into the air, but is created by chemical reactions between oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the presence of sunlight. Ozone’s production in the troposphere occurs by hydroxyl radical oxidation of carbon monoxide, methane and non-methane hydrocarbons in the presence of oxides of nitrogen.

Tropospheric ground-level ozone is a secondary air pollutant. Sources of ground-level ozone precursors in the troposphere are both natural and anthropogenic. Natural sources are responsible for an average background ground-level or surface ozone concentration of 20–30 ppb. Ozone is produced through chemical reactions between NOx and VOCs in the presence of sunlight. NOx and VOCs initiate a complex set of reactions that produce a number of secondary pollutants known as photochemical oxidants. Ozone is the most abundant photochemical oxidant.

In the troposphere, oxygen atom cannot form by the photodissociation of molecular oxygen, because this reaction requires short wavelength (λ < 242 nm) which is not available in the troposphere (due to the absorption by stratospheric ozone). In the troposphere, formation of oxygen atom occurs due to photodissociation of nitrogen dioxide:



In the presence of NO, O3 reacts with it and reproduces the NO2:



This means that reactions mentioned above themselves do not result in net ozone production, because these reactions only recycle O3 and NOx. Net ozone production occurs, when other precursors, such as carbon monoxide, methane, non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHCs) or certain volatile organic compounds are present in the atmosphere. Ozone production can be simulated by a simple reaction scheme, through the oxidation of carbon monoxide, when nitric oxide is available. In this reaction chain OH, HO2, NO and NO2 participate as catalysts.

Ground-level ozone is produced mainly in the urban environment due to the high emission of ozone precursor compounds. It has also a typical diurnal cycle. Highest concentration occurs in the afternoon, when photochemical activity is more intense.



Figure 6.1 Schematic picture of photochemical ozone formation in the troposphere. Ozone formation is always initiated by the photolysis of NO2. The recycling of NO to NO2 occurs after VOCs react with OH and generate peroxy radicals. These readily react with NO, regenerating NO2. Thus, NOx is recycled in what is referred to as the ROx-NOx cycle.



Ozone is a major constituent of photochemical smog. ‘Smog’ is a term that was derived from a combination of words smoke and fog. Smog has historically been described as two types named after the places where they were first observed, London and Los Angeles.

The Los Angeles smog is a photochemical smog, formed from the photochemical reactions of nitrogen oxides and volatile organic hydrocarbons. It requires neither smoke nor fog. Photochemical smog is a complex mixture of primary and secondary air pollutants. This type of smog has its origin in the nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons emitted by automobiles and other sources, which then undergo photochemical reactions in the lower atmosphere. The most important component of photochemical smog is ozone. Other major components of photochemical smog are formaldehyde, acrolein, peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN) and peroxybenzoyl nitrate. Because these species are created in the atmosphere by photochemical reactions of the primary pollutants, they are called secondary pollutants. The Los Angeles type smog is therefore dependent on the daytime intensity of solar radiation. The resulting smog causes a light brownish coloration of the atmosphere, reduced visibility, plant damage, irritation of the eyes and respiratory distress. Photochemical smog has a high concentration of oxidizing agents and is, therefore, called as oxidizing smog.

The London smog has been called sulfurous smog. This type is identified by high concentrations of sulfur dioxide and particulate matter in the air. It is caused by the use of sulfur-bearing fossil fuels, particularly coal. Chemically, it is a reducing mixture and so it is also called as reducing smog.





Oxides of nitrogen


Oxides of nitrogen are a mixture of gases that are composed of nitrogen and oxygen. Two important oxides of nitrogen (NOx) considered as air pollutants are nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). NOx primarily gets in the air from the burning of fossil fuel. Almost all NOx emissions occur in the form of NO. NO can oxidize to NO2.



Rate of production of NO2 is faster when nitric oxide reacts with ozone.



NO2 may react with hydrocarbons in the presence of sunlight to form photochemical smog.

NO2 and other NOx interact with water, oxygen and other chemicals in the atmosphere to form acid. Acid precipitation harms sensitive ecosystems such as lakes and forests.





Particulate matter


Atmospheric particulate matter (PM) is defined as a complex mixture of extremely small particles and liquid droplets suspended in the air. Once inhaled, these particles cause serious health effects.

Particulate matter pollution includes:

PM10 Particulate matters which are equal to or less than 10 microns and more than 2.5 microns in aerodynamic diameter are known as PM10 (or respirable suspended particulate matter).

PM2.5 Particulate matters which are equal to or less than 2.5 microns in aerodynamic diameter are known as PM2.5 (or fine suspended particulate matter).

Particulate matters come in many sizes and shapes and can be made up of hundreds of different chemicals. Particulate matters can be emitted directly from a source or formed in the atmosphere. Primary particulate matters are those released directly to the atmosphere. These include dust from roads and black and elemental carbon from combustion sources. Secondary particulate matters, on the other hand, are formed in the atmosphere from chemical reactions involving primary gaseous emissions. Thus, these particles can form at locations distant from the sources that release the precursor gases.





Oxides of sulfur


Oxides of sulfur (SOx) are produced when sulfur containing fossil fuel is burnt. It is also released naturally by volcanic activity. The most common oxide of sulfur is sulfur dioxide. Sulfur dioxide, once released, can be converted to other oxides of sulfur.



The reaction is also promoted by ozone and hydrogen peroxide.



Aerosol

An aerosol is a colloid of fine solid particles or liquid droplets, in gas. A colloid is a broad category of mixtures and is defined as one phase suspended in another. Aerosol can be liquid aerosol (liquid suspended in gas) and solid aerosol (solid suspended in gas).



Particulate matter

Term used for a mixture of solid particles and liquid droplets suspended in the air in the form of dust, fume, mist, smoke or soot. It is not a specific chemical entity but a mixture of particles from different sources and of different sizes, composition and properties.

Dust Solid particles generated by a mechanical process such as grinding or crushing operations.

Fume Solid particles generated by condensation of vapours in air.

Mist Liquid aerosol, liquid particles generated by condensation (dispersed phase) suspended in the gas (continuous phase).

Smoke Solid aerosol, solid particles (dispersed phase) suspended in the gas (continuous phase). Emitted when a material undergoes combustion or pyrolysis and its exact composition depends on what is being burned.

Soot Carbon particles produced by incomplete combustion of coal, oil, wood or other fuels.



SO2 can affect both animals and plants. It has been reported that even a low concentration of sulfur dioxide causes respiratory diseases e.g. asthma, bronchitis, emphysema in human beings. At high concentrations, gaseous SOx can harm plants by damaging foliage. SO2 and other sulfur oxides can contribute to acid rain which can harm sensitive ecosystems.





Lead


Lead (Pb) is a naturally occurring element found in small amounts in the Earth’s crust. Lead is emitted to the atmosphere primarily in the form of inorganic particulates. Most lead emission occurred in the past from motor vehicles as a result of burning of leaded gasoline. Other human activities acting as a source include use of lead-based paint, pipes and plumbing materials, batteries, ammunition and cosmetics.

Lead can affect almost every organ and system in our body. Even low levels of lead in the blood of children can result in behavior and learning problems, lower IQ and slowed growth. In the case of pregnant women, it causes reduced growth of the fetus and premature birth. Lead is also harmful to adults. Adults exposed to lead can suffer from cardiovascular defects, increased blood pressure, decreased kidney function and reproductive problems.





6.1.5 Effects of air pollution


A variety of air pollutants have known or suspected harmful effects on human, plants and the environment. Outdoor (ambient) air pollution is a major environmental health problem affecting everyone in developed and developing countries.





Effect on human health


Air pollutants escape to the environment by a number of natural and anthropogenic activities cause adverse effects on human health. It has both acute and chronic effects on human health, affecting different systems and organs. It can be minor upper respiratory irritation, bronchitis, emphysema, asthma, lung cancer and heart disease. In addition, short- and long-term exposures have also been linked with premature mortality and reduced life expectancy.





Effect on plants


Air pollutants have a negative effect on the plants; they can have direct toxic effects, or indirect effect by causing acid rain, changing soil pH and other parameters. The particulate matters also have a negative effect. They cover the leaf surface reducing light penetration and blocking the stomata. These impediments influence strongly the process of photosynthesis. Air pollution causes necrosis (killing of plant tissues), chlorosis (loss or reduction of chlorophyll), abscission (shedding of plant organs) and growth and yield reduction in plants.





Loss of biodiversity


Habitat loss, climate change and invasive species are considered as prime threats to biodiversity loss. Environmental pollution also causes adverse effects on biodiversity. Effects of air pollution have been identified, with varying levels of certainty, in all the ecosystem types. It is also responsible for the decline of global biodiversity.





Acid rain


Acid rain or acid deposition is a broad term that includes any form of precipitation with acidic components, such as sulfuric or nitric acid that fall to the ground from the atmosphere in wet or dry forms. This can include rain, snow, fog, hail or even dust that is acidic.

Natural, unpolluted rainwater actually has a pH of about 5.6 (i.e. acidic). The acidity of rain-water comes from the natural presence of three substances (CO2, NOx and SO2) found in the troposphere. Carbon dioxide is present in the greatest concentration and therefore contributes the most to the natural acidity of rainwater. When the pH of the rainwater drops below 5.6 (between 4.2 and 4.4), it is called acid rain. Large emissions of sulfur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen from the combustion of fossil fuels is responsible for lowering of pH of rainwater. From these gases, airborne sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and nitric acid (HNO3) are formed which makes water more acidic.





Eutrophication


Eutrophication is a process whereby water bodies, such as lakes, ponds, receive excess inorganic nutrients (mainly nitrogen and phosphorus-containing compounds) that stimulate excessive plant and algal growth. Eutrophication can be natural or cultural. Natural eutrophication is a natural ageing process of water bodies. It occurs as lakes and ponds age and is filled in with sediments. Cultural eutrophication occurs due to excessive discharge of inorganic nutrients into the water bodies due to human activities. Air pollution due to human activities also has accelerated the rate and extent of eutrophication due to a large input of nitrogen and phosphorus, into water bodies.





Ozone depletion


The stratospheric ozone layer is depleting due to the release of pollution containing the chemicals chlorine and bromine. These chemicals are widely known as ozone-depleting substances. The chief ozone-depleting substances include chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), hydrobromofluorocarbons (HBFCs), halons, methyl bromide, carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform. CFCs, for example, are chemically inert and non-toxic. But at stratosphere, CFCs (e.g. CF2Cl2) are broken down by UV light and releasing chlorine atoms. The chlorine freed in the reaction acts as a catalyst in the ozone removal process. A single chlorine atom may break down thousands of ozone molecules before it returns to the troposphere.



Halocarbons are carbon-based molecules that have chlorine, fluorine or bromine in them. A CFC is a halo-carbon that contains only carbon, chlorine and fluorine. Some CFCs contain hydrogen, chlorine, fluorine and carbon, and they are called hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs). When chlorine is not present in the molecules, they are called hydro-fluorocarbons (HFCs).





Greenhouse effect and Global warming


The ‘Greenhouse effect’ is a term that refers to a physical property of the Earth’s atmosphere. If the Earth had no atmosphere, its average surface temperature would be very low of about –18°C rather than about 15°C found today. The difference in temperature is due to the presence of gases called greenhouse gases which affect the overall energy balance of the Earth’s system by absorbing long-wave infrared radiation. Due to greenhouse gases, the atmosphere absorbs more infrared energy than it re radiates to space, resulting in a net warming of the Earth atmosphere system. This is the natural greenhouse effect. With more greenhouse gases released to the atmosphere due to human activity, more infrared radiation will be trapped in the Earth’s lower atmosphere which contributes to the global warming i.e. ‘enhanced greenhouse effect’.





Climate change


Air pollution and climate change are closely related. Greenhouse gases from human activities are the most significant driver of observed climate change. Greenhouse gases warm the surface and the atmosphere with significant implications in rainfall pattern, retreat of glaciers and sea ice, sea level, among other factors.





6.1.6 Air quality standards


Ambient air quality refers to the condition or quality of air surrounding us in the outdoor environment. Many countries have their own Ambient Air Quality Standards prescribed for their territories. EPA has established two levels (primary and secondary) of national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS) for pollutants considered harmful to public health and the environment. Primary standards are required to be set at levels that will protect human health including the most sensitive individuals. Secondary standards are established to protect public welfare (e.g. crops, animals, structures). Secondary standards are meant to be more stringent than primary standards. NAAQS has been set for six ‘criteria’ air pollutants in the US, namely, carbon monoxide, lead, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, particulate matter and sulfur dioxide.





Ambient Air Quality Standards in India


In India, NAAQS are the standards for ambient air quality set by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) that is applicable nationwide. The current NAAQS were notified on 18 November 2009 by the CPCB. Prior to the November 2009 standards, India had set air quality standards on 11 April 1994, and this was later revised on 14 October 1998. The 2009 standards further lowered the maximum permissible limits for pollutants and made the standards uniform across the nation. Earlier, less stringent standards were prescribed for industrial zones as compared to residential areas.

Table 6.2 National ambient air quality standards in India





Box 6.1 Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)




The CPCB of India is a statutory organization under the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. It was established in 1974 under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. Later, CPCB is also entrusted with the powers and functions under the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. The board is led by its chairman, who is nominated by the central government. The main functions of the CPCB are:

To advise the central government on any matter concerning the improvement of the quality of the air and the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution.



To plan and cause to be executed a nation-wide programme for the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution.



To provide technical assistance and guidance to the State Pollution Control Board.



To carry out and sponsor investigations and research related to prevention, control and abatement of air pollution.



To collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data related to air pollution; and



To lay down an annual standards for the quality of air.





WHO air quality guidelines


World Health Organization (WHO) work on environmental health provides the basis for global standards in environmental quality. The ‘WHO air quality guidelines’ provide an assessment of the health effects of air pollution and thresholds for health-harmful pollution levels. The guidelines are intended for worldwide use. On the other hand, air quality standards are set by each country to protect public health. Therefore, national standards will vary according to the approach adopted for balancing health risks, technological feasibility, economic considerations and various other political and social factors.

Table 6.3 WHO air quality standards





Air Quality Index


The air quality index (AQI) is an index for reporting daily air quality. It tells you how clean or polluted your air is. Index ranges from 0 to 500. The higher the value, the greater the level of air pollution and the greater the health concern. Thus, it is a tool to describe the air quality status to the people in terms, which are easy to understand. It transforms complex air quality data of various pollutants into a number (index value), nomenclature and color. Different countries have their own air quality indices, corresponding to different national air quality standards.

In India, there are six air quality indices categories, namely good, satisfactory, moderately polluted, poor, very poor and severe. The existing air quality indices consider eight pollutants (particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, carbon monoxide, ammonia, sulphur dioxide and lead) for which short-term (up to 24 hourly averaging period) NAAQS are prescribed.

Based on the measured ambient concentrations, corresponding standards and likely health impact, a sub-index is calculated for each of these pollutants. The worst sub-index reflects overall air quality indices. Associated likely health impacts for different air quality indices categories and pollutants have also been suggested, with primary inputs from the medical expert members of the group. The air quality indices values and corresponding ambient concentrations (health breakpoints) as well as associated likely health impacts for the identified eight pollutants are given in table 6.4.





National Air Quality Monitoring Programme


Air quality monitoring is the collection and measurement of samples of ambient air pollutants to evaluate the status of the atmosphere as compared to clean air standards or historical information. It is used to control the operation of a process or emissions control device performance.

CPCB is executing a nation-wide programme of ambient air quality monitoring known as National Air Quality Monitoring Programme (NAMP). Under NAMP, four air pollutants - SO2, NO2, PM10 and PM2.5 have been identified for regular monitoring at different locations. The monitoring of meteorological parameters such as wind speed and wind direction, relative humidity and temperature were also integrated with the monitoring of air quality. The monitoring of pollutants is carried out for 24 hours (4 hourly sampling for gaseous pollutants and 8 hourly sampling for particulate matters) with a frequency of twice a week, to have one hundred and four (104) observations in a year.

The objectives of the NAMP are:

To determine status and trends of ambient air quality;



To ascertain whether the prescribed ambient air quality standards are violated;



To identify non-attainment cities;



To obtain the knowledge and understanding necessary for developing preventive and corrective measures;



To understand the natural cleansing process undergoing in the environment through pollution dilution, dispersion, wind based movement, dry deposition, precipitation and chemical transformation of pollutants generated.





6.1.7 Indoor air pollution


Indoor air pollution refers to the physical, chemical and biological characteristics of air in the indoor environment within a home, building, institution or commercial facility. Various conditions are responsible for indoor air pollution in the rural areas and the urban areas.

Indoor air quality (IAQ) refers to the quality of the air inside buildings as represented by concentrations of pollutants and thermal (temperature and relative humidity) conditions that affect the health and performance of occupants.



In the developing countries, it is the rural areas that face the greatest threat from indoor pollution. This is mainly due to use of traditional fuels such as firewood, charcoal and cow dung for cooking and heating. Burning such fuels produces large amount of smoke and other air pollutants.

Table 6.4 AQI category, Pollutants and Health breakpoints





In urban areas, exposure to indoor air pollution has increased due to a variety of reasons, including the construction of more tightly sealed buildings, reduced ventilation, the use of synthetic materials for building and furnishing and the use of chemical products, pesticides and household care products. Common indoor air pollutants include:

Biological contaminants It includes pollen from plants, mite, hair from pets, fungi, parasites and bacteria.



Carbon dioxide



Carbon monoxide



Dust



Tobacco smoke



Fine particulate matter



Lead



Nitrogen oxides



Pesticides



Radon: Radon is a colorless, odorless radioactive gas that is formed in soil due to natural breakdown of Uranium and is emitted naturally by the soil. Radon is the leading cause of lung cancer among non-smokers. Due to modern houses having poor ventilation, it is confined inside the house.



Volatile organic compounds (VOCs): The main indoor sources for VOCs are perfumes, hair sprays, furniture polish, glues, air fresheners, moth repellents, wood preservatives and many other products used in the house.





Infiltration is the term used to describe the natural air exchange that occurs between a building and its environment when doors and windows are closed.

Natural ventilation is the air exchange that occurs when windows or doors are purposely opened to increase air circulation, while forced ventilation occurs when mechanical air handling system induces air exchange using fans or blowers.





6.1.8 Acid rain


Acid rain or acid deposition is a broad term refers to any form of precipitation (rain, snow, fog, hail or even dust) containing higher than normal amounts of nitric and sulfuric acids. Forms of acid deposition may be wet deposition or dry deposition. In the case of wet deposition, the sulfuric and nitric acids formed in the atmosphere fall to the ground mixed with rain. However, acidic particles can also deposit from the atmosphere in the absence of moisture as dry deposition. The term acid rain is used most often, but acid precipitation is more accurate since it can also reach the ground as dry particles in dust and smoke.

Acidity and alkalinity are measured using a pH scale for which 7.0 is neutral. The lower a substance’s pH (less than 7), the more acidic it is; the higher a substance’s pH (greater than 7), the more alkaline it is. Normal rainwater is slightly acidic (pH of about 5.6) in nature because carbon dioxide dissolves into it forming weak carbonic acid. When the pH of the rainwater drops below 5.6 (between 4.2 and 4.4), it is called acid rain.



The acidity of rainwater increases through the introduction of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides into the atmosphere from both natural sources, such as volcanic eruption and man-made sources primarily from fossil fuel combustion. These gases react in the atmosphere with water, oxygen and other chemicals to form various acidic compounds such as sulfuric acid and nitric acid.



Acid rain causes acidification of soil and water bodies such as lakes and streams. Some types of plants and animals are able to tolerate acidic waters. Others, however, are acid-sensitive and will be lost as the pH declines.

Acidification of soil due to acid rain increases the exchange between hydrogen ion and nutrient cations like potassium, magnesium and calcium in the soil. These cations are liberated into soil and can be rapidly leached out in soil solution along with sulphate. Acid induced leaching leads to nutrient deficiency in the affected soils.

Acidic rainwater can also leach aluminum from soil clay particles. The more acid that is introduced to the ecosystem, the more aluminum is released. That aluminum may be harmful to plants as well as animals. In addition, acid rain accelerates the decay of building materials. The acidic particles corrode metal and cause paint and stone to deteriorate more quickly. One very famous example is the discoloration of Taj Mahal in India. The air around the city of Agra, where the Taj Mahal is located, contains fairly high levels of sulfur and nitrogen oxides. It is mainly due to a large number of industries and power plants around the area.



The resulting acid rain reacts with marble, CaCO3 of Taj Mahal causing damage to this wonderful monument. As a result, the monument is being slowly disfigured and the marble is getting discolored and lustreless.





6.1.9 Control of air pollution


Air pollution control includes the use of materials, processes, or practices that reduce or eliminate the creation of pollutants or wastes. A control strategy related to air quality is a set of specific techniques and measures identified and implemented to achieve reductions in air pollution to attain an air quality standard or goal. The goal for all control strategies is to achieve real and measurable air emission reductions.





Control strategy


The air pollution control strategies assumes that a source of a specific pollutant can be reduced to a target value to meet a regulation. Control strategy cannot be applied to an uncontrollable source, such as a volcanic eruption, nor can it be expected to control a source completely i.e. reduce emissions to zero. Control of any air pollutant source also requires a complete knowledge of the contaminant and the source. Control strategy for a particular air pollutant involves the following three steps:

Determine priority pollutants

It is the first step of control strategy. The pollutants of concern for a specific location should be based on health effects and the severity of the air quality problem in that area.



Source control

Measures to control sources of pollution include:

Pollution prevention approaches

Pollution prevention approaches are required to reduce, eliminate or prevent pollution at its source. It may include

substitution of raw materials,



process change and



modification of existing equipment





Pollution control equipments

In many situations, sufficient control over emissions cannot be obtained by pollution prevention approaches such as fuel or process change. In cases, the levels of the pollutants of concern in the exhaust gases or process stream must be reduced to allowable values before they are released to the atmosphere. It involves the use of pollution control equipments to remove pollutants from the gas stream before releasing it to the environment. If a pollutant is removed from the carrying gas stream, disposal of the collected material is also very important. If the collected material is truly inert, it may be disposed of in a sanitary landfill. If it is reactive and toxic then strict laws governing its disposal apply.



Compliance and enforcement programs

These programs help owners or operators of pollutant sources to understand the requirements, as well as the actions that environmental authorities can take if the sources don’t comply.





A gaseous substance is called a vapour below its critical temperature, and a gas above its critical temperature. For example, the critical temperature for CO2 is 31.1°C. Below this temperature CO2 is a ‘vapour’ and can be liquefied by pressure. Above this temperature CO2 is a ‘gas’ and cannot be liquefied by pressure alone.



Pollution control equipments are generally classified into two types: control devices for particulate matters and control devices for gaseous pollutants. Key characteristics of pollution control devices depend on corrosiveness, inflammability, toxicity and reactivity for gaseous pollutants and size range, particle shape, agglomeration tendencies, corrosiveness, abrasiveness, hygroscopic tendencies and stickiness for particulate matters.

For particulate matters

Cyclones

Particle-laden gases are forced to change direction. The inertia of the particle causes them to separate from the gas stream.

Wet scrubbers

Liquid droplets (water) collect the particles by impaction, interception and diffusion. The droplets and their particles are then separated from the gas stream.

Electrostatic precipitators

Electrical forces are used to move the particles out of the gas stream onto collection plates.

Filters

A porous fabric removes particulates from the gas stream. The porous dust cake that forms on the fabric then actually does the filtration.

For gaseous pollutants

Contact and surface condensers

The vapor is cooled and condensed to a liquid.

Wet scrubbers

The gas or vapor is collected in a liquid.

Thermal incinerator

An organic gas or vapor is oxidized by heating it to a high temperature and holding it at that temperature for a sufficient time period.

Catalytic incinerator

It is another category of oxidation systems that is similar to typical thermal oxidizers, but the catalytic oxidizers use a catalyst to promote the oxidation.





Automobile emission controls


Vehicles are the principal cause of India’s urban air pollution problems. Vehicular emissions are caused by both combustion and evaporation. To the extent that fossil fuels continue to be used, there are three general approaches that can be used to reduce emissions from combustion of fossil fuel.

Precombustion controls to reduce the emission potential of the fuel itself (for example, using fuels with less sulfur or nitrogen content).

Combustion controls to reduce emissions by improving the combustion process itself.

Postcombustion controls to capture emissions after they have been formed but before they are released to the air.

Most of the control of automobile emissions occur at the exhaust system. The approach most favored by automobile manufacturers to achieve the emission standards has been the catalytic converter (for CO, HCs and NOx). A catalytic converter is able to oxidize hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide, while reducing NOx to N2 all in the same catalyst bed. For pre-combustion controls, a number of alternatives to gasoline (petrol) are being investigated as possible fuels for the future. These include ethanol, biodisel, CNG, LPG, hydrogen and electricity.

Ethanol, also known as grain alcohol, has long been used as an oxygenate to reduce CO emissions, in which case the gasoline/ethanol mixture is usually referred to as gasohol. Ethanol can be blended with gasoline with a range of mixture ratios. The two mixtures common in the United States are E10 (10 percent ethanol, 90 percent gasoline, by volume) and E85 (85 percent ethanol, 15 percent gasoline).

Biodiesel can be created from vegetable oils, animal fats or recycled restaurant greases. It is a biodegradable, domestic, renewable energy fuel that has the potential to help reduce the need for petroleum-based transportation fuels as well as helping farmers by providing a market for excess soybean oil. As a renewable fuel whose production requires little or no fossil fuel, its net CO2 emissions are only about one-fourth that of standard diesel. The oxygen in biodiesel enables more complete combustion to take place, and the fewer sulfur content reduces sulfate emissions.

Biodiesel can be blended with conventional diesel in mixture strength, with the most common blend B2 (2 percent biodiesel, 98 percent standard diesel) being popular because of its superior lubricity compared to ultra-low-sulfur diesel fuels. Other common blends are B5 and B20. Conventional engines can run on B20 without any modifications, but higher concentrations may require certain engine modifications to avoid maintenance or operational problems. Biodiesel is produced using a process called transesterification in which the unwanted glycerol in vegetable oil or fat is removed by chemical reactions involving an alcohol, such as methanol or ethanol and a catalyst. The catalyst is usually sodium or potassium hydroxide.

CNG (compressed natural gas) is made by compressing natural gas which is mainly composed of methane. CNG combustion produces fewer undesirable gases than petrol, diesel and LPG. CNG is often confused with LNG (liquefied natural gas). While both are stored forms of natural gas (predominantly methane), the key difference is that CNG is gas that is stored at high pressure, while LNG is stored at very low temperature, becoming liquid in the process. CNG is a very clean fuel resulting in very low emissions of reactive hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, particulates and toxics.

LPG (liquefied petroleum gas) is the most popular cooking fuel. It is a mixture of gases, liquefied by compression, consisting of primarily propane or primarily butane or mixture of propane and butane. It is obtained either from crude oil or from natural gas. Crude oil, recovered from underground oil deposits, is a mixture of heavy hydrocarbons. In a petroleum refinery, this oil is heated and turned into a mixture of gases and liquids. The mixture of gases become liquid when kept under pressure. When pressure is released, they again turn into gaseous forms as happens when the valve in the gas is released. LPG is volatile and highly inflammable. Since the hydrocarbons do not have any smell a small quantity of powerful odorant, ethanethiol, is added so that leaks can be detected easily.





Box 6.2 Bharat stage emission standards




Fuel quality plays a very important role in meeting the stringent emission regulation. Bharat stage emission standards (BSES) are emission standards adopted by the Government of India to regulate the output of air pollutants from internal combustion engines and spark-ignition engines. The standards and the timeline for implementation are set by the CPCB under the MoEFCC. The Bharat stage emission standard is based on European emission standards. It was first introduced in year 2000 (Euro-I and Euro-II equivalent norms). Progressively stringent norms have been rolled out since then. Since October 2010, Bharat stage III (Euro-III equivalent) norms have been enforced across the country. In 13 major cities, Bharat stage IV (Euro-IV equivalent) emission norms have been in place since April 2010 and it is enforced for whole country from April 2017. In 2016, the Indian government announced that the country would skip the Bharat stage V (Euro-V equivalent) emission norms altogether and adopt Bharat stage VI (Euro-VI equivalent) norms by 2020.





6.1.10 Noise pollution


Noise is defined as unwanted sound which causes undesirable physiological and psychological effects in an individual. The word ‘noise’ descends from the Latin word ‘nausea,’ meaning seasickness, or, more generally, any similar sensation of disgust, annoyance or discomfort.

Sound with frequency between 20 Hz and 20,000 Hz are called audible sound. Frequencies below the range of human audibility are called infrasound, and those above it are referred to as ultrasound. Decibel (abbreviated dB) is a unit for measuring intensity of sound. A sound of minimal audibility is assigned the value of 0 dB. The maximum decibel level that a human ear can endure without experiencing damage is 120 dB.





Sources of noise pollution


The sources of noise pollution are divided into two categories– Natural sources and man-made sources.

The natural sources include thunderstorms, tornado, cyclone, volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, landslides, sounds produced by animals and rapidly falling water.

The man-made sources include transport system, industrial activities, fireworks, construction activities, commercial activities and others.





Effect of noise pollution


Noise pollution affects both health and behavior. Noise can cause annoyance and aggression, hypertension, high-stress levels, tinnitus, hearing loss, sleep disturbances and other harmful effects. High noise levels can also contribute to cardiovascular effects.





Standards and guidelines of ambient noise level in India


Due to the increasing ambient noise levels in public places from various sources, inter-alia, industrial activity, construction activity, generator sets, loudspeakers, public address systems, music systems, vehicular horns and other mechanical devices have deleterious effects on human health and the psychological well being of the people, Indian government has taken necessary provision to regulate and control noise producing and generating sources with the objective of maintaining the ambient air quality standards in respect of noise. Under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, the central government has made the ‘Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000’ for the regulation and control of noise producing and generating sources.

Table 6.5 Ambient air quality standards in respect of noise





Note

Day time shall mean from 6.00 a.m. to 10.00 p.m.



Night time shall mean from 10.00 p.m. to 6.00 a.m.



Silence zone is defined as an area comprising not less than 100 metres around hospitals, educational institutions and courts. The silence zones are zones which are declared as such by the competent authority.



Mixed categories of areas may be declared as one of the four above mentioned categories by the competent authority.





* dB(A) Leq denotes the time weighted average of the level of sound in decibels on scale A which is relatable to human hearing. A decibel is a unit in which noise is measured.

In dB(A) Leq, ‘A’ denotes the frequency weighting in the measurement of noise and corresponds to frequency response characteristics of the human ear.

‘Leq’ is an energy mean of the noise level over a specified period.





Box 6.3 Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981




The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 an Act of the Parliament of India to control and prevent air pollution in India. It was amended in 1987. The Act was enacted to implement the decisions taken at the United Nations Conference on Human Environment held at Stockholm in June 1972, in which India participated.

The objective of this Act is to provide for the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution, for the establishment, with a view to carrying out the aforesaid purposes, of Boards, for conferring on and assigning to such Boards powers and functions relating thereto and for matters connected therewith.

Environment (Protection) Act, 1986

Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 is an Act of the Parliament of India. It came into force on 19 November 1986 with the objective of providing for the protection and improvement of the environment. The Act was last amended in 1991. The Act is an ‘umbrella’ legislation designed to provide a framework for central government to coordinate the activities of various central and state authorities established under previous laws, such as the Water Act and the Air Act. It empowers the Central Government to establish authorities charged with the mandate of preventing environmental pollution in all its forms and to tackle specific environmental problems that are peculiar to different parts of the country.





6.2 Water pollution


Water pollution is the contamination or changes in the physical, biological and chemical properties of natural surface and groundwater which makes water unsuitable for beneficial use.

‘Water pollution is the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water which tends to degrade the quality so as to constitute a hazard, or impairs the usefulness of water.’

USPHS Drinking Water Standards.


Water pollution can be surface water pollution and groundwater pollution. The surface water pollution can be further divided into freshwater pollution and marine water pollution. The most obvious type of water pollution affects surface waters. Water stored underground in aquifers is known as groundwater.

Water pollution can come from a number of different sources. The sources of water pollution may be: point sources and non-point sources.

A point source is a single identifiable localized source of water pollution. Point sources of water pollution include municipal sewage treatment plant discharges and industrial plant discharges. A great deal of water pollution happens not from one single source but from many different scattered sources. This is called non-point source. Non-point source is diffuse source (not a single discrete source). Non-point source pollution is caused by rainwater moving over and through the ground, it picks up and carries natural and human-made pollutants, depositing them into lakes, rivers, wetlands, coastal waters and groundwater.

Non-point source pollution can include:

Excess fertilizers, herbicides and insecticides from agricultural lands and residential areas.



Oil, grease and toxic chemicals from urban runoff.



Sediment from construction sites, crop and forest lands and others.



Pathogens and nutrients from livestock and pet wastes.



Atmospheric deposition.





6.2.1 Causes of water pollution


The causative agents of water pollution may be natural and man-made. Some of the major causative agents of freshwater pollution are:





Industrial discharges


Pollutants coming from chemical and industrial processes are the major causes of water pollution. When factories and manufacturers pour their inorganic and organic wastes directly into streams and rivers, the water becomes poisonous and oxygen levels are depleted causing many aquatic organisms to die. The heated water from the industries also causes thermal pollution. This kills aquatic animals and plants by reducing the oxygen content of the water.





Disposal of sewage


Sewage is the biggest polluter of surface and groundwater sources. The terms ‘wastewater’ and ‘ sewage’ are regularly used interchangeably, however there are differences between both. In fact, ‘sewage’ is considered a subset of wastewater. Sewage (or domestic wastewater or municipal wastewater) is the term used for wastewater that often contain domestic wastes that often contains feces. Sewage is mainly biodegradable waste. It includes mainly human excreta released from domestic and public toilets.





Surface run-off


Surface run-off includes run-off from farmland and mines as well as urban run-off. Run-off water from farmland and mines. Agricultural runoff water contains pesticides, fertilizers and organic wastes. The flow of fertilizer rich water into streams and lakes gives rise to eutrophication. Excess of pesticides in water also adversely affect the aquatic life. Intensive cultivation also causes fertilizers and pesticides to seep into the groundwater, through the process of leaching.





6.2.2 Types of water pollutants


The substances which are responsible for causing water pollution are called water pollutants. Pollutants have been classified into physical, chemical and biological nature. There are eight basic categories: organic waste, infectious agents, plant nutrients, synthetic organic chemicals, inorganic chemicals, sediments, radioactive pollution and thermal pollution.

Classification of water pollutants

Occurrence Nature

Physical Temperature

Total dissolved solids

Total suspended solids

Suspended and floating matters

Chemical Inorganic materials

Heavy metals like arsenic, mercury.

Inorganic nutrients such as nitrate, phosphate

Mineral acids

Radioactive materials

Organic materials

Oxygen demanding wastes

Synthetic organic compounds such as synthetic pesticides, synthetic detergents

Biological Pathogenic organisms (e.g. fecal coliform, E. coli)

Nuisance organisms (e.g. mollusca, algae and ascellus)

Thermal pollution

Thermal pollution (or calefaction) is a rise in temperature (above the normal range) of water body. It occurs as a result of the entry of heated water from industries and power generation plants. Various processes involved in generating thermal pollution are

Water for cooling condensers



Feeding boilers for steam generation



Auxiliary plant cooling



Ash handling



Gas washing, etc.





The immediate effect of an increase in temperature is a decrease in the oxygen concentration. A temperature rise of 10°C will double the rate of many chemical reactions and so the decay of the organic matter, rusting of iron, and the solubility rate of salts are also accelerated by calefaction. All organisms have a range of temperature tolerance beyond which they either die or move to more congenital conditions downstream.





6.2.3 Indicators of water pollution


There are two main ways of measuring the quality of water. One way is to measure the concentrations of different chemicals that it contains. If the chemicals are dangerous or the concentrations are too high, we can regard the water as polluted. Measurements like this are known as chemical indicators of water quality. Another way to measure water quality involves examining the fish, insects and other invertebrates that the water will support. If many different types of creatures can live in a river, the quality is likely to be very good; if the river supports no or less aquatic life, the quality is obviously much poorer. Measurements like this are called biological indicators of water quality.





6.2.4 Groundwater pollution


Water from rainfall and melting of snow return to the atmosphere by evaporation or transpiration, or seep into the ground to become part of the subsurface or underground water. As water percolates down through cracks and pores of soil and rock, it passes through a region called the unsaturated zone, which is characterized by the presence of both air and water in the spaces between soil particles. Water in the unsaturated zone, called vadose water, is essentially unavailable for human use. In the saturated zone, all spaces between soil particles are filled with water. Water in the saturated zone is called groundwater, and the upper boundary of the saturated zone is called the water table.

Groundwater contamination can come from a number of natural and human-made sources. These can include:

Improper hazardous waste disposal

Improper use and disposal of pesticides and misuse of fertilizers and pesticides can cause groundwater pollution. Overuse of fertilizers can allow nitrates from fertilizer to seep into the water table. In sensitive groundwater areas, rainfall seepage can cause fertilizer and pesticides to migrate and contaminate an aquifer.

Leachate from landfills

If landfills are not properly constructed, liquid from decomposition of materials, or leachate, can leak out of the landfill into an aquifer. Leachate can contain high levels of bacteria, hazardous chemicals, metals, and ammonia. Runoff water from landfills after rains can also carry pollution to groundwater recharge areas and hence into groundwater.

Septic systems

Septic systems can be a source of groundwater pollution if too many systems are located in an area, if a system is overloaded or not working properly, or if a system is improperly used for disposal of chemicals or other materials. If a septic system is not working properly, it can contaminate groundwater with bacteria, viruses, and hazardous cleaning materials or household chemicals.

Saline intrusion

In coastal areas, too much demand on potable groundwater can create induced recharge from ocean waters, resulting in saline intrusion into groundwater supplies. This can also happen in times of severe drought.

Animal wastes

Animal wastes are sources of bacteria and nitrates. They can contaminate groundwater if too many animals are located in too small lot, or if the lot has improper drainage.





6.2.5 Water quality indicators


In general, water quality refers to the physical, chemical, biological, radiological, and other characteristics of water resources, affecting their usefulness for a particular use. The parameters for water quality are determined by the intended use such as human consumption, agricultural, domestic and industrial use.





Physical indicators


Temperature

Water temperature is a physical property expressing how hot or cold water is. The temperature of surface water is influenced by latitude, altitude, season, time of day, air circulation, cloud cover and the flow and depth of the water body. Temperature influences several other parameters and can alter the physical and chemical properties of water such as metabolic rates of animals, dissolved oxygen concentrations, conductivity and salinity

Conductivity

Conductivity, or specific conductance, is a measure of the ability of water to conduct an electric current. It is sensitive to variations in dissolved solids, mostly mineral salts. The degree to which these dissociate into ions, the amount of electrical charge on each ion, ion mobility and the temperature of the solution all have an influence on conductivity. The more ions that are present, the higher the conductivity of water.

Salinity

Salinity is a measure of the amount of salts in the water. Salinity is a strong contributor to conductivity. Saline water conducts electricity more readily than freshwater, so electrical conductivity is routinely used to measure salinity. As salinity increases, it may become toxic to native freshwater organisms.

Total suspended solids

Total suspended solids are particles that are larger than 2 microns. Anything smaller than 2 microns is considered a dissolved solid. Total solids include both total suspended solids, the portion of total solids retained by a filter and total dissolved solids, the portion that passes through a filter. Most suspended solids are made up of inorganic materials.

Total dissolved solids

Total dissolved solids (TDS) combine the sum of all particles that are smaller than 2 microns. Total dissolved solids comprise inorganic salts and some small amounts of organic matter that are dissolved in water. Total dissolved solids are measured in mg/L. The concentration of TDS is an important indicator of the usefulness of water for various applications. Drinking water, for example, has a recommended maximum contaminant level of TDS is 500 mg/L.

Turbidity

Turbidity is a measure of the amount of suspended particles in the water. Turbidity is an optical determination of water clarity. The turbidity of water is based on the amount of light scattered by particles in a given sample of water.

Odor and color of water

Water odor is usually the result of labile, volatile organic compounds and may be produced by phytoplankton and aquatic plants or decaying organic matter. Industrial and human wastes can also create odors, either directly or as a result of stimulating biological activity. Usually, the presence of an odor suggests higher than normal biological activity.

Hardness

The hardness of natural waters depends mainly on the presence of dissolved calcium and magnesium salts. The total content of these salts is known as general hardness, which can be further divided into carbonate hardness (determined by concentrations of calcium and magnesium hydrocarbonates) and non-carbonate hardness (determined by calcium and magnesium salts of strong acids).





Chemical indicators


pH

The pH is an important variable in water quality assessment as it influences many biological and chemical processes within a water body. pH is an indicator of acidity or alkalinity. Neutral water has a pH of 7. If pH is less than 7, water is acidic and if more than 7, it is basic. The pH of most natural waters is between 6.0 and 8.5. pH determines solubility and biological availability of chemicals in water.

Acidity and alkalinity are the base- and acid-neutralizing capacities of water. Although alkalinity and pH are closely related, there are distinct differences. The alkalinity of water or a solution is the quantitative capacity of that solution to buffer or neutralize an acid. In other words, alkalinity is a measurement of water’s ability to resist changes in pH. If a body of water has a high alkalinity, it can limit pH changes due to acid rain, pollution or other factors.

Dissolved oxygen

Dissolved oxygen (DO) refers to the level of free, non-compound oxygen (i.e. oxygen that is not bonded to any other element) present in water. It is an important parameter in assessing water quality because of its influence on the organisms living within the water body.

Sources of dissolved oxygen in water is either air or photosynthetic activity of algae and plants. The actual amount of dissolved oxygen (in mg/L) will vary depending on temperature, pressure and salinity. First, the solubility of oxygen decreases as temperature increases. Second, dissolved oxygen decreases exponentially as salt levels increase. Third, dissolved oxygen will increase as pressure increases. In freshwaters dissolved oxygen at sea level ranges from 15 mg/L at 0°C to 8 mg/L at 25°C. Concentrations in unpolluted waters are usually close to, but less than, 10 mg/L.

Biochemical oxygen demand

The amount of dissolved oxygen (DO) used up by aerobic microorganisms to decompose (oxidize) the biodegradable organic matters present in a sample of water is termed biochemical oxygen demand or biological oxygen demand (BOD). It is an indirect measure of the concentration of the total biodegradable organic matter. The greater the amount of organic matter present, the greater the amount of oxygen utilized. Since aerobic microorganisms oxidize organic matters, the amount of oxygen used is proportional to their number and metabolic rate.

BOD test evaluates the dissolved oxygen used up by aerobic microorganisms over a 5-days period at 20°C. BOD concentration of wastewater is expressed in mg/L. BOD of clean freshwater is 2 mg/L, whereas value exceeding 5 mg/L indicates contamination. When BOD levels are high, there is a decline in DO levels. It is an approximate measure of the amount of biochemically degradable organic matter present in a water sample. Oxygen-demanding wastes are usually biodegradable organic substances contained in municipal wastewaters or in effluents from certain industries, such as food processing and paper production. In addition, the oxidation of certain inorganic compounds may also contribute to the oxygen demand.

Chemical oxygen demand

Chemical oxygen demand (COD) is used as a measure of oxygen requirement of a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant. Under controlled conditions of time and temperature, a chemical oxidizing agent (potassium permanganate or dichromate) is added to the sample of water, and the amount needed to oxidize the reducing materials present is measured. The difference between the amount of oxidizing agent at the beginning of the test and that remaining at the end of the test is used to calculate the COD. The test for COD is nonspecific in that it does not identify the oxidizable material or differentiate between the organic and inorganic material present. Similarly, it does not indicate the total organic carbon present since some organic compounds are not oxidized by the chemical oxidizing agent, whereas some inorganic compounds are oxidized. The concentrations of COD observed in surface waters range from 20 mg/L O2 or less in unpolluted waters.

Heavy metals

The accumulation of heavy metals is a quality indicator. The presence of heavy metals causes many problems to living organisms. Especially high levels of arsenic, cadmium, nickel, mercury, etc. are very dangerous to freshwater ecosystems as well as for human if the water is being used as drinking water.

In India, the states of West Bengal, Jharkhand, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and Chhattisgarh are reported to be most affected by arsenic contamination of groundwater above the permissible level. WHO’s provisional guideline value for arsenic in drinking water is 0.01 mg/l (10 μg/l) (Source: Guidelines for drinking water quality, 4th edition, WHO, 2011). Permissible limit of arsenic in India in absence of an alternative source is 0.05 mg/l (50 μg/l). (Source: Indian Standards for Drinking Water, 2004).

Pesticides are compounds used to control pests. Any organism that interferes in some way with human welfare or activities is a pest. It can be weeds, insects, rodents, bacteria, fungi, nematodes etc. Pesticides are grouped by their target organisms— that is, by the pests they are supposed to eliminate. Insecticides kill insects, herbicides kill plants, fungicides kill fungi and rodenticides kill rodents, such as rats and mice. Insecticides, the largest category of pesticides, are usually classified into groups based on chemical structure. Three of the most important groups of insecticides are the chlorinated hydrocarbons, organophosphates, and carbamates.



Nutrients

Nutrients are chemicals, such as nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur, calcium, potassium, iron, manganese, boron and cobalt that are essential to the growth of plants. These nutrients occur naturally in water bodies. In terms of water quality, nutrients can be considered as pollutants when their concentrations are sufficient to allow excessive growth of aquatic plants, particularly algae. Nutrient enrichment can lead to algal bloom which eventually die and decompose. Their decomposition removes oxygen from the water, potentially leading to levels of dissolved oxygen that are insufficient to sustain normal life forms.

Pesticides

The presence of pesticide is an indicator of water quality. The most well-known organochlorine pesticide is DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) which has been widely used to control insects they are quite soluble in lipids, which means they easily accumulate in fatty tissue. The accumulation of organochlorine pesticides in fatty tissue means that organisms at successively higher trophic levels in a food chain are consuming food that has successively higher concentrations of pesticide. At the top of the food chain, body concentrations of these pesticides are the highest, and it is there that organochlorine toxicity has been most recognizable. Birds, for example, are high on the food chain and it was the adverse effect of DDT on their reproductive success that focused attention on this particular pesticide. DDT interferes with calcium metabolism in birds, resulting in eggs with shells that are too thin to support the weight of the parent.

Surfactants

Surfactant (surface active agent) is a substance which lowers the surface tension of the medium in which it is dissolved, and/or the interfacial tension with other phases. Surfactants are usually organic compounds that are amphiphilic.





Biological indicators


The presence of pathogenic organisms in aquatic bodies also acts as an indicator of water quality. It is not practical to test for diverse pathogens in every water sample collected. Instead, the presence of pathogens is determined with indirect evidence by testing for an ‘indicator’ organism such as coliform bacteria. Coliform bacteria are defined as rod-shaped Gram-negative bacteria.

Water pollution caused by fecal contamination is a serious problem. Total coliform bacteria, fecal coliform bacteria and E. coli are all considered indicators of water contaminated with fecal matter. The total coliforms bacteria include fecal coliform bacteria such as E. coli as well as other types of coliform bacteria.

Fecal coliforms are present specifically in the gut and feces of warm-blooded animals. Because the origins of fecal coliforms are more specific than the origins of the more general total coliform group of bacteria, fecal coliforms are considered a more accurate indication of animal or human waste than the total coliforms. E. coli is the major species in the fecal coliform group. Consequently, E. coli is considered to be the species of coliform bacteria that is the best indicator of fecal pollution and the possible presence of pathogens.





6.2.6 Water quality standards


Water is used for various purposes such as drinking, agriculture, industry and domestic use. Water quality standard develops the parameters which do not cause any hazard to human or impose limitations on use of water, according to the purpose of water usage. Accordingly, there are various water quality standards for different uses such as drinking, agriculture, industry and domestic use. In the setting of standards, agencies make political and scientific decisions about how the water will be used. Water quality standards are enforceable by law. The goals of water quality standards are to protect public health and the environment, and to maintain a standard of water quality consistent with its designated uses. It provides the ‘teeth’ for water quality legislation and also the yardstick by which performance may be evaluated.

Water quality standard in India

Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) which comes under Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of India, has categorized the surface water into five classes: A, B, C, D and E - depending upon its designated best use. The following classifications have been adopted in India–

Class A Drinking water source without conventional treatment but after disinfection.

Class B Outdoor bathing (organized).

Class C Drinking water source after conventional treatment and disinfection.

Class D Fish culture and wildlife propagation.

Class E Irrigation, industrial cooling or controlled waste disposal.

The tolerance limits of parameters are specified as per classified use of water depending on various uses of water.

Surface water quality criteria for different uses

(Specified by CPCB, 1979 and the Bureau of Indian Standards, 1982)

Class A

Criteria

Total Coliforms Organism MPN/100 ml shall be 50 or less

If MPN (most probable number) count is noticed to be more than fifty then regular Tests should be carried out. The criteria would be satisfied if during a period of time not more than 5% of the samples show greater than 200 MPN/100 ml and not more than 20% of samples show more than 50 MPN/100 ml.



pH: between 6.5 and 8.5



Dissolved Oxygen: 6 mg/l or more



Biochemical Oxygen Demand (5 days at 20°C): 2 mg/l or less

Note: There shall be no visible discharge of domestic and industrial wastes into class A.





Class B

Criteria

Total Coliforms Organism MPN/100 ml shall be 500 or less

If MPN count is noticed to be more than 500 MPN/100 ml then regular tests should be carried out. The criteria would be satisfied if during a period of time not more than 5% of the samples show greater than 2000 MPN/100 ml and not more than 20% of samples show greater than 500 MPN/100 ml.



pH: between 6.5 and 8.5



Dissolved Oxygen: 5 mg/l or more



Biochemical Oxygen Demand (5 days at 20°C): 3 mg/l or less

Note: All domestic and industrial wastewater discharge upstream of bathing places shall be so regulated that the stream standards are maintained and that there is no visible floating matter including oils at the bathing places.





Class C

Criteria

Total Coliforms Organism MPN/100 ml shall be 5000 or less.

If MPN count is noticed to be more than 5000 MPN/100 ml then regular tests should be carried out. The criteria would be satisfied if during a period of time not more than 5% of the samples show greater than 20,000 MPN/100 ml and not more than 20% of samples show greater than 5000 MPN/100 ml.



pH: between 6 and 9



Dissolved Oxygen: 4 mg/l or more



Biochemical Oxygen Demand (5 days at 20°C): 3 mg/l or less

Note: All domestic and industrial wastewater discharge into class C waters shall necessarily be treated to ensure maintenance of stream standards and the discharge points shall be kept sufficiently away from the abstraction points.





Class D

Criteria

pH: between 6.5 and 8.5



Dissolved Oxygen: 4 mg/l or more



Free Ammonia (as N): 1.2 mg/l or less





Class E

Criteria

pH: between 6 and 8.5



Electrical Conductivity at 25°C micro mhos/cm (max): 2250



Sodium absorption Ratio (max): 26



Boron (max): 2 mg/l





6.2.7 Effects of water pollution


The effects of water pollution are not only devastating to human but also to animals. Polluted water destroys aquatic life and reduces its reproductive ability. Polluted water is unsuitable for drinking, recreation, agriculture and industry. It diminishes the aesthetic quality of lakes and rivers.

Death of aquatic animals

The main problem caused by water pollution is that it kills organisms that depend on these water bodies. Dead fish, crabs, birds, dolphins and many other animals often wind up on beaches, killed by pollutants in their habitat (living environment).

Disruption of food-chains

Pollution disrupts the natural food chain as well. Pollutants such as lead and cadmium are eaten by tiny animals. Later, these animals are consumed by fish and shellfish and the food chain continues to be disrupted at all higher levels.

Contaminated water can lead to both waterborne and water-contact diseases. Waterborne diseases are those acquired by ingestion of contaminated drinking water, but also from washing hands, food or utensils with contaminated water. Water-contact diseases do not even require an individual to ingest the water. Schistosomiasis is the most common water-contact disease in the world. It is spread by free-swimming larva in the water, called cercaria, that attach themselves to human skin, penetrate it, and enter the bloodstream.



Health impact and diseases

Health impacts originating from water pollution can be divided into two main categories: biological agents that may affect man following ingestion of water or contact with water and chemical pollutants (both organic and inorganic) resulting from discharges of industrial wastes.

The most common health risk associated with drinking-water is contamination by sewage, or by fecal matters. Fecal pollution may introduce a variety of pathogens.

Evidence that chemicals can be harmful to health is based on the results of toxicological studies, occupational exposure and acute poisoning. The health risk due to toxic chemicals differs from that caused by biological contaminants. Many inorganic (such as arsenic, cadmium, chromium, cyanide, fluoride, lead, mercury, nitrate and selenium) and organic chemicals (such as aldrin and dieldrin, benzene, benzo(a)pyrene, chlordane, chloroform) have been identified as water pollutants. Many of them are pharmacologically active, carcinogens and mutagenic.

Consumption of polluted water is a major cause of ill health in India. Polluted water causes some of the deadly diseases like cholera, dysentery, diarrhea, tuberculosis, jaundice, etc. About 80 percent of stomach diseases in India are caused by polluted water.

Minamata disease: Minamata disease is methylmercury poisoning that occurred in humans who ingested fish and shellfish contaminated by methylmercury discharged in wastewater from a chemical plant. It was in May 1956, that Minamata disease was first officially discovered in Minamata City, Japan. The marine products in Minamata Bay displayed high levels of Hg contamination (5.61 to 35.7 ppm). It is a neurological disease and typical symptoms in human are as follows: sensory disturbances, ataxia, dysarthria, constriction of the visual field, auditory disturbances and tremor were also seen. Further, the fetus was poisoned by methylmercury when their mothers ingested contaminated marine life.

Itai-Itai disease: The term ‘itai-itai disease’ was coined due to the severe pains victims felt in the spine and joints. It was caused by cadmium poisoning in the drinking water. This disease was first noticed in the Junzu River basin region in Toyama Prefecture in central Japan around the 1930s.

Blue baby syndrome: An illness that begins when large amounts of nitrates in water are ingested by an infant (first 6 months of life) and converted to nitrite by the digestive system. The nitrite then reacts with oxyhemoglobin (the oxygen-carrying blood protein) to form methemoglobin. Because methemoglobin is unable to transport oxygen, the condition produces symptoms of cyanosis. If a large enough amount of methemoglobin is formed in the blood, body tissues may be deprived of oxygen, causing the infant to develop a blue coloration of their mucous membranes.

Eutrophication

Eutrophication is a process whereby water bodies, such as lakes, ponds, receive excess inorganic nutrients (mainly nitrogen and phosphorus-containing compounds) that stimulate excessive plant and algal growth. The enrichment is often increased by human activities, such as agriculture activities. Over time, lakes then become eutrophic due to an increase in the amount of inorganic nutrients. Eutrophication is mainly caused by an increase in nitrate and phosphate levels and has a negative influence on water life. This is because, due to the enrichment, aquatic photosynthetic organisms like algae grow extensively. A rapid increase in the population of algae in an aquatic system is called an algal bloom. Excessive algal growth eventually leads to death and decomposition of algae which reduce dissolved oxygen in the water. Depending on the degree of eutrophication, subsequent negative environmental effects such as anoxia and severe reductions in aquatic animal populations may occur. A good indicator of the degree of eutrophication is the oxygen content of deep water during summer. In a relatively unproductive lake, oxygen content varies little with depth and there is ample oxygen at the bottom of the lake. In contrast, oxygen content diminishes rapidly with depth in eutrophic lakes.





6.2.8 Control of water pollution


Water pollution is the man-made damage or the man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. Two basic mechanisms can be used to curb pollution, direct regulations and economic considerations. Direct regulations can include:

Setting of standards,



Prescription of appropriate technologies,



Determination of allowable concentration of pollutants at the source,



Allowable concentration of pollutants of various types in the receiving body of water.





Box 6.4 Ganga Action Plan




The Ganga action plan was, launched by Shri Rajeev Gandhi, the then Prime Minister of India on 14 January 1986 with the main objective of pollution abatement, to improve the water quality by interception, diversion and treatment of domestic sewage and present toxic and industrial chemical wastes from identified grossly polluting units entering in to the river. Total 34 sewage treatment plants have been set up under the Plan. Ganga action plan I was completed in March 2000 at a cost of Rs. 452 crores.

Ganga action plan II was started in 1993. It covers 59 towns located along the river in the five states of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bihar and West Bengal. 319 schemes have been taken up under the Plan, out of which 200 have been completed. Ganga action plan II was expanded in 1996 into the National River Conservation Plan (NRCP), which presently covers polluted stretches of 36 rivers in 20 states in the country.

Recognizing the need to revamp the river conservation strategy, the Central Government has given Ganga the status of a ‘National River’ and has set up the National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) on 20 February 2009. It is an empowered planning, financing, monitoring and coordinating Authority for effective abatement of pollution and conservation of the river.

National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG), a registered society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, is the implementing wing of NGRBA and its General Body is chaired by the Minister, Environment & Forests, Government of India. A Joint Secretary to the Government of India level officer is the mission director. To implement the program in the states under the overall supervision of NMCG, there are State Program Management Groups (SPMGs), registered as societies in the respective states, namely Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar and West Bengal while Jharkhand has a dedicated nodal cell. The SPMGs are also headed by senior IAS officers of the level of Secretary / Principal Secretary of the states. NMCG is the planning, financing, monitoring and coordinating body of NGRBA.

‘ Namami Gange Programme’, is an Integrated Conservation Mission, approved as ‘Flagship Programme’ by the Union Government in June 2014 with budget outlay of Rs.20,000 Crore to accomplish the twin objectives of effective abatement of pollution, conservation and rejuvenation of National River Ganga.



Economic considerations explain why pollution occurs, suggest alternatives for their management, and provide criteria to make cost-effective decisions to reduce or eliminate pollution. Three mechanisms can be used to this effect: regulations, subsidies and taxes. The three can also be combined.

Control strategies should focus on the consequences of an act and not on the means by which the act is accomplished. Therefore, the prohibition includes intentional, unintentional, and accidental addition of pollutants. Every type of discharge is subject to regulation.





6.2.9 Wastewater treatment


Wastewater is the end-product or by-product of municipal, agricultural and industrial activity. It contains a variety of organic and inorganic compounds of anthropogenic and natural origin. The contaminants in wastewater include biodegradable organic matters, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals and pathogens. The specific substances and amounts of each will vary, depending on the source; thus, it is difficult to precisely characterize wastewater. Wastewater treatment is used to remove contaminants before they are released into the water bodies.





Treatment processes


Waste materials in wastewater can be classified into three major categories: industrial wastes, domestic or municipal wastes and agricultural wastes. Each of these waste materials has its own characteristics, and thus treatment methods vary. The waste treatment methods include physical, chemical and biological treatments.

Physical treatment: Physical treatment includes screening, flocculation, sedimentation and filtration, which are usually used for the removal of insoluble suspended and floating materials.

Chemical treatment: Chemical treatment includes chemical oxidations and chemical precipitation.

Biological treatment: Biological treatment includes the aerobic and anaerobic treatment of wastewater by a mixed culture of microorganisms.

Alternatively, treatment processes can be categorized as primary, secondary (or biological) and tertiary treatments.



Figure 6.2 Schematic diagram of standard wastewater treatment processes.



Primary treatment

Primary treatment includes physical and chemical processes, such as skimming and sedimentation, to remove particles too large to pass through simple screening devices. This often takes place in sedimentation tanks. Primary treatment typically decreases 25 to 40 percent of the BOD and removes about 60 percent of the suspended solids.

Secondary treatment

Secondary treatment (or biological treatment) involves biological processes to lower BOD. It involves the microbial oxidation of organic wastes in controlled conditions. The secondary treatment removes about 90 percent of the BOD. There are two commonly used approaches, both of which take advantage of the ability of microorganisms to convert organic wastes into stabilized, low-energy compounds. In the first approach, suspended growth treatment, the microorganisms are suspended in and move with the water. In contrast, the microorganisms in attached growth treatment processes are fixed on a stationary surface, and the water flows past the microorganisms. The secondary biological treatment may be achieved aerobically or anaerobically in a number of ways. The most widely used aerobic processes are trickling filters and activated sludge processes. The anaerobic processes (digestion, filtration and sludge blankets) are used both in the treatment of specific wastewaters and in sludge conditioning.

Trickling filters: The basic principle of aerobic trickle filters is that a microbial population is allowed to develop as a biofilm on an inert support material within a biological reactor. Waste-water is continuously sprayed over the surface of the support material which percolates through the filter bed, where it is biodegraded by the microbial population. Aeration is achieved by exploiting the difference in temperature between the inside and the outside of the reactor, resulting in a countercurrent of air. High microbial activity within the reactor causes a rise in temperature, and warm air rises and allows fresh air to enter at the bottom of the reactor.

Activated sludge: Activated sludge processes include a well agitated and aerated continuous flow reactor and a settling tank. This is a two step process, involving biological treatment and secondary settlement. Biological treatment is performed in an aeration tank containing a diverse range of microorganisms. To maintain aerobic conditions, air or oxygen is pumped into the tank and the mixture is kept thoroughly agitated. Secondary settlement occurs when the treated effluent (mixed liquor) from the aeration tank passes into a secondary settlement tank. In settlement tank, solids mostly bacterial masses are separated from the liquid by subsidence.

Oxidation pond: Oxidation pond (also known as waste stabilization ponds or lagoons) is one of the biological systems which are used for the secondary treatment of wastewater. It involves natural purification and stabilization of wastewaters. Oxidation ponds are large, shallow ponds, typically 1-2 m deep where BOD reduction of a wastewater takes place by supporting algal-bacterial growth. It acts as a shallow waste treatment reactor where raw or partially treated sewage is decomposed by microorganisms. These ponds are effective, low-cost and simple technology for the treatment of wastewater before it is discharged to an aquatic ecosystem. The conditions are similar to a eutrophic lake. The ponds can be designed to maintain aerobic conditions. The performance of pond depends on climatological conditions like light, temperature, wind and also the wastewater quality. Oxidation ponds are also used to augment secondary treatment, in which case they are often called polishing ponds.

Tertiary treatment

A typical wastewater treatment process includes the primary and secondary treatment, depending on the degree of purification. Any treatment after secondary treatment is defined as tertiary treatment. This treatment is sometimes called as the advanced treatment and consists of removing the organic load left after secondary treatment, especially removes nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus, refractory organics and heavy metals left after secondary treatment. This treatment includes physical, chemical as well as biological treatments. Nitrogen-containing organic compounds are first oxidized biologically to ammonium ions which are further oxidized to nitrite and nitrate by genera nitrosomonas and nitrobacter, respectively. The second phase is anaerobic denitrification which releases nitrogen gas. A number of bacteria can act as denitrifiers such as Pseudomonas, Alcaligenes, Arthrobacter. Phosphorus in wastewater exists in many forms but all of it ends up as orthophosphate. Removing phosphate is most often accomplished by adding a coagulant, usually alum or lime. Phosphate removal from wastewater by biological means involves assimilation or storage.





Sludge treatment


The purpose of secondary treatment by trickling filter and activated sludge process is to lower BOD from the wastewater before the treated liquid is released to a water body. What remains to be disposed off is a mixture of solids and water, called sludge.

Sludge treatment process can be divided into two categories– either aerobic or anaerobic. In aerobic treatment sludge is brought into contact with the mixed microbial population of aerobic microorganisms and oxygen. During the process, part of the biodegraded material is converted into carbon dioxide and a portion becomes new biomass. A major problem associated with aerobic treatment is the disposal of excess biomass produced during the degradation of waste. The traditional method of sludge processing utilizes anaerobic treatment. That is, it involves bacteria that thrive in the absence of oxygen. Anaerobic digestion is slower than aerobic digestion, but has the advantage that only a small percentage of the wastes is converted into new bacterial cells. Most of the organics are converted into carbon dioxide and methane gas.

The anaerobic digestion process is very complex and can be divided into two phases. In the first phase, complex organic compounds such as proteins, lipids and carbohydrates are converted into simpler organic materials. The bacteria that perform this conversion are commonly referred to as acid formers. In the second phase, organic materials are converted slowly into CO2, CH4 and other stable end products by methane forming bacteria. These bacteria are very sensitive to temperature, pH, toxins and oxygen. The optimal temperature and pH range for methanogenic bacteria are 35° to 40°C and pH 7 to 7.8. Methanogenic bacteria used for this purpose are Methanobacterium, Methanobacillus and Methanococcus.



Figure 6.3 The two phases of anaerobic digestion.



Digested sludge removed from the second stage of the anaerobic treatment is still mostly liquid. The solids have been well digested, so there is little odor. Traditionally, dewatering was accomplished by pumping the sludge onto large sludge drying beds where evaporation and seepage removed the water. The digested and dewatered sludge is potentially useful as a soil conditioner.





Box 6.5 Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act




The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act was enacted in 1974 to provide for the prevention and control of water pollution, and for the maintaining or restoring of wholesomeness of water in the country. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act was enacted in 1977, to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on water consumed by persons operating and carrying on certain types of industrial activities. This cess is collected with a view to augment the resources of the Central Board and the State Boards for the prevention and control of water pollution constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. This Act was last amended in year 2003.





6.2.10 Bioaccumulation, bioconcentration and biomagnification


Bioaccumulation, bioconcentration and biomagnification are distinct phenomena.

Bioaccumulation is the intake and accumulation of a chemical in an organism by all routes of exposure including transport across respiratory surfaces, dermal absorption and dietary absorption.

Bioconcentration is a specific type of bioaccumulation that occurs when an organism accumulates a chemical only through its respiratory and dermal surfaces. It does not involve the uptake of a chemical through the organism’s diet.

Biomagnification is the bioaccumulation of chemicals in organisms in increasingly higher concentrations at successive trophic levels. It occurs when the chemical is entered into the food chain. It occurs because the biomass at any given trophic level is produced from a much larger biomass ingested from the level below. Consumers at higher trophic levels ingest a significant biomass present at lower levels, along with the fat soluble pollutants stored in their tissues. Biomagnification occurs in both aquatic and terrestrial habitats. An infamous case of biological magnification that harmed top-level carnivores involved DDT, a chemical used to control insects such as mosquitoes and agricultural pests. One of the first signs that DDT was a serious environmental problem was a decline in the populations of ospreys and eagles, birds that feed at the top of food webs. The accumulation of DDT in the tissues of these birds interfered with the deposition of calcium in their eggshells. When these birds tried to incubate their eggs, the weight of the parents broke the shells of affected eggs, resulting in catastrophic declines in reproduction rates.





6.3 Soil pollution


Soil pollution, also commonly known as soil contamination, is a condition that occurs when soil loses its structure, biological and chemical properties due to the use of various man-made chemicals and other natural changes in the soil environment.

Occurrence of soil pollution is correlated with the degree of industrialization and intensities of chemical usage. Various human activities are causing soil pollution. These activities are:

Deposition of oxides of sulfur and nitrogen

The oxides of sulfur and nitrogen, chlorides, fluorides, etc., emitted into the atmosphere due to combustion of fossil fuel from vehicles and various industries come down as dry or wet deposition (acid rain) onto the soil and lower the soil pH.

Use of pesticides

Various pesticides (such as DDT, BHC, malathion and aldrin) used in agricultural practices cause soil pollution. These pesticides are used for unwanted weeds, harmful insects, pathogenic fungi in agricultural practices affect biological and chemical properties of soil. These substances pollute the soil depending on their volatility, biodegradability, persistence, leaching, chemical reactivity and adsorption on the soil particles.

Release of sewage matters and use of chemical fertilizers

Sewage matter is commonly used as fertilizer or deposited as waste on the soil. Decomposition of sewage may release various toxic heavy metals that cause an increase in heavy metal toxicity.

Detergent substances may also be released from sewage causing damage to the soil. Chemical fertilizers are generally used far in excess of the requirements of the crop. The unutilized fertilizers also cause soil pollution by leaving persistent chemicals and heavy metals (many mineral fertilizers contain varying amounts of trace elements such as As, Cd, Hg, Pb etc.)

Deposition of industrial effluents and solid wastes

Various inorganic and organic substances are present in the industrial effluents. They affect various soil characteristics. Effluents affect the mineral structure, soil pH, exchangeable base status etc., of the soil. Large quantity of solid wastes like unused and rejected chemicals (like calcium carbonate, magnesium sulphate, ferrous chloride, ferrous oxide, radioactive wastes, fly ashes, sludge, plastic materials) and unwanted industrial wastes generated during manufacturing processes (rejection, broken items of metal, plastic, wooden or chemical solids, powders) are dumped over the surface of soil. All these solid materials are bound to change the chemical and physical nature of the soil besides contributing large quantity of pollutants to underground water – whenever rainwater passes through them.

Radioactive pollutants

A variety of radioactive waste materials like Strontium-90, Cesium-137, Iodine-131, Plutonium, Uranium, Neptunium etc., are added to soil from nuclear activities. These substances may be washed into water or may be directly added to water that is used as a coolant in nuclear power plants.

Control of soil pollution

Control measures for soil pollution and land degradation involve safer land use, planned urbanization, controlled developmental activities, safe disposal and managements of solid wastes from industries and human habitations, afforestation and reforestation. Management of solid wastes involves: collection and categorization of wastes; recovery of resources like scar metals and plastics for recycling and reuse and safe disposals with minimum environmental hazards.





6.4 Solid waste management


Waste

‘Substances or objects which are disposed of or are intended to be disposed of or are required to be disposed of by the provisions of the law.’

Annex IVB of the Basel Convention

Depending upon the physical states of wastes, there are two major types of waste— solid waste and liquid waste. Solid wastes are any discarded or abandoned materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community activities. Nearly everything we do leaves behind some kind of waste. It can be solid, semi-solid, liquid or contained gaseous material. For waste to be considered non-liquid it must have a solids content of at least 20% and liberate no free liquids when transported.

It is important to be aware that the definitions of solid waste terms and the classifications of solid waste vary greatly in the literature and in the profession. Consequently, the use of published data requires considerable care, judgment, and common sense.



Classification of solid waste

There are a number of ways for solid waste classification, different countries and different waste disposal agencies have classified the solid waste in a different manner. Based on their effects on human health and the environment, solid wastes are classified into two categories:

Hazardous waste

According to Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), a substance is hazardous if it possesses any of the following four characteristic attributes: reactivity, ignitability, corrosivity or toxicity.

Ignitable substances are easily ignited and burn vigorously and persistently. Examples include volatile liquids, such as solvents, whose vapors ignite at relatively low temperatures (defined as 60°C or less).

Corrosive substances include liquids with pH less than 2 or greater than 12.5, and those that are capable of corroding metal containers.

Reactive substances are unstable under normal conditions. They can cause explosions and/or liberate toxic fumes, gases and vapors when mixed with water.

Toxic substances are harmful or fatal when ingested or absorbed.

Hazardous waste is emitted by chemical manufacturing companies, petroleum refineries, paper mills, smelters, atomic power plants, nuclear medicine research centres etc. Handling and disposal of hazardous wastes require special equipments, training and guidelines.

Non-hazardous waste

Non-hazardous solid wastes can be divided into two major categories:

Municipal solid waste

Non-municipal solid waste

Municipal solid waste (more commonly known as trash or garbage) consists of everyday items we use and then throw away, such as product packaging, furniture, clothing, bottles, food scraps, newspapers, appliances, paint and batteries. This comes from our homes, schools, hospitals and commercial complexes. With rising urbanization and change in lifestyle and food habits, the amount of municipal solid waste has been increasing rapidly and its composition changing. Municipal solid waste does not include construction waste, automobile bodies, municipal sludges, combustion ash and industrial process wastes even though those wastes might also be disposed of in municipal waste landfills or incinerators.

Non-municipal solid waste is generated by industry, agriculture and mining. Industrial solid wastes are generated by manufacturing and processing units of various industries like chemical, petroleum, coal, metal gas, sanitary and paper etc. Agricultural solid wastes are generated from farming activities. These substances are mostly biodegradable.

Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules In order to ensure safe storage, treatment and disposal of hazardous wastes in an environmentally sound manner without causing adverse effect to environment and human health, Govt of India notified, the Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, in the year 1989 under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and these rules are amended from time to time and have recently been revamped with notification of Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016.





Hazardous waste treatment


Treatment technologies are often categorized as being chemical, biological, physical, thermal, or fixation/stabilization.

Physical, chemical and biological treatment processes

These processes are currently the most commonly used methods of treating aqueous hazardous waste.

Physical treatment processes include gravity separation, phase change systems such as air and steam stripping of volatiles from liquid wastes, and various filtering operations, including carbon adsorption.

Chemical treatment transforms waste into less hazardous substances using such techniques as pH neutralization, oxidation or reduction and precipitation.

Biological treatment uses microorganisms to degrade organic compounds in the wastewater.

Thermal destruction processes

These processes include incineration which is increasingly becoming a preferred option for the treatment of hazardous wastes, and pyrolysis, which is the chemical decomposition of waste brought about by heating the material in the absence of oxygen.

Fixation and stabilization processes

These processes involve removal of excess water from a waste and solidifying the remainder either by mixing it with a stabilizing agent, such as Portland cement or polymeric substances, or vitrifying it to create a glassy substance. Solidification is used on inorganic sludges.





Solid waste management


Solid waste management is a term that is often used to refer the process of collecting and treating solid wastes. It is the collection, treatment and disposal of solid material that is discarded because it had served its purpose or remains no longer useful.

In developing solid waste management programs, it is important to identify the sources, characteristics, and quantities of solid waste. Information on these subjects is of fundamental importance in determining the types of collection service, the types of collection vehicles to be used, the type of processing facilities and the disposal method to be used.

Sources of solid waste

Sources of solid wastes include (1) residential, (2) commercial, (3) institutional, (4) construction and demolition, (5) municipal services, (6) treatment plant sites, (7) industrial and (8) agricultural.

Solid waste management

The systematic administration of activities that provide for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment, and disposal of solid waste.

Disposal means ‘any operation which may lead to resource recovery, recycling, reclamation, direct re-use or alternative uses.’





Box 6.6 Electronic waste




Electronic waste (e-waste) consists of discarded electrical or electronic devices. It is one of the fastest-growing pollution problems worldwide. According to the UNEP, an estimated 53.6 million metric tons of e-waste were generated globally in 2019.

E-waste consists of a large variety of materials, some of which contain a range of toxic substances that can contaminate the environment and threaten human health if not appropriately managed. E-waste disposal methods include landfill and incineration, both of which pose considerable contamination risks. Landfill leachates can potentially transport toxic substances into groundwater whilst combustion in an incinerator can emit toxic gases into the atmosphere. Recycling of e-waste can also distribute hazardous substances into the environment and may affect human health. While there are more than 1000 toxic substances associated with e-waste, the more commonly reported substances include: toxic metals (such as barium, beryllium, cadmium, lead, lithium, lanthanum, mercury) and persistent organic pollutants such as dioxin, brominated flame retardants, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and polyvinyl chloride.

In India, as per the Hazardous Waste Rules (1989), e-waste is not treated as hazardous unless proved to have higher concentration of certain substances.



Municipal solid waste consists of household waste and waste from streets. It is normally assumed to include all community wastes with the exception of wastes generated from municipal services, water and wastewater treatment plants, industrial processes, and agricultural operations.

Plastic waste

Indiscriminate littering and non-biodegradability of plastic waste raise several environmental issues; such as choking of drains, making land infertile and on ingestion by cattle lead to death; burning of plastic generates toxic emissions. No organized/systematic system has been developed by concerned municipal authorities for collection, segregation, transportation and disposal of plastics waste. To tackle the menace of plastic waste management, the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change notified the Plastic Waste (Management & Handling Rules) 2011. The Government has notified the Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016, in suppression of the earlier Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011.



Integrated solid waste management

The Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM) proposes a waste management hierarchy with the aim to reduce the amount of waste being disposed, while maximizing resource conservation and resource efficiency. The ISWM hierarchy ranks waste management operations according to their environmental, economic and energy impacts. Hierarchy of priorities in the ISWM:

At source reduction and reuse: The most preferred option for waste management in the ISWM hierarchy is to prevent the generation of waste at various stages including in the design, production, packaging, use, and reuse of products. Waste prevention helps to reduce handling, treatment, and disposal costs and various environmental impacts such as leachate, air emissions and generation of greenhouse gases.

Waste recycling: The next preferred option for waste management in the ISWM hierarchy is recycling of waste to recover material resources through segregation, collection, and re-processing to create new products. For example, composting of organic matter of waste and recovery of material.

Waste to energy: Energy recovery from waste through production of heat, electricity or fuel is preferred where material recovery from waste is not possible. Biomethanation, waste incineration, production of refuse derived fuel (RDF), co-processing of combustible non-biodegradable dry fraction from municipal solid waste in cement kilns and pyrolysis or gasification are some waste-to-energy technologies.

Waste disposal: Residual inert wastes at the end of the hierarchy are to be disposed in sanitary lined landfills. All over the world, landfills which integrate the capture and use of methane are preferred over landfills which do not capture the landfill gas. As per the hierarchy, the least preferred option is the disposal of waste in open dump sites.





Box 6.7 Bio-medical waste




Solid or liquid wastes generated during diagnosis, treatment and research activities of medical sciences are called bio-medical waste. According to Biomedical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998 of India,

‘Any waste which is generated during the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or animals or in research activities pertaining thereto or in the production or testing of biologicals’.

It includes wastes like human anatomical waste, animal waste, microbiology and biotechnology waste, waste sharps, discarded medicines and cytotoxic drugs, soiled waste, solid waste, liquid waste, incineration ash, chemical wastes. These wastes are hazardous because of the potentially infectious in nature as it may pose a serious threat to human health, if its management is indiscriminate and unscientific.

Bio-medical waste consists of

Human anatomical waste like tissues, organs and body parts.



Animal wastes generated during research from veterinary hospitals.



Microbiology and biotechnology wastes from laboratory, culture stocks or specimens of micro-organisms, live or attenuated vaccines, human and animal cell culture used in research.



Waste sharps like hypodermic needles, syringes, scalpels and broken glass.



Discarded medicines and cytotoxic drugs comprising of outdated, contaminated and discarded medicines.



Soiled waste such as cotton balls used while blood collection or used as absorbent material for accidental blood and body fluid spillage.



Solid waste such as dressing, bandages, plaster casts, material contaminated with blood, tubes and catheters.



Liquid waste from any of the infected areas.



Incineration ash from incineration of any bio-medical waste.



Chemical wastes generated while testing and analysis.





Bio-medical waste is divided into 10 waste categories:

Human and anatomical waste



Animal waste



Microbiology and biotechnology waste



Waste sharps



Discarded medicines and outdated drugs



Soiled waste



Solid waste



Liquid waste



Incineration ash



Chemical waste





The Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998 and amendments thereof (hereafter referred as BMW Rules) were notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 by the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change in the year 1998 and further amendments issued in the year 2000 and 2003. As per BMW Rules, 1998, State Pollution Control Boards/ Pollution Control Committees in the respective States/UTs have been notified as the ‘Prescribed Authority’ for overall enforcement of the said Rules. The Rules have been revamped in 2016 as Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016.





6.5 Bioremediation


Bioremediation is a biological process whereby organic wastes are biologically degraded under controlled conditions. The process involves the use of living organisms, primarily microorganisms, to degrade the environmental contaminants. In this process, contaminant compounds are transformed by living organisms through reactions that take place as a part of their metabolic processes. For bioremediation to be effective, microorganisms must enzymatically attack the contaminants and convert them to harmless products. Hence it is effective only where environmental conditions permit microbial growth and activity. Thus, its application involves the manipulation of environmental parameters to allow microbial growth and degradation to proceed at a faster rate. The control and optimization of bioremediation processes is a complex phenomenon. Various factors influence this process. These factors include: the existence of a microbial population capable of degrading the pollutants; the availability of contaminants to the microbial population; the environment factors (type of soil, temperature, pH, the presence of oxygen or other electron acceptors and nutrients).





Bioremediation strategies


Bioremediation strategies can be in-situ or ex-situ. In-situ bioremediation involves treating the contaminated material at the site while ex-situ bioremediation involves the removal of the contaminated material to be treated elsewhere. In-situ bioremediation techniques are generally the most desirable option due to lower cost and less disturbance since they provide the treatment at a site avoiding excavation and transport of contaminants. Ex-situ bioremediation requires transport of the contaminated water or excavation of contaminated soil prior to remediation treatments.

In-situ and ex-situ strategies involve different technologies such as bioventing, biosparging, bioreactor, composting, landfarming, bioaugmentation and biostimulation.

Bioventing is an in-situ bioremediation technology that uses microorganisms to biodegrade organic constituents adsorbed on soils in the unsaturated zone (extends from the top of the ground surface to the water table). Bioventing enhances the activity of indigenous bacteria and stimulates the natural in-situ biodegradation of contaminated materials in soil by inducing air or oxygen flow into the unsaturated zone and, if necessary, by adding nutrients. Biosparging is also an in-situ bioremediation technology that uses indigenous microorganisms to biodegrade organic constituents in the saturated zone. In biosparging, air (or oxygen) and nutrients (if needed) are injected into the saturated zone to increase the biological activity of the indigenous microorganisms.

Biostimulation involves the modification of the environment to stimulate the existing bacteria capable of bioremediation. This can be done by the addition of various forms of rate-limiting nutrients and electron acceptors, such as phosphorus, nitrogen, oxygen, or carbon (e.g. in the form of molasses).

Bioaugmentation is a process where selected, standardized bacteria (microbes) are added to an area that has been contaminated with an unwanted substance. These bacteria cause breakdown of contaminants.

Composting is a controlled decomposition of organic matters. It involves mixing of contaminated soil with non-hazardous organic materials such as manure or agricultural wastes. The presence of these organic materials supports the development of a rich microbial population, which causes decomposition of organic contaminants.

Bioreactors such as slurry reactors or aqueous reactors are used for ex-situ treatment of contaminated soil and water. Bioremediation in reactors involves the processing of contaminated solid material or water through an engineered containment system. A slurry bioreactor is a containment vessel and apparatus used to create a three-phase (solid, liquid and gas) mixing condition to increase the bioremediation rate of soil bound and water-soluble pollutants as a water slurry of the contaminated soil and biomass (usually indigenous microorganisms) capable of degrading target contaminants.

Landfarming is a simple technique in which contaminated soil is excavated and spread over a prepared bed and periodically tilled until pollutants are degraded. The goal is to stimulate indigenous biodegradative microorganisms and facilitate their aerobic degradation of contaminants. In general, the practice is limited to the treatment of superficial 10–35 cm of soil. Since landfarming has the potential to reduce monitoring and maintenance costs, as well as clean-up liabilities, it has received much attention as a disposal alternative.





Advantages of bioremediation


Bioremediation is a natural process and is therefore used as an acceptable waste treatment process for contaminated material such as soil. Microbes able to degrade the contaminant increase in numbers when the contaminant is present; when the contaminant is degraded, the population declines. The residues for the treatment are usually harmless products and include carbon dioxide, water and cell biomass.

By the process of bioremediation instead of transferring contaminants from one environmental medium to another, for example, from land to water or air, the complete destruction of target pollutants is possible. Bioremediation can often be carried out on site, often without causing a major disruption of normal activities. This also eliminates the need to transport waste off site and the potential threats to human health and environment that can arise during transportation. Bioremediation is also less expensive than other technologies that are used for cleanup of hazardous waste.





Phytoremediation


In natural ecosystems, plants act as filters and metabolize substances generated by nature. In phytoremediation, plants are used to remove contaminants from soil and water. There are three major types of phytoremediation techniques, classified based on the action: phytoextraction, phytotransformation and phytostabilization.

Phytoextraction (or phytoaccumulation) is the process used by the plants to accumulate contaminants (most usually heavy metals) into the roots and above ground plant parts. Currently, this process is mainly used for extracting heavy metals and phytomining. Phytomining involves extracting metals from soil by harvesting specially selected hyperaccumulating plants.

Phytostabilization (or phytoimmobilization) is a technique in which plants reduce the mobility and migration of contaminants and contaminated soil. Leachable constituents are adsorbed and bound into the plant structure so that they form a stable mass of plant from which the contaminants will not re-enter the environment.

Phytotransformation (or phytodegradation) refers to the metabolization and degradation of organic contaminants taken up by plants from soil or less commonly, the breakdown of contaminants outside the plants by enzymes secreted by the plants. When phytodegradation occurs within the plant, contaminant uptake is dependent on both, the properties of the contaminants including hydrophobicity, solubility, polarity and the characteristics of plants.





6.6 Bioindicator


A bioindicator or biological indicator is an indicator species or group of species that are used to assess the abiotic or biotic state of an environment, and how it changes over time. According to United Nations Environment Programme (1996),

‘A bioindicator is a species whose status provides information on the overall condition of the ecosystem and of other species in that ecosystem. They reflect the quality and changes in environmental conditions as well as aspects of community composition.’

It is fundamental to ecology that an organism cannot survive indefinitely in an environment that does not provide suitable physical, chemical and nutritional requirements. Thus the presence of a particular species, especially if it is reasonably abundant, indicates that its environmental requirements are being met. Its absence, however, does not necessarily indicate the converse. Nevertheless, within certain limitations the presence, absence or relative abundance of species may be used as indicators of environmental quality. Changes in the presence, absence or relative abundance of species, whether sudden or gradual, may, therefore, imply a corresponding change in environmental conditions.

In broadest sense, the term bioindicator can be used for any organism of a habitat. Some organisms have such wide tolerances of different environmental conditions that their patterns of distribution or abundance are only slightly affected by quite wide variations in environmental quality. These species may tell us little about their changing environment. The term ‘bioindicator’ is therefore sometimes reserved for those species which have narrow and specific environmental tolerances, so that they will show a marked response to quite small changes in environmental quality. If the environmental factors which are most commonly limiting to the species concerned are known, its presence will be indicative of a specific environmental condition. For example, nymphs of stoneflies are not found in waters where the dissolved oxygen concentration falls substantially below its saturation value for appreciable periods of time. Hence, their presence indicates that the water is well oxygenated; and although their absence does not necessarily indicate the converse, their absence from waters wherein they might normally be expected at least suggests a possibility for further investigation. There are very few organisms whose presence specifically indicates that the water is polluted. One exception may be, for example, the presence of coliform bacteria, indicating fecal contamination.

Thus, bioindicators are considered to be ‘those species which, by their presence and abundance, provide some indication, either qualitatively or quantitatively or both, of the prevailing environmental conditions’.

Within this framework, there are three main functions of bioindicators:

to monitor the environment (i.e. physical and/or chemical changes),



to monitor ecological processes, or



to monitor biodiversity.





For example, lichens and bryophytes serve as effective bioindicators of air quality. Lichens (a symbiosis between fungi and algae, and or cyanobacteria) and bryophytes are often used to assess air pollution because they have no roots, no cuticle, and acquire all their nutrients from direct exposure to the atmosphere. Their high surface area to volume ratio further encourages the interception and accumulation of contaminants from the air.

According to the different applications of bioindicators, three categories can be distinguished:

Environmental indicator: This is a species or group of species responding predictably to environmental disturbance or change (e.g. sentinels, detectors, exploiters, accumulators, bioassay organisms).

Ecological indicator: This is a species that is known to be sensitive to ecological degradation, habitat fragmentation or other stresses. The response of the indicator is representative of the community.

Biodiversity indicator: The species richness of an indicator taxon is used as an indicator for species richness of a community. However, the definition has been broadened to ‘measurable parameters of biodiversity’, including e.g. species richness, endemism, genetic parameters, population-specific parameters and landscape parameters.

Examples of environmental, ecological, and biodiversity indicators can be found in many different organisms inhabiting many different environments. In common usage, the terms ‘biomonitor’ and ‘bioindicator’ are interchangeable, but in the scientific community, these terms have more specific meanings. Bioindicators qualitatively assesses biotic responses to environmental stress (e.g. presence of the lichen, Lecanora conizaeoides, indicates poor air quality) while biomonitors quantitatively determine a response (e.g. reductions in lichen chlorophyll content or diversity indicates the presence and severity of air pollution).

The use of the term ‘bioindicator’ should be distinguished from the use of the same term to organisms whose tissue levels of contaminants are measured in order to infer the possible extent of chemical contamination of the environment. Bioaccumulation indicators are a special kind of indicator organism. These so called sentinel organisms accumulate and concentrate pollutants from their surroundings and/or food so that an analysis of their tissues provides a time-integrated estimate of the environmentally available concentrations of specific pollutant.

Good bioindicator

Considering the 1.7 million species that currently documented on Earth, how do we choose just one as a bioindicator? The answer is simple: No single species can adequately indicate every type of disturbance or stress in all environments. Depending upon the specific environment, the species present, and local disturbances, appropriate bioindicator species or groups of species need to be selected. Ecologists have established a broad set of criteria that species must exhibit to be considered good bioindicators.

Regardless of the geographic region, type of disturbance, environment, or organism, good bioindicators often share several characteristics.

Good indicator ability

Provide measurable response (sensitive to the disturbance or stress but does not experience mortality or accumulate pollutants directly from their environment).



Response reflects the whole population/community/ecosystem response.



Respond in proportion to the degree of contamination or degradation.





Abundant and common

Adequate local population density (rare species are not optimal).



Common, including distribution within the area of question.



Relatively stable despite moderate climatic and environmental variability.





Well-studied


Ecology and life history well understood.



Taxonomically well documented and stable.



Easy and cheap to survey.



Taxonomically well documented and stable.



Easy and cheap to survey.





6.7 Environmental Impact Assessment


Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is an important management tool for ensuring optimal use of natural resources for sustainable development. It is a process of evaluating the likely environmental impacts of a proposed project or development, taking into account inter-related socio-economic, cultural and human-health impacts, both beneficial and adverse.

EIA is a structured approach for obtaining and evaluating environmental information prior to the development process. This information consists basically of predictions of how the environment is expected to change if certain alternative actions are implemented and advice on how best to manage environmental changes if one alternative is selected and implemented.

UNEP defines EIA as ‘a tool used to identify the environmental, social and economic impacts of a project prior to decision-making. It aims to predict environmental impacts at an early stage in project planning and design, find ways and means to reduce adverse impacts, shape projects to suit the local environment and present the predictions and options to decision-makers’.





Steps in EIA process


EIA represents a systematic process that examines the environmental consequences of the development actions, in advance. The emphasis of an EIA is on prevention and, therefore, is more proactive than reactive in nature. Although legislation and practice vary around the world, the fundamental components of an EIA would necessarily involve the following steps:

Screening is done to determine whether or not a proposal should be subject to EIA and, if so, at what level of detail. Screening may be partly determined by the EIA regulations operating in a country at the time of assessment. The screening process determines whether a particular project warrants preparation of an EIA. The threshold requirements for an EIA vary from country to country – some laws provide a list of the types of activities or projects that will require an EIA, others require an EIA for any project that may have a significant impact on the environment or for projects that exceed a certain monetary value. In some cases, particularly if the possible impacts of a project are not known, a preliminary environmental assessment will be prepared to determine whether the project warrants an EIA.

Scoping seeks to identify at an early stage, from all of a project’s possible impacts and from all the alternatives that could be addressed, those that are the crucial, significant issues.

Consideration of alternatives seeks to ensure that the proponent has considered other feasible approaches, including alternative project locations, scales, processes, layouts, operating conditions and the ‘no action’ option.

Description of the project action includes a clarification of the purpose and rationale of the project, and an understanding of its various characteristics—including stages of development, location and processes.

Description of the environmental baseline includes the establishment of both the present and future state of the environment, in the absence of the project, taking into account changes resulting from natural events and from other human activities.

Identification of the main impacts brings together the previous steps with the aim of ensuring that all potentially significant environmental impacts (adverse and beneficial) are identified and taken into account in the process.

Prediction of impacts aims to identify the magnitude of impact, extent of impact, duration of impact and significance of the impact of identified change in the environment with a project/ action, by comparison with the situation without that project/action.

Evaluation and assessment of significance assess the relative significance of the predicted impacts to allow a focus on the main adverse impacts.

Mitigation involves the introduction of measures to avoid, reduce, remedy or compensate for any significant adverse impacts. The objectives of mitigation, therefore, are to:

find better alternatives and ways of doing things;



enhance the environmental and social benefits of a project



avoid, minimize or remedy adverse impacts; and



ensure that residual adverse impacts are kept within acceptable levels





Public consultation and participation aim to ensure the quality, comprehensiveness and effectiveness of the EIA, and that the public’s views are adequately taken into consideration in the decision-making process. Best EIA practice involves and engages the public at numerous points throughout the process with a two-way exchange of information and views. Public participation may consist of informational meetings, public hearings, and opportunities to provide written comments about a proposed project. However, there are no consistent rules for public participation among current EIA systems. Even within a particular country, there can be variations in the quality and considered, the communities that may be affected, or government agencies that are overseeing the project.

EIS presentation is a vital step in the process. If done badly, much good work in the EIA may be negated. The EIS (Environmental Impact Statement) or EIA report provides documentation of the information and estimates derived from the various steps in the EIA process. The information contained in an EIS provides the decision-makers/regulators with valuable information that could ultimately contribute to either the abandonment or substantial modification of a proposed development action.

EIS should have the following:

Executive summary



Policy, legal and administrative framework



Description of the environment



Description of the proposed project in detail



Significant environmental impacts



Socio-economic analysis of project impacts



Identification and analysis of alternatives



Mitigation action/Mitigation management plan



Environmental management plan



Monitoring program



Knowledge gaps



Public involvement



List of references





Appendices including

Reference documents, photographs, unpublished data

Terms of Reference (TOR)

Consulting team composition

Notes of public consultation sessions

Review of an EIA report is intended to ensure that it contains the information necessary for decision-making purposes. This check should draw attention to any deficiencies and indicate ways of improving the quality of the report.

Decision-making on the project involves a consideration by the relevant authority of the EIS (including consultation responses) together with other material considerations.

Post-decision monitoring involves the recording of outcomes associated with development impacts, after a decision to proceed. It can contribute to effective project management.

Auditing follows from monitoring. It can involve comparing actual outcomes with predicted outcomes, and can be used to assess the quality of predictions and the effectiveness of mitigation. It provides a vital step in the EIA learning process.





Advantages of EIA


By using EIA both environmental and economic benefits can be achieved, such as reduced cost and time of project implementation and design, avoided treatment/clean-up costs and impacts of laws and regulations.

The main advantages and benefits of EIA are:

Improved project design;



More informed decision-making (with improved opportunities for public involvement in decision-making).



More environmentally sensitive decisions;



Increased accountability and transparency during the development process;



Improved integration of projects into their environmental and social setting; reduced environmental damage;



More effective projects in terms of meeting their financial and/or socio-economic objectives; and



A positive contribution towards achieving sustainability.





EIA guiding principles


International Association for Impact Assessment (IAIA, 1999) and others have developed guiding principles for EIA. The principles are

Participative: The process should provide appropriate opportunities to inform and involve the interested and affected publics and incorporate their input in decision-making.



The EIA process

Source: UNEP EIA Training Resource Manual



Transparency: Assessment process, outcomes & decisions should be open and accessible.

Certainty: The process and timing of the assessment should be agreed in advanced and followed by all participants.

Accountability: The decision-makers and project proponents are responsible to all parties for their action and decisions under the assessment process.

Credibility: Assessment is undertaken with professionalism and objectivity.

Cost-effectiveness: The assessment process and its outcomes will ensure environmental protection at the least cost to the society.

Practical: The process should result in practical outputs, which can be implemented by proponent.

Relevant: The process should focus information that is relevant for development planning and decision-making.

Focused: The process should concentrate on significant environmental effects and key issues that need to be taken into account in making decisions.

Interdisciplinary: The process should ensure that the appropriate techniques and experts in the relevant disciplines are employed, including use of traditional knowledge as relevant.

Integrated: The process should address the interrelationships of social, economic and biophysical aspects.





EIA system in India


United States of America was the first country to assign mandatory status to EIA through its National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA) of 1969. A host of industrialized countries has since implemented EIA procedures. India also has taken considerable effort in implementing the universally accepted principles of Rio Declaration. In one of its 27 principles, the Rio Declaration calls for EIA to be undertaken for activities that are likely to have a significant adverse impact on the environment.

EIA in India was started in 1976-77, when the Planning Commission asked the then Department of Science and Technology to examine the river-valley projects from the environmental angle. In January 1994, the Ministry of Environment and Forests and climate change issued a notification on EIA of development projects. This Notification listed 30 projects that required environmental clearance from the central government. It also included – for the first time – Public hearing as a pre-requisite for clearing large projects. The notification made it obligatory to prepare and submit an EIA, an Environment Management Plan and a project report to the Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change which had the option to consult a multi-disciplinary committee of experts.

In September 2006, the Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change issued the Environmental Impact Assessment Notification, 2006 which makes prior environmental clearance mandatory for the development activities. All projects and activities are broadly categorized into two categories – category A and category B, based on the spatial extent of potential impacts and potential impacts on human health and natural and man-made resources.

The category ‘A’ activities require prior environmental clearance from the Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change on the recommendations of Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) constituted by the Central Government.

The category ‘B’ activities require prior environmental clearance from the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA) on the recommendations of State level Expert Appraisal Committee (SEAC). The SEAC and SEIAA are constituted by Central Government. Category ‘B’ projects are further categorized as category ‘B1’ and ‘B2’. The projects categorized as B1 require EIA report for appraisal and also have to undergo public consultation process. The projects categorized as ‘B2’ are to be appraised based on the application accompanied with pre-feasibility report and other relevant documents.





Strategic environmental assessment


Impact assessments are carried out to assess the consequences of individual projects – Environmental Impact Assessment – or of policies and programmes – Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA).

Strategic Environmental Assessment is the formalized, systematic and comprehensive process of identifying and evaluating the environmental consequences of proposed policies, plans or programmes to ensure that they are fully included and appropriately addressed at the earliest possible stage of decision-making on a par with economic and social considerations.

SEA, by its nature, covers a wider range of activities or a wider area and often over a longer time span than the environmental impact assessment of projects.

SEA might be applied to an entire sector (such as a national policy on energy for example) or to a geographical area (for example, in the context of a regional development scheme). SEA does not replace or reduce the need for project-level EIA (although in some cases it can), but it can help to streamline and focus the incorporation of environmental concerns (including biodiversity) into the decision-making process, often making project-level EIA a more effective process. EIA focuses on proposed physical developments such as highways, power stations, water resource projects and large-scale industrial facilities. SEA focuses on proposed actions at a ‘higher’ level such as new or amended laws, policies, programmes and plans. Often, physical developments and projects are the result of implementation of a policy or plan, for example, an extended highway network may be an outcome of a new transport policy.





References


Bienfang P (1971), Taking the Pollution out of Waste Heat. New Scientist and Science Journal, pp. 456-457.

Boyajian GE and Carreira LH (1997), Phytoremediation: A clean transition from laboratory to market-place. Nature Biotechnology, 15, 127–128.

Butler E, Hung Y, Ahmad SA, Yeh RY, Liu RL and Fu Y (2017), Oxidation pond for municipal waste-water treatment. Applied Water Science, 7(1), 31-51.

CPCB (2009), NAAQS – Central Pollution Control Board notification in the Gazette of India, New Delhi.

Gerhardt A (2002), Bioindicator species and their use in biomonitoring. Environmental Monitoring.

Kiely G (2006), Environmental engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill Education.

Levins R (1966), The strategy of model building in population biology. American Scientist, 54:421-431

Likens GE, Driscoll CT and Busco DC (1996), Long-term effects of acid rain: Response and recovery of a forest ecosystem. Science, 272:244-246.

Masters GM and Ela WP (2008), Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science, 3rd ed. Phi Learning.

Morgan RK (2012), Environmental impact assessment. The State of the Art, Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal, 30 (1), 5–14.

Singh H, Duraisamy A, Subramaniam U and De D (1994), Handbook of environ-mental procedures and guidelines. Ministry of Environment, Government of India.

UNEP (2002), Environmental Impact Assessment Training Resource Manual.

WHO (2005), Air quality guidelines – global update.

WHO (2005), Air quality guidelines for particulate matter, ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide. Global update.

WHO (2011), Guidelines for drinking-water quality, 4th ed.





Chapter 7


Climate Change


Climate refers to the long-term patterns of weather conditions in a specific location, region, or across the entire planet. It is typically characterized by analyzing meteorological data over a period of at least 30 years, and this analysis includes variables such as temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure, wind patterns, precipitation, and other meteorological factors.

‘Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the average weather, or more rigorously, as the statistical description in terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a period of time ranging from months to thousands or millions of years. The classical period for averaging these variables is 30 years, as defined by the World Meteorological Organization. The relevant quantities are most often surface variables such as temperature, precipitation and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical description, of the climate system.’

IPCC, 2001

The terms climate and weather have different meanings. Weather represents the short-term state of atmospheric conditions (such as temperature, pressure, humidity, precipitation, wind speed and direction, and more) for a specific place and time. It exhibits both temporal (time-related) and spatial (location-related) variations.





7.1 Climate change


Climate change is a large-scale, long-term shift in weather patterns and atmospheric conditions on a global scale.

According to IPCC, ‘Climate change refers to a change in the state of the climate that can be identified (e.g. by using statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/or the variability of its properties, and that persists for an extended period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due to natural internal processes or external forcings such as modulations of the solar cycles, volcanic eruptions and persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use.’

The UNFCCC defines climate change as, ‘a change of climate that is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and that is in addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable time periods’.

The UNFCCC, thus, makes a distinction between climate change attributable to human activities altering the atmospheric composition, and climate variability attributable to natural causes.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) is a body of the United Nations dedicated to addressing environmental issues and promoting sustainable development worldwide. UNEP was established on December 15, 1972, by the United Nations General Assembly. It was created in response to growing concerns about environmental degradation and the need for international cooperation to address global environmental challenges. Its headquarter is situated in Nairobi, Kenya.

UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) is one of the Rio Conventions aimed at addressing the issue of global climate change and its impacts. It was adopted in May 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), commonly known as the Earth Summit, and entered into force in March 1994. The treaty was a response to growing concerns about the impact of greenhouse gas emissions on the Earth’s climate system. There are 197 parties (196 countries and the European Union) to the UNFCCC. These parties are signatories to the treaty and are committed to its principles and objectives. The UNFCCC organizes annual conferences of the parties (COP) where representatives from member countries come together to negotiate and make decisions on climate-related issues.

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) is the leading international body for the assessment of climate change. It was established by the WMO (World Meteorological Organization) and the UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) in 1988 to provide the world with a clear scientific view on the current state of knowledge about climate change and its potential environmental and socio-economic impacts. The primary mandate of the IPCC is to assess the scientific literature related to climate change, its impacts, adaptation, and mitigation. It does not conduct original research but synthesizes and evaluates existing scientific knowledge. The IPCC’s reports are a crucial resource for policymakers and governments when making decisions related to climate change.

WMO (World Meteorological Organization) is a specialized body of the United Nations responsible for promoting international cooperation in the fields of meteorology, as well as related geophysical sciences. The WMO was established on March 23, 1950. Its headquarter is located in Geneva, Switzerland. The primary mandate of the WMO is to facilitate and coordinate international activities related to the study of the Earth’s atmosphere. It focuses on improving weather forecasting, climate monitoring, and the understanding of related environmental and meteorological phenomena.

NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) is a United States scientific agency responsible for understanding and predicting changes in the Earth’s atmosphere and oceans. Established in 1970 and headquartered in Maryland, NOAA’s primary mission is to understand and predict changes in the oceans, atmosphere, and climate while conserving and managing coastal and marine resources. The agency’s wide-ranging activities encompass weather forecasting, climate monitoring, coastal and marine resource conservation, satellite operations, and research in atmospheric and environmental sciences.

NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration), is the United States government agency responsible for the civilian space program, aeronautics research, and space science. It was established on July 29, 1958. NASA’s work is divided into four major programs: space exploration (developing and operating spacecraft and robotic missions to explore the solar system and beyond), science (conducting scientific research in space, including astronomy, astrophysics and Earth science), aeronautics research (conducting research to improve the safety and efficiency of air travel) and space technology (developing new technologies to support NASA’s missions and to benefit society as a whole).



Climate science is a process of collective learning of climate that relies on the careful gathering and analyses of data, the formulation of hypotheses, the development of models to study key processes and make predictions, and the combined use of observations and models to test scientific understanding.





Climate change and Global warming


Global warming causes climate change, so the two terms are very much related. Global warming is the term used to describe the increase in the Earth’s average surface air temperatures over land and oceans. Climate change refers not only to global changes in temperature but also to changes in wind, precipitation, the length of seasons as well as the strength and frequency of extreme weather events like droughts and floods. Another difference between the two terms is that global warming is a worldwide phenomena while climate change can be seen at global, regional or even more local scales.





Climate change: Evidence


Climate change is one of the defining issues of our time. It is now more certain than ever, based on many lines of evidence.

Global temperature rise: The planet’s average surface temperature has increased significantly, showing a rise of 1.09°C between 2011-2020 compared to the period of 1850-1900. Notably, this temperature rise has been more pronounced over land (1.59°C) than over the ocean (0.88°C).

Sea level rise: Global sea levels have seen a significant rise over the last century. From 1901 to 2018, there was a notable increase in the global mean sea level by 0.20 meters. The rate of sea level rise, on average, was 1.3 mm per year between 1901 and 1971. This rate then escalated to 1.9 mm per year between 1971 and 2006, and further accelerated to 3.7 mm per year between 2006 and 2018.

Shrinking ice sheets: The Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets have decreased in mass. Data from NASA’s Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment show Greenland lost an average of 279 billion tons ice per year between year 1993 and 2019, while Antarctica lost about 148 billion tons of ice per year.

Climate models

For several decades, scientists have used the world’s most advanced computers to simulate the Earth’s climate. These models are based on a series of mathematical equations representing the basic laws of physics—laws that govern the behaviour of the atmosphere, the oceans, the land surface and other parts of the climate system, as well as the interactions among different parts of the system. Climate models are important tools for understanding past, present, and future climate change. Climate models are tested against observations so that scientists can see if the models correctly simulate what actually happened in the recent or distant past.



Declining Arctic sea ice: Both the extent and thickness of Arctic sea ice has declined rapidly over the last several decades. Arctic ice refers to the area of the Arctic ocean covered in ice. Arctic sea ice reaches its minimum each September. September Arctic sea ice is now declining at a rate of 13.3 percent per decade, relative to the 1981 to 2010 average.

Glacial retreat: Higher temperatures and less snowfall have been causing many glaciers worldwide to retreat (i.e. ice melts or ablates more quickly than snowfall can accumulate and form new glacial ice). Glaciers are retreating almost everywhere around the world — including in the Alps, Himalayas, Andes and Rockies.

Ocean acidification: Since the beginning of the industrial revolution, the acidity of surface ocean waters has increased by about 30 percent. This increase is the result of humans emitting more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and hence more being absorbed into the oceans.





Box 7.1 Scientific consensus




‘Climate change is real. There will always be uncertainty in understanding a system as complex as the world’s climate. However, there is now strong evidence that significant global warming is occurring. The evidence comes from direct measurements of rising surface air temperatures and subsurface ocean temperatures and from phenomena such as increases in average global sea levels, retreating glaciers, and changes to many physical and biological systems. It is likely that most of the warming in recent decades can be attributed to human activities’.

Joint science academies’ statement: Global response to climate change (2005)





7.2 Greenhouse effect


The earth receives energy from the Sun in the form of solar radiation. Various gases in the atmosphere absorb incoming solar radiation. The ability of atmospheric gases to absorb radiation varies with the wavelength. All of the incoming solar radiation with wavelengths less than 0.3 μm is absorbed by oxygen and ozone. This absorption occurs mainly in the stratosphere. Most of the solar radiation passes through the atmosphere without being absorbed. A large fraction of this radiation is absorbed by land and oceans. This absorbed energy is then re-radiated upward from the earth’s surface in the form of longwave infrared radiation.



Figure 7.1 Incoming shortwave solar radiations (ultraviolet, visible and a limited portion of infrared energy) from the Sun drive the earth’s climate system. Some of this incoming radiation is reflected by the atmosphere and the earth’s surface whereas some is absorbed by the atmosphere and the earth’s surface. The heat generated by this absorption is emitted as longwave infrared radiation. Some of which radiates out into space but most of the earth’s emitted longwave infrared radiation is absorbed by greenhouse gases present in the atmosphere, which heats the lower atmosphere.



Most of these longwave infrared radiation (greater than 4 μm) re-radiated by the earth’s surface is absorbed by atmospheric gases, most importantly water vapour (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O) and methane (CH4). Radiatively active gases that absorb wavelengths longer than 4 μm are called greenhouse gases. This absorption heats the atmosphere, which in turn, radiates energy back to the earth. Thus, the greenhouse gases act as a thermal blanket around the earth, raising the earth’s temperature. This effect is known as greenhouse effect.

Step 1: Solar radiation enters the earth’s atmosphere – Some of this incoming radiation is reflected by the atmosphere and the earth’s surface.

Step 2: The rest of the incoming radiation is absorbed by the land and oceans, heating the earth.

Step 3: The heat generated due to absorption is emitted as longwave infrared radiation.

Step 4: Some of the emitted radiation radiates out into space but most of the earth’s emitted longwave radiation is absorbed by greenhouse gases present in the atmosphere.

Step 5: This keeps the earth warm enough to sustain life.





Box 7.2 Natural greenhouse effect




A planet’s climate is determined by several factors, including its mass, distance from the Sun, and the composition of its atmosphere. In the case of Mars, its small size prevents it from maintaining a thick atmosphere, resulting in an extremely thin atmosphere with very low concentrations of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide. In contrast, Earth’s atmosphere is approximately a hundred times denser than that of Mars. As a result, even though carbon dioxide makes up only about 0.03% to 0.04% of its composition, the overall concentration of greenhouse gases is high compared to Mars. These greenhouse gases play a significant role in absorbing thermal radiation emitted from the planet’s surface. They act like a partial blanket, trapping heat and preventing it from escaping into space. This phenomenon is known as the natural greenhouse effect and is responsible for maintaining Earth’s average temperature at a level substantially warmer than it would be without these greenhouse gases. Without them, Earth’s average temperature would be around –18°C.

On Mars, the thin atmosphere and very low concentration of greenhouse gases result in a negligible greenhouse effect, leading to an average surface temperature of about -50°C. In contrast, Venus, despite having a mass similar to Earth’s, has a much thicker atmosphere primarily composed of carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas. This very high concentration of greenhouse gas on Venus results in a more significant greenhouse effect and an extraordinarily high surface temperature, reaching approximately +460°C. The presence of greenhouse gases in Earth’s atmosphere plays a pivotal role in regulating its temperature and making it habitable, while Mars and Venus exhibit extreme temperatures due to differences in their atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations.



The greenhouse effect is a natural phenomenon. In the absence of greenhouse gases, heat would simply escape into space, and the Earth’s average surface temperature would be well below freezing temperature. However, greenhouse gases absorb and redirect some of this energy downward, trapping heat near the Earth’s surface. Therefore, greenhouse gases are responsible for the Earth’s average near-surface air temperature, which is approximately 16°C. Without the greenhouse effect, the Earth’s average surface temperature would be around –18°C instead of the current 16°C.





Greenhouse gases


Many gases present in the earth’s atmosphere behave as ‘greenhouse gases’. Many greenhouse gases present naturally in the atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide, methane, water vapour and nitrous oxide, while others are synthetic i.e. man-made. Those that are synthetic greenhouse gases include chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs), as well as sulfur hexafluoride (SF6). HFCs, PFCs and SF6 are categorized as fluorinated gases (or F-gases).

Concentrations of these greenhouse gases are measured in parts per million (ppm), parts per billion (ppb), or parts per trillion (ppt) by volume. In other words, a concentration of 1 ppb for a given gas means there is one molecule of that gas in every 1 billion molecules of air. Greenhouse gases differ in their warming effect. For example, a single methane molecule has about 25 times the warming potential of a single CO2 molecule. However, CO2 has a much larger overall warming effect than methane because it is much more abundant and stays in the atmosphere for much longer periods of time. The extent to which any greenhouse gas show warming depends on three key factors:

Concentration in the atmosphere.



Lifetime—how long it remains in the atmosphere.



Global warming potential—how effective it is at trapping heat.





Water vapour: It is the most abundant greenhouse gas in our atmosphere. As atmospheric temperatures increase, more water evaporates from sources like rivers, oceans, reservoirs, and soil. Since warmer air has a greater capacity to hold water vapour, higher temperatures lead to an increase in the concentration of water vapour in the atmosphere. This elevated water vapour concentration, acting as a greenhouse gas, further contributes to atmospheric warming. This warming effect enables the atmosphere to hold even more water vapour, creating a cyclical process known as a ‘positive feedback loop.’ However, it’s important to note that as water vapour concentrations increase in the atmosphere, some of it eventually condenses into clouds. Clouds have the ability to reflect incoming solar radiation, reducing the amount of energy that reaches the Earth’s surface. Consequently, this cloud-related reflection limits surface heating.

Carbon dioxide: A minor but very important component of the atmosphere, carbon dioxide, is released through natural processes such as respiration, volcanoic eruptions and through human activities such as deforestation, land use changes, and burning fossil fuels.

Methane: A hydrocarbon gas produced both through natural sources and human activities, including the decomposition of wastes in landfills, agriculture (especially rice cultivation), ruminant digestion and manure management associated with domestic livestock. Over the last 50 years, human activities such as growing rice, raising cattle, using natural gas and mining coal have added to the atmospheric concentration of methane.

Nitrous oxide: A powerful greenhouse gas produced by agricultural practices, especially the use of commercial and organic fertilizers, fossil fuel combustion, nitric acid production and biomass burning.

Chlorofluorocarbons: Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are synthetic organic compounds consisting of carbon, chlorine, and fluorine atoms, and they fall under the category of halocarbons. CFCs were once widely used in a variety of applications, including refrigerators, air conditioners, foam insulation, and aerosol propellants. These compounds act as greenhouse gases and are much more potent than carbon dioxide, with a global warming potential up to thousand times greater. Additionally, CFCs also act as ozone-depleting substances.

Tropospheric ozone: According to IPCC, tropospheric ozone is the third most important greenhouse gas after carbon dioxide and methane. The concentrations of tropospheric ozone have risen by around 30 percent since the pre-industrial era due to urbanization and industrial activity. Globally, the amount of ozone in the troposphere has increased by about 3 percent between 1979 and 2014.





Global-warming potential of greenhouse gases


Global warming potential is defined as the amount of warming a greenhouse gas will cause over a given period of time. Essentially, it measures how effectively a greenhouse gas can trap heat in the atmosphere compared to carbon dioxide. It is based on the heat-absorbing ability of each gas relative to that of carbon dioxide, as well as the decay rate of each gas (the amount removed from the atmosphere over a given number of years). It is calculated over a specific time interval, commonly 20, 100 or 500 years. Most climate change institutions use 100 years as the time duration for estimating the global-warming potential of greenhouse gases. For example, the 20 years global-warming potential of methane is 72, which means that if the same mass of methane and carbon dioxide were introduced into the atmosphere, methane will trap 72 times more heat than the carbon dioxide over the next 20 years.

Carbon dioxide, by definition, has a global-warming potential of 1 regardless of the time period used, because it is the gas being used as the reference. Multiplying the actual amount of greenhouse gas emissions by its global-warming potential gives what is known as its carbon dioxide equivalent. Expressing all greenhouse gases in terms of their carbon dioxide equivalents are the technique used to show what impact each greenhouse gas has on global warming.

Let us understand carbon dioxide equivalent using an example. Suppose we have two greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide and methane. Carbon dioxide serves as the reference gas in this calculation. By definition, carbon dioxide has a global-warming potential of 1, regardless of the time period chosen. The global-warming potential value for methane over a 20-year period is 72.

Assume we have two sources of emissions: source A emits 100 metric tons of carbon dioxide and source B emits 100 metric tons of methane. Now, we want to express carbon dioxide equivalent emissions for the methane over a 20-year period. For source A, since carbon dioxide has a global-warming potential of 1 over a 20-year period, there’s no need for conversion. The carbon dioxide emissions remain as is 100 metric tons. But, for source B, carbon dioxide equivalent emissions for the methane over a 20-year period is equal to 7,200 metric tons (100 metric tons x 72).

So, when we express the emissions from Source B in terms of carbon dioxide equivalents, it’s equivalent to emitting 7,200 metric tons of carbon dioxide over a 20-year period.





Increase in greenhouse gas concentrations


Human activities have increased the atmospheric concentrations of important greenhouse gases. In last 100 years, as concentrations of heat absorbing greenhouse gases increased in the atmosphere, Earth’s natural greenhouse effect is enhanced, causing surface temperatures to rise.

The levels of carbon dioxide in the Earth’s atmosphere have seen a significant increase over time. Carbon dioxide levels have increased from 280 ppm in 1750 to over 407 ppm in 2017 (nearly 40% higher than pre-industrial levels). Almost all of this increase is due to human activities.

The commencement of precise and continuous measurements of atmospheric carbon dioxide started in 1957 at the south pole and in 1958 at Mauna Loa, Hawaii. At that initial stage, the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide observed at Mauna Loa was 315 ppm, and it was increasing at a relatively slow rate of less than 1 ppm per year. By 1979, the NOAA had begun consolidating data from a network of measurement sites worldwide to establish a global average value. At that point, in 1990, the global average stood at 354 ppm, and it was increasing at a rate of 1.6 ppm annually. As time progressed, the concentration continued to climb. By 2006, it had reached 380 ppm, with the rate of growth accelerating to approximately 2 ppm per year.



Figure 7.2 Carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, 1958–2007. CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere have been measured at an altitude of about 4,000 meters on the peak of Mauna Loa mountain in Hawaii since 1958. This location was selected because it is far from urban areas where factories, power plants and motor vehicles that emit CO2 might bias the measurements. The measurements at this location, remote from local sources of pollution, have clearly shown that atmospheric concentrations of CO2 are increasing. The mean concentration of approximately 316 parts per million by volume (ppmv) in 1958 rose to approximately 369 ppmv in 1998. The annual variation is due to CO2 uptake by growing plants. The uptake is highest in the northern hemisphere springtime (source: NOAA)



Carbon dioxide is produced and consumed in many natural processes as a part of the carbon cycle. However, anthropogenic activities such as burning of coal and oil for energy, deforestation, led to additional CO2 being released into the atmosphere more rapidly than in the natural carbon cycle. Measurements of global atmospheric concentrations have shown an increasing trend not only in carbon dioxide but also in other potent greenhouse gases like methane and nitrous oxide. For instance, the concentration of methane in the atmosphere has more than doubled since pre-industrial times, surging to approximately 1800 ppb in recent years. This remarkable increase can be primarily attributed to agricultural activities and the extensive use of fossil fuels. Similarly, concentrations of nitrous oxide in the atmosphere have witnessed a significant increase in recent years, reaching 328 ppb, which is significantly higher than pre-industrial levels. This surge is chiefly a result of agricultural practices. Furthermore, numerous halogenated gases, which were nearly absent in the atmosphere just a few decades ago, have experienced rapid increases as they became integral components of industrial processes and products. It is worth noting that some of these chemicals are being phased out due to their association with ozone depletion.



According to the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), carbon dioxide accounted for 82% of greenhouse gas emissions in the United States in 2013. Based on their CO2 equivalents, methane is the next highest at 10%, followed by N2O at 5% and fluorinated gases at 3%.



Between 1990 and 2010, global emissions of all major greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and fluorinated gases such as HFCs, PFCs and SF6) increased (figure 7.3). Net emissions of carbon dioxide increased by 42 percent, which is particularly important because carbon dioxide accounts for about three-fourths of total global emissions. Nitrous oxide emissions increased by about 9 percent, while emissions of methane increased by about 15 percent. Emissions of fluorinated gases more than doubled. Each greenhouse gas has a different lifetime (how long it stays in the atmosphere) and a different ability to trap heat in our atmosphere. To allow different greenhouse gases to be compared and added together, emissions are converted into carbon dioxide equivalents. This step uses each gas’s 100 year global warming potential, which measures how much a given amount of the gas is estimated to contribute to global warming over a period of 100 years after being emitted. Carbon dioxide is assigned a global warming potential equal to 1.



Figure 7.3 Global greenhouse gas emissions, 1990–2015. F-gases are hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride. This figure shows worldwide emissions of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and several fluorinated gases from 1990 to 2015. For consistency, emissions are expressed in million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalents. These totals include emissions and sinks due to land-use change and forestry (sources: Food and agriculture organization, 2020).





7.3 Global warming


Global warming is the increase in Earth’s average surface temperature due to rising levels of greenhouse gases. Over the past century, between 1906 and 2005, the average temperature near the Earth’s surface has risen by more than 1.4°F (0.8°C). The rate of warming over the last 50 years is nearly twice that observed for the entire period from 1906 to 2005. If the world continues to consume ever-increasing amounts of fossil fuels, greenhouse gas concentrations will persist in rising, leading to a further increase in Earth’s average surface temperature. Based on a range of plausible emission scenarios, average surface temperatures could increase by anywhere from 2°C to 6°C by the end of the 21st century. According to the IPCC 2023 report, the global surface temperature reached 1.1°C above the 1850-1900 baseline during the period 2011-2020, with a more significant increase over land at 1.59°C compared to 0.88°C over the ocean.

The observed increase in global temperatures can be primarily attributed to the growing concentration of greenhouse gases, which is a direct consequence of human activities. Among these activities, the burning of fossil fuels and widespread deforestation play a central role in elevating greenhouse gas levels in the atmosphere. Deforestation, for instance, is responsible for a substantial portion of the excess carbon dioxide emissions released annually. It’s estimated that deforestation contributes to approximately 10% to 20% of the total excess carbon dioxide emissions each year. Changes in land use and land cover are another way that human activities are influencing Earth’s climate. Changes in land use and land cover modify the reflectivity of Earth’s surface; the more reflective a surface, the more sunlight is sent back into space.



Figure 7.4 The figure shows the combined land-surface and sea-surface air temperatures (°C) for the period 1861 to 1998, relative to the average temperature between 1961 and 1990. The mean global surface temperature has increased by about 0.3 to 0.6°C since the late 19th century and by about 0.2 to 0.3°C over the last 40 years, which is the period with most reliable data (source: School of environmental sciences, climate research unit, university of East Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom, 1999).



It is important to note that climate change and global warming have distinct meanings. Climate change refers to a broad range of global phenomena. These phenomena include global warming but also encompass changes such as sea level rise, ice mass loss in Antarctica, the Arctic, and mountain glaciers worldwide, and extreme weather events.

Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as confirmed by extensive observations. These observations include increases in global average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice in polar regions and mountainous areas, and a rise in global average sea levels. The evidence for this warming trend is clear and compelling. The temperature increase associated with global warming is not confined to specific regions; it is a phenomenon that spans the entire globe. Moreover, the warming is particularly pronounced at higher northern latitudes.





7.4 Climate change: Impacts


Global climate change has already had observable effects on the environment. Effects that scientists had predicted in the past that would result from global climate change are now occurring like loss of sea ice, accelerated sea level rise and longer and more intense heat waves.

Radiative forcing occurs when the amount of energy entering Earth’s atmosphere differs from the amount leaving it. Energy travels in the form of radiation, with solar radiation coming in from the Sun and infrared radiation leaving as heat. The Earth’s surface temperature depends on this balance between incoming and outgoing energy. When more radiation enters Earth than leaves, as is happening today, it leads to an increase in atmospheric temperature. This phenomenon is known as radiative forcing because the energy imbalance can force changes in Earth’s climate. Changes that have a warming effect are called ‘positive’ forcing, while changes that have a cooling effect are called ‘negative’ forcing. Radiative forcing measures how much energy is coming in from the Sun, compared to how much is leaving. Before the industrial era, radiative forcing was in very close balance, and the Earth’s average temperature was more or less stable. But today, various human activities have caused changes in this energy balance, leading to shifts in Earth’s climate. Radiative forcing can directly measure the ways recent human activities have changed the planet’s climate.



Melting of snow and ice: Global warming has a significant impact on snow and ice, especially in response to the warming across the Arctic. For example, the average annual extent of Arctic sea ice has dropped by roughly 10% per decade since satellite monitoring began in the year 1978. Many of the world’s glaciers and ice sheets are melting in response to the warming trend, and long-term average winter snowfall and snowpack have declined in many regions.

Ocean acidification: The natural pH of the oceans is between 8.0 and 8.3, which means it is somewhat alkaline. Because carbon dioxide dissolves in seawater to form carbonic acid, the acidification of the Earth’s oceans is another significant consequence of elevated carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere. Most carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere as a result of the burning of fossil fuels will eventually be absorbed by the ocean. When carbon dioxide dissolves in the ocean, it lowers the pH, making the ocean more acidic. It is estimated that the oceans have absorbed between one-quarter and one-third of the excess carbon dioxide from human activities, becoming nearly 30% more acidic than during preindustrial times. This has the potential to radically alter marine ecosystems.

Changed frequency and distribution of precipitation: As a result of a climate change, changes in the frequency and distribution of precipitation have been observed during the past several decades. For example, total precipitation in the United States has increased by about 5% over the past 50 years, but this has not been geographically uniform. This change has increased the risk of flooding.

Sea level rise: Over the period 1901-2010, global mean sea level rose by 0.19 m [0.17 to 0.21]. Since the early 1970s, glacier mass loss and ocean thermal expansion from warming together explain about 75% of the observed global mean sea level rise. NASA predicts that oceans will continue to rise at a considerable rate, about 3.21 millimeters per year on average. In 2013, the IPCC predicted sea level rise would be between 0.3 to 1.2 meters by the year 2100.



Figure 7.5 Satellite sea level observations (source: NASA Goddard Space Flight Centre).



Extreme weather patterns: Changes in climate not only affect average temperatures but also extreme temperatures, increasing the likelihood of extreme weather patterns. If global climate change causes the global average temperature to rise, there will be less cold weather, and a greater probability of hot and record hot weather. An increase in temperature variability will extend the extremes of temperature, both cold and hot. An increase in average temperature combined with increased variance will have little effect on cold weather, but hot weather will be more common and record hot weather will increase greatly. Most scientists believe that the warming of the climate will lead to more extreme weather patterns such as heat waves, droughts and very heavy rain.

For example, in recent years, a higher percentage of precipitation in the United States has come in the form of intense single-day events. The prevalence of extreme single-day precipitation events remained fairly steady between 1910 and the 1980s but has risen substantially since then. Nationwide, nine of the top 10 years for extreme one-day precipitation events have occurred since 1990. Similarly, tropical storm activity in the Atlantic ocean, the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico has increased during the past 20 years.

Ecosystem impacts: With global warming on the increase and species’ habitats on the decrease, the chances for various ecosystems to adapt naturally are diminishing. Many studies have pointed out that the rates of extinction of animal and plant species, and the temperature changes around the world since the industrial revolution, have been significantly different to normal expectations. As the climate has changed, many species have shifted their range toward the poles and to higher altitudes as they try to stay in areas with the same ambient temperatures. The timing of different seasonal activities is also changing. Several plant species are blooming earlier in Spring, and some birds, mammals, fish, and insects are migrating earlier, while other species are altering their seasonal breeding patterns. An increase in pests and disease are also expected. A report in the journal Science in June 2002 described the alarming increase in the outbreaks and epidemics of diseases throughout the land and ocean based wildlife due to climate changes.

‘Taken as a whole, the range of published evidence indicates that the net damage costs of climate change are likely to be significant and to increase over time.’

IPCC, 2014





7.5 Responding to climate change


Climate change is one of the most complex issues facing us today. It involves many dimensions – science, economics, society, politics, moral and ethical questions – and is a global problem, felt on local scales, that will be around for decades and centuries to come. Because we are already committed to some level of climate change, responding to climate change involves two approaches:

Reducing emissions and stabilizing the levels of heat-trapping greenhouse gases in the atmosphere (mitigation).



Adapting to the climate change already in the pipeline (adaptation).





Mitigation – reducing climate change – involves reducing the flow of heat-trapping greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, either by reducing sources of these gases (for example, the burning of fossil fuels for electricity, heat or transport) or enhancing the ‘sinks’ that accumulate and store these gases (such as the oceans, forests and soil).

Adaptation – adapting to life in a changing climate – involves adjusting to actual or expected future climate. The goal is to reduce our vulnerability to the harmful effects of climate change (like sea-level encroachment, more intense extreme weather events or food insecurity). It also encompasses making the most of any potential beneficial opportunities associated with climate change (for example, longer growing seasons or increased yields in some regions).



Relationship between mitigation and adaptation

If we make fewer efforts to mitigate climate change, we will have to adapt to more serious problems that impact food and water resources, biological diversity, and human health. If we take aggressive mitigation measures, the long-range changes in climate will be less and have less serious impacts on humans and the natural environment.





7.6 Earth Summit


The Earth Summit, also known as the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), was an important international conference on sustainable development held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil from 3 to 14 June 1992. This conference marked a significant moment in global environmental diplomacy and international efforts to address environmental and developmental issues. The conference was attended by leaders and representatives from 172 countries, along with thousands of participants from non-governmental organizations (NGOs). The goals of the summit were to:

Address the environmental and developmental challenges facing the world



Promote sustainable development



Protect the environment



Raise awareness of environmental issues





The conference concluded with the adoption of the Rio Declaration on environment and development. This non-binding declaration outlined a set of principles and guidelines for sustainable development and environmental protection. A key outcome of the Earth Summit was the creation of Agenda 21, a comprehensive action plan for sustainable development. Agenda 21 provided a blueprint for addressing a wide range of environmental and developmental issues, including poverty reduction, biodiversity conservation, climate change, and sustainable resource management.





Rio Conventions


The Rio Convention is a UN Convention, which is a binding agreement between different countries. It comprises three conventions, all falling under the umbrella of UNCED (also known as the Earth Summit): Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD); United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) and United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The CBD aims to conserve biological diversity, the UNCCD aims to combat desertification, and the UNFCCC aims to address climate change.

CBD: Its primary objective is to facilitate the development of national strategies for the conservation and sustainable utilization of biodiversity. It encompasses three primary goals:

The conservation of biodiversity.



The responsible and sustainable use of various components of biodiversity.



The promotion of fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources.





UNCCD: Its objective is to combat desertification, land degradation, and drought. It aims to mitigate the effects of these environmental challenges and promote sustainable land management practices.

UNFCCC: Its ultimate objective is the ‘stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.

United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCSD)

The UNCSD, also known as Rio+20, was an international conference held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from June 20 to 22, 2012. It marked the 20th anniversary of the 1992 Earth Summit held in the same city. The main objectives of UNCSD were to assess the progress made since the original Earth Summit in 1992 and to address new and emerging challenges related to sustainable development. Key issues discussed during the conference included poverty eradication, sustainable development goals, green economy, and the institutional framework for sustainable development. UNCSD resulted in the adoption of a political outcome document titled ‘The future we want,’ which outlined the global commitment to sustainable development.





Kyoto protocol


The Kyoto Protocol is an international treaty aimed at addressing the issue of climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The protocol was adopted in Kyoto, Japan, in December 1997 and entered into force on February, 2005. The detailed rules for the implementation of the protocol were adopted in Marrakesh, Morocco, in 2001 and are referred to as the Marrakesh Accords.

The Kyoto Protocol is a legally-binding agreement under which industrialized countries committed to reducing their collective emissions of greenhouse gases by 5.2% compared to the levels in the year 1990 over the five-year period from 2008 to 2012. The Kyoto Protocol implemented the objective of the UNFCCC to combat global warming by reducing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere to a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. The goal is to lower overall emissions of six greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, sulfur hexafluoride, hydrofluorocarbons, and perfluorocarbons.

Kyoto mechanisms

Under the Kyoto Protocol, countries are obligated to meet their emissions reduction targets primarily through national measures. However, the protocol also provides countries with three market-based mechanisms to help achieve their targets more efficiently. These mechanisms are:

International emissions trading: Countries that have commitments under the Kyoto Protocol can engage in international emissions trading. This allows them to acquire emission units (often referred to as Assigned Amount Units) from other countries with Kyoto commitments.

These acquired emission units can be counted towards a part of the country’s emissions reduction target, enabling flexibility and cost-effectiveness in meeting their obligations.

Clean development mechanism (CDM): The CDM allows industrialized countries to invest in emission reduction or removal projects in developing countries. These projects generate certified emission reduction (CER) credits, with each CER equivalent to one tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions reduced. Industrialized countries can purchase and use CERs to meet a portion of their emission reduction targets under the Kyoto Protocol, incentivizing sustainable development and emissions reduction in developing nations.

Joint implementation: Through the joint implementation mechanism, countries with emissions reduction commitments under the Kyoto Protocol can participate in emission reduction or removal projects in other countries with Kyoto commitments. These projects generate emission reduction units (ERUs), with each ERU equivalent to one tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions reduced. Like CERs, ERUs can be used by participating countries to meet their emission reduction targets. Similar to the CDM, all emission reductions from joint implementation projects must be real, measurable, verifiable, and additional to what would have occurred without the project.

These Kyoto mechanisms provide countries with flexibility in achieving their emissions reduction targets while fostering international cooperation and investment in emission reduction projects. They contribute to the overarching goal of mitigating global climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

Emission trading or Carbon trading

Under the Kyoto Protocol, countries have committed to targets for limiting or reducing greenhouse gas emissions. These targets are expressed as levels of allowable emissions, often referred to as ‘assigned amounts,’ over the commitment period from 2008 to 2012. These assigned amounts are measured in tonnes of CO2 equivalent and are informally known as Kyoto units. One Kyoto unit is equivalent to one metric tonne of carbon dioxide equivalents, calculated based on their global warming potential. In the context of carbon trading, countries with higher carbon emissions have the option to purchase the right to emit more carbon, while countries with lower emissions can trade the right to emit carbon to other nations. Each industrialized nation has been allocated a specific number of assigned amount units (AAUs). If a nation surpasses its allocated quota, it must acquire Kyoto units from other countries that have accumulated them by successfully reducing their emissions below their AAUs. This practice is commonly known as carbon trading or emission trading.

In essence, carbon trading allows nations to balance their emissions by facilitating the transfer of emission allowances between countries, encouraging emission reduction efforts and promoting a more sustainable approach to addressing climate change.





Doha Amendment


In Doha, Qatar, on 8 December 2012, the ‘Doha amendment to the Kyoto protocol’ was adopted. The amendment includes:

New commitments for Annex I Parties to the Kyoto Protocol who agreed to take on commitments in a second commitment period from 1 January 2013 to 31 December 2020;

A revised list of greenhouse gases to be reported on by parties in the second commitment period; and

Amendments to several articles of the Kyoto protocol which specifically referenced issues pertaining to the first commitment period and which needed to be updated for the second commitment period.

During the first commitment period, 37 industrialized countries and the European community committed to reduce greenhouse gases emissions to an average of five percent against 1990 levels. During the second commitment period, parties committed to reduce greenhouse gases emissions by at least 18 percent below 1990 levels in the eight-year period from 2013 to 2020; however, the composition of Parties in the second commitment period is different from the first.





Copenhagen Accord


The Copenhagen Accord is a political agreement that was reached at the 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen, Denmark. The accord is not legally binding, but it sets out a number of important goals and commitments related to climate change. It was a significant step forward in the international negotiations on climate change. The key elements of the Copenhagen Accord include:

An aspirational goal of limiting global temperature increase to 2 degrees Celsius.



A process for countries to submit their specific emission reduction pledges by January 2010.



Broad terms for the reporting and verification of countries’ actions.



A collective commitment by developed countries to provide $30 billion in ‘new and additional’ resources in 2010-2012 to help developing countries reduce emissions, preserve forests, and adapt to climate change.



A goal of mobilizing $100 billion a year in public and private finance by 2020 to address developing country needs.





The Accord also calls for the establishment of a Copenhagen Green Climate Fund, a high-level panel to examine ways of meeting the 2020 finance goal, a new technology mechanism, and a mechanism to channel incentives for reduced deforestation.





Paris Agreement


The Paris agreement or Paris climate accord is an agreement within the UNFCCC dealing with greenhouse gas emissions mitigation, adaptation and finance starting in the year 2020. The language of the agreement was negotiated by representatives of 196 parties at the 21st conference of the parties of the UNFCCC in Paris and adopted by consensus on 12 December 2015. As of June 2017, 195 UNFCCC members have signed the agreement, 151 of which have ratified it. In 2017, President Donald J. Trump withdrew the United States from the agreement.

In the Paris agreement, each country determines, plans and regularly reports its own contribution it should make in order to mitigate global warming. There is no mechanism to force a country to set a specific target by a specific date, but each target should go beyond previously set targets. The Paris agreement builds upon the convention and – for the first time – brings all nations into a common cause to undertake ambitious efforts to combat climate change and adapt to its effects, with enhanced support to assist developing countries to do so. As such, it charts a new course in the global climate effort.

The Paris agreement’s central aim is to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change by keeping a global temperature rise this century well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase even further to 1.5°C. Additionally, the agreement aims to strengthen the ability of countries to deal with the impacts of climate change. To reach these ambitious goals, appropriate financial flows, a new technology framework and an enhanced capacity building framework will be put in place, thus supporting action by developing countries and the most vulnerable countries, in line with their own national objectives. The agreement also provides for enhanced transparency of action and support through a more robust transparency framework.





7.7 Stratospheric ozone


Most atmospheric ozone is concentrated in a layer in the stratosphere, about 9 to 18 miles (15 to 30 km) above the Earth’s surface. The stratosphere contains approximately 90% of the ozone in the atmosphere, with the remaining 10% in the troposphere. Most of the ozone in the stratosphere is produced above the tropics where the sunlight is the most intense. The atmosphere absorbs ultraviolet (UV) radiation coming from the Sun. The ozone layer in the stratosphere absorbs a portion of UV radiation and protects life against its harmful effects. The amount of UV radiation that reaches the Earth’s surface depends on the amount of ozone in the stratosphere. The UV radiation spectrum has been subdivided into three wavelength bands designated UV-A (400 to 320 nm), UV-B (320 to 280 nm), and UV-C (280 to 100 nm). UV-C radiation is almost entirely absorbed by the ozone layer in the stratosphere, whereas UV-B radiation is mostly absorbed. UV-A radiation is not absorbed by the atmosphere, and a significant portion of UV-A radiation reaches the Earth’s surface.





Stratospheric ozone formation


Ozone is a molecule that contains three oxygen atoms. At any given time, ozone molecules are constantly formed and destroyed in the stratosphere. The process of ozone formation in the stratosphere first involves the formation of atomic oxygen (O) from the photodissociation of oxgyen molecules . The atomic oxygen, in turn, reacts with molecular oxygen to form ozone, where M represents a third body (N2 or O2) necessary to carry away the energy released in the reaction. The third neutral body (M) is needed for the energy balance of the reaction.

Photodissociation of oxgyen molecules into free oxygen atoms



Creation of stable ozone molecule in a three body reaction



The ozone that is formed in this process is also dissociated by solar radiation to form an oxygen atom and an oxygen molecule. Ozone absorbs UV radiation in the 200 to 320 nm wavelength region and generates molecular oxygen as a result of photodissociation.



This cyclic process leads to a natural steady-state concentration of stratospheric ozone. These three reactions are called the Chapman cycle, after the person who discovered them.

Levels of ozone in the stratosphere are measured in Dobson Units (D.U.). The average amount of stratospheric ozone throughout the world is about 300 D.U (equivalent to a layer 3 millimeters thick if it is compressed into a single layer). Ozone concentrations over Antarctica during the period of greatest depletion usually fall well below 200 D.U.





Stratospheric ozone depletion


Ozone is continuously being synthesized from molecular oxygen in the stratosphere by the absorption of short-wavelength ultraviolet (UV) radiation, while at the same time it is continuously being removed by various chemical reactions that convert it back to molecular oxygen. The rates of synthesis and destruction at any given time determine the concentration of ozone in the stratosphere. This balance is being affected by increasing stratospheric concentrations of chlorine and bromine, which increase the destruction process. One chlorine atom can destroy over 100,000 ozone molecules before it is removed from the stratosphere. Bromine atom is believed to be 40 times more destructive than chlorine molecules.

Some compounds release chlorine or bromine when they are exposed to intense UV light in the stratosphere. The chlorine and bromine containing compounds that cause significant depletion of the ozone layer are chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), hydrochlorofluoro-carbons (HCFCs), hydrobromofluorocarbons (HBFCs) and halons. These compounds contribute to ozone depletion and are called ozone-depleting substances. Ozone-depleting substances are man-made gases that destroy ozone once these gases reach the ozone layer. The ozone layer can also be depleted by methyl chloride (CH3Cl) which comes mainly from the oceans and methyl bromide (CH3Br) which comes from natural as well as anthropogenic sources.

Applications of ozone-depleting substances: Ozone-depleting substances have been employed in various applications across industries. The widespread use of these ozone-depleting substances in these applications was a consequence of their remarkable properties, such as chemical stability, non-flammability, and non-toxicity. Ozone-depleting substances have previously been used in a number of ways - aerosol propellants (particularly CFCs), foaming (involving CFCs and halons), refrigeration and air conditioning (involving CFCs and HCFCs), fire extinguishers (such as halon), and many other applications.

Major ozone depleting substances of anthropogenic origin



Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs): CFCs are nontoxic, non-flammable synthetic organic compounds composed of carbon, chlorine, and fluorine atoms. They are classified as halocarbons, and ‘Freon’ is a common trade name used to refer to a group of CFCs. CFC molecules are labeled with a unique numbering system, such as CFC-11 or CFC-12, which reflects their chemical composition. This numbering system provides information about the number of atoms of different elements within the molecule, including carbon, hydrogen, fluorine, and chlorine. For instance, CFC-11 is CFCl3, with one fluorine and three chlorine atoms bonded to the carbon. CFC-12 is CF2Cl2, with two fluorine atoms and two chlorine atoms bonded to carbon.

To determine the composition of specific CFC molecules, you can start by adding 90 to the CFC code number. The resulting 3-digit number corresponds to the number of carbon (the first digit), hydrogen (the second digit), and fluorine atoms (the third digit) in the molecule. You can calculate the total number of chlorine atoms in a CFC molecule using the formula:



where C represents the number of carbon atoms, H represents the number of hydrogen atoms, and F represents the number of fluorine atoms. For example, let’s consider CFC-11. Start by adding 90 to the CFC code number: 11 + 90 = 101. On the basis of this code number, the number of carbon atoms = 1, number of hydrogen atoms = 0, and number of fluorine atoms = 1.





Box 7.3 Dobson Unit




The Dobson Unit (D.U.) is the most common unit for measuring ozone concentration. Instead of measuring the amount of ozone at a particular height, the Dobson Unit measures the total amount of ozone in a column extending vertically from Earth’s surface to the top of the atmosphere. A column of air with an ozone concentration of 1 Dobson Unit would contain about 2.69 × 1016 ozone molecules for every square centimeter of area at the base of the column. The number of molecules of ozone present in one Dobson Unit would form a layer of 0.01 millimeters thick layer at the base of the column if it were compressed into a single layer at a temperature of 0°C and a pressure of 1 atmosphere. 100 Dobson Unit of ozone would form a layer only 1 millimeter thick if it were compressed into a single layer.

Ozone layer thickness is expressed in terms of Dobson units, which measure what its physical thickness would be if compressed in the Earth’s atmosphere. Over the Earth’s surface, the ozone layer’s average thickness is about 300 Dobson Units or a layer that is 3 millimeters thick.



Using the formula, one can calculate the number of chlorine atoms as follows: Cl = 2(1 + 1) – 0 – 1 = 3 chlorine atoms. Therefore, CFC-11 indeed has one C-atom, no H-atoms, one F-atom, and three Cl-atoms in its chemical structure (i.e., CCl3F).

Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs): HCFCs are organic compounds containing carbon, hydrogen, chlorine and fluorine. The HCFCs have shorter atmospheric lifetimes than CFCs and deliver less reactive chlorine to the stratosphere. Consequently, it is expected that these chemicals will contribute much less to stratospheric ozone depletion than CFCs.

Hydrobromofluorocarbons (HBFCs): HBFCs are composed of molecules containing one, two or three carbon atoms and at least one atom each of hydrogen, bromine and fluorine.

Carbon tetrachloride: Carbon tetrachloride, also called tetrachloromethane, belongs to the family of organic halogen compounds, used principally in the manufacture of dichlorodifluoromethane (a refrigerant and propellant).

Halons: Halons are a group of chemical compounds categorized as halocarbon. All halons contain bromine atom. The most common halons are halon-1211, halon-1301 and halon-2402. The numbering system for the halons is different from the CFCs. The first digit from the left is for the total number of carbon atoms, second is for the number of flourine atoms, third is for the number of chlorine atoms, and last is the number of bromine atoms. For example, in Halon 1211 (or CF2ClBr), there are 1 C atom, 2 F atoms, 1 Cl atom, and 1 Br atom. Similarly, in halon-2402 (or C2F4Br2), there are 2 C atom, 4 F atoms, 0 Cl atom, and 2 Br atoms.

Bromochloromethane: It is a halomethane that is chloromethane in which one of the hydrogens has been replaced by a bromine atom.





Ozone depletion potential


Ozone-depleting substances vary in their capacity to destroy ozone molecules. The impact of an ozone-depleting substance on the ozone layer is determined by its ozone depletion potential and its total emissions into the atmosphere. Ozone depletion potential is a measure of how much damage a chemical can cause to the ozone layer compared to a similar mass of CFC-11 (trichlorofluoromethane). CFC-11 is taken as the reference substance and is assigned an ozone depletion potential value of 1. The higher the number, the more damage a chemical can cause to the ozone layer. For example, bromotrifluoromethane (halon 1301) has an ozone depletion potential of 10.0.

Table 7.1 Ozone depletion potential (ODP) of the principal ozone-depleting substances (ODSs)





Not all chlorine and bromine sources contribute to ozone layer depletion. For example, researchers have found that chlorine from swimming pools, industrial plants, sea salt, and volcanoes does not reach the stratosphere. In contrast, ozone-depleting substances are highly stable and do not dissolve in rain. Therefore, there are no natural processes that remove ozone-depleting substances from the lower atmosphere.

Mechanism of action of ozone-depleting substance

The discovery of the mechanism of ozone depletion is a significant scientific achievement. Ozone depletion refers to the thinning of the ozone layer in Earth’s stratosphere. This phenomenon became a major environmental concern because the ozone layer plays a critical role in protecting life on Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. The mechanism of ozone depletion is explained by Sherwood Rowland, a professor of chemistry at the University of California, Irvine, and Mario Molina, a postdoctoral fellow in Rowland’s laboratory. In 1974, they published a paper in the journal Nature in which they proposed that chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are responsible for ozone depletion. Rowland and Molina’s hypothesis was based on the fact that CFCs are very stable molecules that can remain in the atmosphere for decades. Once in the atmosphere, CFCs can travel to the stratosphere, where they can be broken down by ultraviolet radiation to release chlorine atoms. Chlorine atoms can then destroy ozone molecules by breaking them down into oxygen molecules. Rowland and Molina were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1995 for their work on ozone depletion.

CFCs are inert molecules and have residence time of over a hundred years in the troposphere. These gaseous molecules diffuse through the troposphere to the stratosphere. In the stratosphere, CFC molecules can be broken by ultraviolet radiation, freeing the chlorine.



The chlorine freed in the reaction acts as a catalyst in the ozone removal process. A single chlorine atom may break down thousands of ozone molecules before it returns to the troposphere. After chlorine is released from CFC, it reacts with ozone to form chlorine monoxide (ClO) which reacts with NO2 to form chlorine nitrate.



Another key feature of catalytic cycles is the formation of reservoir species via holding cycles. Active Cl is held as reservoir species.



ClO reacts with NO2 to form chlorine nitrate (ClONO2). Compounds such as HCl and ClONO2 hold chlorine in an inactive form and are collectively called reservoirs. These reservoirs are of great importance to the chemistry of the stratosphere as they act to divert potential catalytic species from active to inactive forms, but they remain available to release the active catalysts again. ClONO2 formed is destroyed mainly by photolysis in the presence of sunlight or via reaction with O atoms, leading to regeneration of active Cl species.





Antarctic ozone hole


The ozone layer in the stratosphere contains high concentrations of ozone relative to other parts of the atmosphere. Ozone columns are commonly measured in Dobson Units. Over the Earth’s surface, the average thickness of the ozone layer in the stratosphere is approximately 300 Dobson Units, which equates to a layer about 3 millimeters thick. One Dobson Unit represents the number of ozone molecules needed to create a layer of pure ozone that is 0.01 millimeters thick at a temperature of 0 degrees Celsius and a pressure of 1 atmosphere. Ozone depletion refers to the thinning of the ozone layer in the stratosphere. The term ‘ozone hole’ is often used to describe the region of the ozone layer over Antarctica that experiences extreme ozone depletion each spring. However, the ozone hole is not actually a hole devoid of ozone; it is, in fact, a region characterized by very low ozone concentrations. Typically, the ozone hole is defined as the area where ozone column values amount to 220 Dobson Units or less. It’s important to note that ozone depletion is not limited to the region over the south pole; it occurs across all latitudes but is most severe over the polar regions.

The crucial evidence about stratospheric ozone over Antarctica came from British Antarctic Survey’s Halley Research Station is located in Antarctica. In 1984, Joseph C. Farman (a British atmospheric physicist) and his colleagues studied the raw data and found that stratospheric ozone had decreased greatly since the 1960s. In 1985, the scientists published an article in Nature. In this article, they reported that stratospheric ozone over Antarctica had decreased by 40% in the spring (September). This was the first scientific evidence of the ozone hole.

The ozone layer above the Antarctic has been particularly impacted by pollution. The Antarctic ozone hole is limited in space and time, occurring at the time of year when the Sun first appears above the horizon after the long polar night. The ozone hole begins to develop in August, is fully developed by early October and has normally broken up by early December. Strictly speaking the use of the word ‘hole’ to describe what happens to ozone in the Antarctic is an exaggeration. There is undoubtedly a massive depletion of ozone rather than removal of ozone altogether. The exact location and size of the hole vary with meteorological conditions.

In the Antarctic winter a unique atmospheric condition known as the polar vortex forms. The polar vortex blocks warmer mid-latitude air from mixing with the air above the pole, creating extremely cold polar air temperatures. Stratospheric temperatures may fall below –90°C, which is cold enough to form polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) even though the air is very dry. In this cold vortex, polar stratospheric ice crystal clouds form. This unique atmospheric condition eventually allows the chlorine to be released from chlorine nitrate. The ice crystals that make-up polar clouds provide the reaction surfaces for reactions such as



The normally inactive reservoir for Cl and ClO is converted into molecular chlorine. When the Sun rises in the spring it triggers the depletion chemistry.



The freed chlorine causes destruction of ozone. Ozone densities drop rapidly, only to recover when the polar vortex breaks up, mixing warmer air in and releasing the ozone-depleted air to move away from the polar region. When the Sun returns in September, the temperatures begin to rise, the winds weaken and typically this drives the vortex to break down by November.





Arctic ozone hole


While similar chemical mechanisms of ozone depletion occur in both the Arctic (north pole) and Antarctic (south pole) , there are significant differences due to meteorological and geographical factors. Ozone reductions observed in the stratosphere above the Arctic during late winter and early spring (January-March) are typically around 20-25%, which is significantly smaller than the drastic ozone depletion observed each spring over the Antarctic, known as the ozone hole.

In 1994, the United Nations General Assembly voted to designate September 16 as ‘ World Ozone Day’, to commemorate the signing of the Montreal Protocol on that date in 1987.



The difference between ozone content in the two polar regions results from dissimilar weather patterns. The Antarctic continent is a very large land mass surrounded by oceans. This symmetrical condition produces very low stratospheric temperatures within a meteorologically isolated region, the so-called polar vortex. The cold temperatures lead in turn to the formation of clouds, known as polar stratospheric clouds. These clouds provide surfaces that promote production of forms of chlorine and bromine that are chemically active and can rapidly destroy ozone. The conditions that maintain elevated levels of chemically active chlorine and bromine persist into September and October in Antarctica, when sunlight returns over the region to initiate ozone depletion.

The winter meteorological conditions in the Arctic, similar to those in the Antarctic, lead to the formation of an isolated region, in which the temperature is also cold enough for polar stratospheric clouds to form. However, the geographic symmetry about the North Pole is less than about the South Pole. As a result, large-scale weather systems disturb the wind flow, making it less stable over the Arctic than over the Antarctic. These disturbances prevent the temperature in the Arctic stratosphere from being as cold as in the Antarctic stratosphere, and fewer polar stratospheric clouds are therefore formed. Nevertheless, chemically active chlorine and bromine compounds are also formed over the Arctic, as they are over Antarctica, from reactions at the surface of the clouds. But the cold conditions rarely persist into March, when sufficient sunlight is available to initiate large ozone depletion.

Effect of ozone depletion

The ozone layer plays a crucial role in shielding our planet from the harmful UV-radiation present in sunlight. When the ozone layer is depleted, more of this harmful radiation reaches the Earth’s surface. This depletion has far-reaching consequences, including:

Increased incidence of skin cancers and cataracts:



Reduced growth and crop yields:



Threats to ecosystems and biodiversity:



Degradation of materials:





In summary, ozone depletion has far-reaching environmental repercussions. It not only poses health risks to humans but also threatens agricultural productivity, ecosystems, and the integrity of materials we rely on. Protecting and preserving the ozone layer remains vital to mitigating these adverse effects and safeguarding the well-being of our planet.





Montreal Protocol


During the 1970s and 1980s, growing international concern emerged over the potential harm posed by ozone depleting substances (ODS) to the Earth’s ozone layer. In response to these concerns, the Vienna Convention for the protection of the ozone layer was established in 1985, marking the formalization of international cooperation to address this critical issue.

This collaborative effort culminated in the signing of the Montreal Protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer in 1987. The Montreal Protocol is a landmark international agreement that regulates the production and consumption of several man-made chemicals referred to as ozone depleting substances to safeguard the stratospheric ozone layer, a vital component of Earth’s atmosphere. Signed in September 1987, the protocol officially entered into force in 1989.

One of the key provisions of the Montreal Protocol was the commitment to phase out the production and consumption of ozone-depleting compounds, including chlorofluorocarbons, halons, carbon tetrachloride, and methyl chloroform. These substances were slated for complete phase-out by the year 2000, marking a pivotal step in the global effort to protect and restore the ozone layer.

The Montreal Protocol stands as a testament to international cooperation and environmental diplomacy, demonstrating the world’s ability to come together to address pressing environmental challenges. It has played a crucial role in mitigating ozone layer depletion and continues to be a model for successful international agreements aimed at preserving our planet’s ecological balance.

Amendments to the Montreal Protocol

The London amendment (1990): The amendment to the Montreal Protocol agreed by the second meeting of the parties (London, 1990).

The Copenhagen amendment (1992): The amendment to the Montreal Protocol agreed by the fourth meeting of the parties (Copenhagen, 1992).

The Montreal amendment (1997): The amendment to the Montreal Protocol agreed by the ninth meeting of the parties (Montreal, 1997).

The Beijing amendment (1999): The amendment to the Montreal Protocol agreed by the eleventh meeting of the parties (Beijing, 1999).

The Kigali amendment (2016): The Kigali Agreement is an amendment to the Montreal Protocol, and the meeting to discuss it was held in Kigali, the capital city of an African country, Rwanda, in October 2016. In this meeting, the parties to the Montreal Protocol adopted the Kigali Amendment, aiming to phase down the production and consumption of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) globally. HFCs are commonly used as alternatives to ozone-depleting substances like HCFCs and CFCs, which are already regulated under the protocol. However, HFCs are potent greenhouse gases, and the worldwide implementation of the Kigali Amendment is anticipated to prevent up to a half-degree Celsius of temperature increase by year 2100. This amendment provides market certainty and opens international markets to new environmentally-friendly technologies without compromising performance. It calls on all countries to gradually reduce their production and consumption of HFCs in the coming decades.





Progess after Montreal Protocol


Significant progress has been made in reducing the consumption of ozone-depleting substances since 1986, largely due to the 1987 UNEP Montreal Protocol. This is evidenced by the fact that the ozone hole, which reached its largest historical extent of 28.4 million km² in September 2000, has been shrinking in recent years. In late September 2022, the Antarctic ozone hole reached its maximum area of 24.5 million km², which is still significant but smaller than its peak size. While the ozone hole remains a concern, the progress made under the Montreal Protocol is encouraging.



Figure 7.6 Maximum ozone hole extent over the southern hemisphere (Antarctic stratosphere), from 1979 to 2022. Copernicus analyses of total ozone column over the Antarctic. The blue colours indicate lowest ozone columns, while white and grey indicate higher ozone columns.





Box 7.4 Treaty and Article




Treaty means an international agreement concluded between sovereign states and international organizations in written form and governed by international law. A treaty may also be known as an agreement, protocol, covenant, convention, pact or accord, among other terms. A state party to a treaty is a country that has ratified or acceded to that particular treaty, and is therefore legally bound by the provisions in the instrument.

Declaration is a document stating agreed upon standards but which is not legally binding. Conventions are stronger than declarations because they are legally binding for governments that have signed them.

Article is an international legal instruments generally include a Preamble (stating the reasons for and underlying understandings of the drafters and adopters of the instrument) and a series of ‘articles’, which lay out the obligations of those States choosing to be bound by it and procedural matters involving the treaty. The term ‘provision’ is often used as an alternative when referring to the content of particular articles. The term ‘ charter’ is used for particularly formal and solemn instruments, such as the treaty founding an international organization like the United Nations.



Alternative of ozone-depleting substances

The scientific community’s understanding of the harmful effects of ozone-depleting substances on the ozone layer led to international agreements like the Montreal Protocol, which effectively banned or restricted the production and use of many ozone-depleting substances, such as CFCs and halons. However, while the elimination of ozone-depleting substances has greatly benefited the recovery of the ozone layer, it has also underscored the need for alternative substances. In response, synthetic gases known as F-gases (or fluorinated gases) have been introduced.

F-gases encompass a group of synthetic gases that contain fluorine and carbon atoms. Some common examples of F-gases include hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs). Unlike ozone-depleting substances, F-gases do not contain chlorine or bromine atoms, which are responsible for ozone depletion.

Nevertheless, the adoption of F-gases as replacements for ozone-depleting substances has also raised concerns due to their high global warming potential. Many F-gases are potent greenhouse gases, capable of trapping heat in the Earth’s atmosphere. This property has renewed the focus on addressing the environmental impact of F-gases, particularly in the context of combating climate change. Consequently, there has been a push for the development and promotion of low-global-warming-potential alternatives like hydrofluoroolefins (HFOs) and natural refrigerants. HFOs are unsaturated organic compounds composed of hydrogen, fluorine and carbon and categorized as having zero ozone-depletion potential and low global-warming potential.





7.8 Environmental Laws in India


A global consciousness for the protection of the environment prompted the Indian Government to enact the 42nd Amendment (1976) in the Constitution. The said amendment added Article 48A to the Directive Principles of State Policy. It declares, ‘the state shall endeavor to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country’. The constitutional provisions are backed by a number of laws – acts, rules and notifications.





Forest and Biodiversity


Indian Forest Act, 1927

Enacted to ‘consolidate the law related to forest, the transit of forest produce, and the duty leviable on timber and other forest produce’.

Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972

An act to provide the protection of birds and animals and for all matters that are connected to it whether it be their habitat or the waterhole or the forests that sustain them. This act has been last amended in 2006.

Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980

An act to provide for the protection of and the conservation of the forests. This act has been amended in 1988.

Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 1991

Puts regulations on various activities, including construction and gives protection to the backwaters and estuaries. This notification was notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

Biological Diversity Act, 2002

An act to provide for the conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its components and fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the use of biological resources and knowledge associated with it.

Scheduled Tribes & other Traditional forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006

To address the adverse living conditions of many tribal families living in forests was on account of non-recognition and vesting of pre-existing rights, a landmark legislation viz. Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, has been enacted to recognize and vest the forest rights and occupation of forest land in forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers, who have been residing in such forests for generations, but whose rights could not be recorded.





Environment and Pollution


Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974

Establishes an institutional structure for preventing and abating water pollution. It establishes standards for water quality and effluent. Polluting industries must seek permission to discharge waste into water bodies. The CPCB was constituted under this act. This act has been last amended in 1988.

The Department of Environment was established in India in 1980 to ensure a healthy environment for the country. This later became the Ministry of Environment and Forests in 1985. Now it is known as ‘Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC)’.



Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977

An act to provide for the levy and collection of cess or fees on water consuming industries and local authorities. This act has been last amended in 2003.

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981

An act to provide for the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution. It entrusts the power of enforcing this act to the central board or state board. This act has been last amended in 1987.

Environment (Protection) Act, 1986

Authorizes the central government to protect and improve environmental quality, control and reduce pollution from all sources and prohibit or restrict the setting and/or operation of any industrial facility on environmental grounds. The EPA (Environment Protection Act), 1986 came into force soon after the Bhopal gas tragedy. This act has been last amended in 1991.

Manufacture, Storage and Import of Hazardous Chemical Rules, 1989

Define the terms used in this context, and sets up an authority to inspect, once a year, the industrial activity connected with hazardous chemicals and isolated storage facilities. These rules have been last amended in 2000. These rules were notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991

An Act to provide for public liability- insurance for the purpose of providing immediate relief to the persons affected by accident occurring while handling any hazardous substance and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. This act has been last amended in 1992.

Bio-medical waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998

A legal binding on the health care institutions to streamline the process of proper handling of hospital waste such as segregation, disposal, collection and treatment. These rules were notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. These rules have been further amended in 2016; the Bio-medical Waste Management Rules, 2016.

Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000

Rules lay down for the regulation of production and consumption of ozone depleting substances. These rules were notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000

Rules lay down terms and conditions as are necessary to regulate and control noise pollution in public places from various sources, inter-alia, industrial activity, construction activity, generator sets, loudspeakers, public address systems, music systems, vehicular horns and other mechanical devices have deleterious effects on human health and the psychological well being of the people. These rules were notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. These rules have been further amended in 2010 as ‘Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) (Amendment) Rules, 2010’.

Batteries (Management and Handling) Rules, 2001

Apply to every manufacturer, importer, re-conditioner, assembler, dealer, auctioneer, consumer and bulk consumer involved in the manufacture, processing, sale, purchase and use of batteries or components so as to regulate and ensure the environmentally safe disposal of used batteries. These rules were notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

National Green Tribunal Act, 2010

An Act to provide for the establishment of a National Green Tribunal for the effective and expeditious disposal of cases relating to environmental protection and conservation of forests and other natural resources including enforcement of any legal right relating to environment and giving relief and compensation for damages to persons and property and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016

The Government of India has revamped the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 and notified the new Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 on April 8, 2016. The Rules are now applicable beyond Municipal areas and lay down terms and conditions for the collection, segregation, storage, transportation, processing and disposal of solid wastes. These rules have been notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.





Box 7.5 Law, Act, Rule and Ordinance




Law is a rule of conduct or procedure established by custom, agreement, or authority. In other words, it is the body of rules and principles governing the affairs of a society.

Legislation is the process of making or enacting laws. It is done by the Parliament of India.

Act is a law passed by both the Houses of Parliament and approved by the President of India. Until it is passed by the Parliament, an Act is known as a Bill. In other words, bills passed in Parliament become Act.

Rules are the standard methods and procedures in relation to any provision contained in an Act. They are framed by the government under the powers given to it in the Act.

An Ordinance is a temporary law that holds the same legal weight as an Act, and it is promulgated based on the recommendation of the Union Cabinet when Parliament is not in session. If the government intends to maintain the provisions of the ordinance, it must present it in the form of a Bill, which needs to be approved by both houses of Parliament. After receiving the President’s assent, the ordinance becomes a full-fledged law. Ordinances automatically expire if Parliament does not endorse them within six weeks of reassembly or if disapproving resolutions are passed by both Houses. Furthermore, it is obligatory for Parliament to convene a session within six months of an ordinance being passed. Notifications and circulars are issued by the government under various Acts to clarify the provisions of law.



Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016

The Government of India has revamped the Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989 and notified the new Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016. The rules lay down terms and conditions to control the generation, collection, treatment, import, storage and handling of hazardous waste. These rules have been notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016

These rules aim to increase the minimum thickness of plastic carry bags from 40 to 50 microns and stipulate a minimum thickness of 50 microns for plastic sheets to facilitate the collection and recycling of plastic waste. Rural areas have also been brought within the ambit of these rules since plastic has reached rural areas, and the responsibility for the implementation of the rules is given to Gram Panchayats.





7.9 Environmental footprints


Carbon footprint


A ‘footprint’ is a quantitative measurement describing the appropriation of natural resources by humans. The total set of greenhouse gas emissions caused directly and indirectly by an individual, organization, event or product is commonly called their carbon footprint. The most important greenhouse gas, arising from human activity, is carbon dioxide. Virtually all human activities cause the carbon dioxide emissions that lead to climate change. Over the past few years, the carbon footprint has become one of the most important environmental protection indicators. It is a measure of the impact our activities have on the environment, and in particular climate change. It relates the amount of greenhouse gases produced in our day-to-day lives through burning fossil fuels for electricity, heating and transportation etc.

Emissions of greenhouse gases are commonly converted into carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) based on their 100 year global warming potential. This allows to express emission of all greenhouse gases in one standard unit. The ‘equivalent’ means that the footprint is made up of a number of different greenhouse gases, which have been converted into the equivalent quantity of carbon dioxide in order to show all emissions in a single number.

A carbon footprint is made up of the sum of two parts, the primary footprint and the secondary footprint. The primary footprint is a measure of our direct emissions of carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels including domestic energy consumption and transportation (e.g. car and plane). The secondary footprint is a measure of the indirect carbon dioxide emissions from the whole lifecycle of products we use – those associated with their manufacture and eventual breakdown.

Why carry out a carbon footprint?

Carbon footprints are useful for a number of purposes:

For publicly reporting greenhouse gas emissions.



For setting a target for reducing emissions (in order to set a reduction target it is necessary to know what current emissions are).



To identify which activities contribute the most to a footprint (in order to identify the important areas for reduction efforts).



In order to measure changes in emissions over time and to monitor the effectiveness of reduction activities.



To offset emissions (in order to offset emissions it is necessary to know how many reductions credits to purchase).





Nitrogen footprint


Nitrogen is an important component in air, land and water. While necessary to life, reactive nitrogen (all forms of the nitrogen except N2) can be detrimental to both ecosystem and human health when present in excessive amounts. Different forms of reactive nitrogen contribute to smog and reduced air quality, acid deposition, eutrophication, reduced drinking water quality, biodiversity loss, global warming and more.

The nitrogen footprint is a measurement of the amount of reactive nitrogen released into the environment as a result of human activities. It mainly includes NOx, N2O, NO3–, and NH3 emission. The two main pathways through which we release reactive nitrogen to the environment are fossil fuel combustion and food production. When a fossil fuel is burned, reactive nitrogen is emitted to the atmosphere as a waste product. The use of nitrogen in food production, on the other hand, is intentional. Nitrogen is a key nutrient for food production and is contained in fertilizers. The nitrogen footprint includes nitrogen contained in consumed food, plus nitrogen released during the whole chain of production, distribution and preparation of the food. The other component of the nitrogen footprint determines the amount of nitrogen (as NOx emissions) released from the burning of fossil fuels related to energy use in housing (e.g. cooking, heating, cooling); transport (e.g. use of private or public transport) and the energy used to produce goods and provide services.





Water footprint


The ‘water footprint’ concept was introduced by Hoekstra in 2002. It is defined as the total volume of freshwater used to produce the goods and services consumed by the individual or producer. It accounts for both the direct (domestic water use) and indirect (water required to produce industrial and agricultural products) water use of a consumer or producer. Water use is measured in terms of volumes of water consumed (evaporated or incorporated into a product) and polluted per unit of time. It is an indicator of freshwater use that looks not only at direct water use of a consumer or producer, but also at the indirect water use.

The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB) for National and International Policy Makers 2009, noted different types of carbon emissions as colors of carbon:

Brown carbon

Industrial emissions of greenhouse gases that affect the climate.

Green carbon

Carbon incorporated into plant biomass and the soils below.

Blue carbon

Blue carbon is the term for carbon captured by the world’s ocean and coastal ecosystems.

Black carbon

Formed through incomplete combustion of fuels.



The concept of ‘water footprint’ is an analogue to the ecological and the carbon footprint, but indicates water use instead of land or fossil energy use. Water use is measured in terms of water volumes consumed or polluted. Water consumption refers to water evaporated or incorporated into a product.

The water footprint of a product is the total volume of freshwater used to produce the product, summed over the various steps of the production chain. The water footprint of a product refers not only to the total volume of water used; it also refers to where and when the water is used. The water footprint can be measured in cubic metres per tonne of production, per hectare of cropland, per unit of currency and in other functional units. The water footprint helps us understand for what purposes our limited freshwater resources are being consumed and polluted.

A water footprint has three components: the blue, green and grey water footprint.

The blue water footprint is the volume of surface and groundwater consumed as a result of the production of a good or service. Consumption refers to the volume of freshwater used and then evaporated or incorporated into a product.

The green water footprint is the volume of rainwater stored in the unsaturated zone of soil consumed during the production process. This is particularly relevant for agricultural and forestry products (products based on crops or wood), where it refers to the total rainwater evapotranspired (from fields and plantations) plus the water incorporated into the harvested crop or wood.

The grey water footprint of a product is an indicator of freshwater pollution that can be associated with the production of a product over its full supply chain. It is defined as the volume of freshwater that is required to assimilate the load of pollutants based on existing ambient water quality standards. It is calculated as the volume of water that is required to dilute pollutants to such an extent that the quality of the water remains above agreed water quality standards.





Ecological footprint


Ecological footprint analysis compares human demand on nature with the biosphere’s ability to regenerate resources and provide services. It does this by assessing the biologically productive land and marine area required to produce the resources a population consumes and absorb the corresponding waste, using prevailing technology.

In other words, an ecological footprint measures, under prevailing technology, how much land and water area a human population requires to provide the resources it consumes and to absorb its waste. Ecological footprints are measured in global hectares (gha) – the amount of bioproductive land and sea available on the planet. Biologically productive areas include cropland, forests and fishing-grounds but exclude deserts, glaciers or the open ocean. The current global biologically productive area is 10.8 billion hectares, of which, 21% is productive ocean and 79% is productive land.

We can calculate our footprint by adding up the hectares it takes to grow our food and farm the animals we eat; the hectares our house stands on; the hectares that oil refineries and other energy infrastructure we depend on take up; the hectares of forest that would be needed to absorb the carbon dioxide emitted by our fuels; a share of the hectares taken up by our roads; and everything else we do that has an impact on the planet’s ecology.

Grey water

Grey water is the water that is polluted during production or process.

Blue water

Blue water is the water in our surface and ground water reservoir.

Green water

The precipitation on land that does not run off or recharge the ground-water but is held in the unsaturated zone of soil and eventually transpired by the plants is known as green water.



The ecological footprint is an accounting framework and it does this by adding together the areas required to provide renewable resources people use, the areas occupied by infrastructure and the areas required for absorbing waste. To determine whether human demand for renewable resources and carbon dioxide uptake can be maintained, the ecological footprint is compared to the regenerative capacity (or ‘ biocapacity’) of the planet. Biocapacity is the total regenerative capacity available to serve the demand represented by the footprint. Both the ecological footprint (which represents demand for resources) and biocapacity (which represents the availability of resources) are expressed in units called global hectares (gha). The WWF claims that the human footprint has exceeded the biocapacity (the available supply of natural resources) of the planet by 20%. Ecological footprint analysis is now widely used around the globe as an indicator of environmental sustainability. It can be used to measure and manage the use of resources throughout the economy. It can be used to explore the sustainability of individual lifestyles, goods and services, organizations, industry sectors, neighborhoods, cities, regions and nations.





References


Allen MR, Barros VR, Broome J, Cramer W, Christ R, Church JA, Clarke L, Dahe Q, Dasgupta P, Dubash NK and Edenhofer E (2014), IPCC fifth assessment synthesis report–climate change. Synthesis report.

Castner EA, Leach AM, Leary N, Baron J, Compton JE, Galloway JN, Hastings MG, Kimiecik J, Lantz-Trissel J, Reguera ED and Ryals R (2017), The Nitrogen Footprint Tool Network: A Multi-Institution Program to Research and Reduce Nitrogen Pollution. Sustainability: The Journal of Record.

Climate change: How do we know?, Vostok ice core data/J.R. Petit et al.; NOAA Mauna Loa CO2 record.

Environmental protection agency (2016), Climate Change Indicators in the United States.

European Environment Agency (1998), Europe’s Environment, The Second Assessment, European Environment Agency Copenhagen. Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg.

Gates DM (1993), Climate Change and Its Biological Consequences. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.

Global Warming, School of environmental sciences, climate research unit, university of East Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom, 1999

Graedel TE and Crutzen PJ (1995), Atmosphere, climate and change, Scientific American Library. W.H. Freeman, New York.

Hoekstra AY, Chapagain AK, Aldaya MM and Mekonnen MM (2012), The water footprint of humanity. Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences.

Hoekstra AY, Wiedmann TO (2014), Humanity’s unsustainable environmental footprint. Science, 344(6188), 1114-1117.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2007), Climate Change: Synthesis Report, Geneva.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2014), Fifth Assessment Report (AR5).

Joint science academies’ statement: Global response to climate change (2005), 11 International Science Academies.

Kerr RA (2007), How urgent is climate change? Science, 318:1230–1231.

Lal N (2017), Lal’s Encyclopaedia on Environment Protection and Pollution Laws. Delhi Law House.

Masters GM and Ela WP (2008), Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science, 3rd ed. Phi Learning.

NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (2017), Global Mean Sea Level.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (2017), Climate Change: Global Sea Level.

Neimark BD (2017), Bioprospecting and Biopiracy, The International Encyclopedia of Geography.

Solomon S, Qin D, Manning M, Chen Z, Marquis M, Averyt KB, Tignor M and Miller HL (eds.), IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 996 pp, Cambridge University Press, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Stocker TF, Qin D, Plattner GK, Tignor M, Allen SK, Boschung J, Nauels A, Xia Y, Bex V and Midgley PM (eds.), IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 1535 pp, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Trends in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide, Mauna Loa Observatory, NOAA.

Visser W (2017), Landmarks for sustainability: events and initiatives that have changed our World.

Wackernagel M and Rees W (1998), Our ecological footprint: Reducing human impact on the Earth. New Society Publication.

World Meteorological Organization (1999), Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1998, World Meteorological Organization Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project–Report No. 44, Geneva.

World Meteorological Organization (2010), Data in ODP2 come from WMO’s (World Meteorological Organization’s) Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion.

World Meteorological Organization (2011), Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 2010. Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project–Report No. 52, 516 pp. Geneva, Switzerland.

World Resources Institute (2014), Climate Change Indicators: Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions.





Index




A

Abiotic 27, 29

Abiotic control 55

Absolute humidity 16

Abyss 58

Abyssal zone 59

Abyssopelagic zone 58

Acceptance hypothesis 168

Acclimation 17

Acclimatization 17

Acid deposition 198, 203

Acid formers 223

Acid precipitation 203

Acid rain 198, 203

Adamsia palliata 123

Adaptation 17, 252

Aerobic treatment sludge 223

Aeronautics research 242

Aerosol 196

African elephant 167

Age pyramid 83

Age structure 83

Agenda 21 253

Agroforestry 69

Air 191

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 209, 266

Air pollution 191

Air quality index 201

Air quality monitoring 202

Air quality standards 199

Alagoas curassow 170

Alcaligenes 222

Algal bloom 215, 219

Allee effect 92

Allelochemicals 129

Allelopathy 129

Allen’s rule 20

Allochthonous production 31

Allogenic succession 153

Allometric constant 21

Allometric relationship 21

Allopatric 148

Alpha diversity 104

Alpine tundra 72

Altitudinal variation 163

Amensalism 129

Ammonia-oxidizers 50

Ammonification 50

Anaerobic treatment 223

Anammox 50

Animal wastes 212

Antagonistic coevolution 128

Antarctic ozone hole 261

Aphotic zone 57

Aposematic coloration 126

Apparent competition 130

Aquatic ecosystem 56

Arctic tundra 72

Area sources 192

Arithmetic growth 85

Arms race coevolution 128

Arthrobacter 222

Article 265

Artificial ecosystem 56

Aspection 119

Assigned amount units 255

Assimilation 43

Assimilation efficiency 43

Associate mangroves 61

Atacama desert 70

Atlantic comb 166

Atmosphere 47, 191

Attached growth treatment 222

Autecology 29

Autochthonous production 31

Autogenic (self-generated) succession 153

Automobile emission controls 206

Autotrophic respiration 30

Autotrophic succession 153

Autotrophs 29

Autumn overturn 64

B

Background extinction rate 168

Bad ozone 194

Barrier reefs 61

Batesian mimicry 126

Bathyal zone 59

Bathypelagic zone 58

Batteries (Management and Handling) Rules 267

Bedload sediments 66

Beijing Amendment 264

Benthic zone 62

Benthos 62

Bergmann’s rule 20

Beta diversity 104

Bharat stage emission standards 207

Bioaccumulation 224

Bioaccumulation indicators 233

Bioaugmentation 230

Biocapacity 271

Biochemical oxygen demand 214

Biodiesel 207

Biodiversity 161, 174

Biodiversity Convention 181

Biodiversity crisis 168

Biodiversity Hotspots 175

Biodiversity indicator 233

Biodiversity prospecting 183

Biogeochemical cycle 47

Biogeocoenosis 27

Biogeographic provinces 186

Biogeographic zones 186

Biogeography 120, 186

Bioindicator 232

Biological agents 218

Biological diversity 161

Biological diversity act 184, 266

Biological indicator 212, 216, 232

Biological invasion 167

Biological nitrogen fixation 49

Biological species concept 23

Biological treatment 221, 227

Biomagnification 224

Biomass 30

Biome 28, 71

Biome distribution 72

Biome types 72

Bio-medical waste (Management and Handling) Rules 267

Biopiracy 184

Bioprospecting 183

Bioreactors 231

Bioremediation 230

Bioremediation strategies 230

Biosparging 230

Biosphere 28, 47

Biosphere reserves 178

Biostimulation 230

Biotic 27, 29

Biotic control 55

Biotic hypotheses 163

Biotic potential 85

Biotic resistance hypothesis 167

Bioventing 230

Birth rate 81

Black carbon 270

Black smokers 59

Blue baby syndrome 219

Blue carbon 270

Blue water 271

Blue water footprint 270

BMW Rules 229

Bogs 66

Bonn Convention 182

Boreal forest 67

Boreal forest biome 76

Botanical garden 174

Bradyrhizobium 124

Bromochloromethane 259

Brown carbon 270

BSES 207

Buffer zone 179

C

Calotropis 126

Capillary water 5

Carbon cycle 48

Carbon dioxide 246

Carbon dioxide equivalents 249

Carbon footprint 268

Carbon monoxide 193

Carbon tetrachloride 259

Carbon trading 255

Cardiac glycosides 126

Carnivores 29

Carrot grass 166

Carrying capacity 87, 88

Catalytic converter 206

Catalytic incinerator 206

Central Pollution Control Board 199, 200

Chamaephytes 118

Chaparral biome 76

Chapman cycle 257

Character displacement 147

Charter 265

Chemical decomposition 3

Chemical indicators 212

Chemical oxygen demand 215

Chemical pollutants 218

Chemical treatment 221, 227

Chemically bound water 5

Chemoautotrophs 29

Chipko movement 186

Chlorofluorocarbons 246, 258

Chresard 5

Cichlid fish 166

CITES 181

Clean Air Act 193

Clean development mechanism 255

Climate 241

Climate change 199, 241

Climate models 243

Climate science 242

Climatic (regional) climax 155

Climatic climax theory 155

Climatic hypothesis 162

Climatic savannas 73

Climax community 149, 150, 155

Climax pattern theory 155

Climax stage 150

Closed community 101

Closed population 84

Closed systems 28

Clumped dispersion 82

CNG 207

Coastal deserts 70

Coastal Regulation Zone Notification 266

Coasts 188

Coevolution 128

Cohort 81, 89

Cold-blooded 18

Colluvium 3

Commensalism 124

Community 101

Community ecology 28, 29, 101

Community forestry 69

Community interactions 112

Community reserves 178

Community stability 114

Community structure 102

Compensation depth 57

Competition 129

Competition coefficient 132

Competitor ruderal strategists 97

Competitor stress tolerator strategists 97

Competitors 97

Complexity 115

Component Allee effects 92

Composting 228, 230

Compressed natural gas 207

Conductivity 213

Coniferous forest 67

Coniferous forest biome 76

Connectance 112

Connectedness webs 113

Conservation 174

Conservation biology 174

Conservation function 179

Conservation reserves 178

Consumers 29

Consumption efficiency 43

Contagious dispersion 82

Continuum concept 102

Copenhagen Accord 256

Copenhagen Amendment 264

Copenhagen Green Climate Fund 256

Coral reefs 124

Coral reefs ecosystem 60

Corals 60

Core zone 179

Criteria air pollutants 193

Critically endangered 171

Crude density 80

Cryptic coloration 126

Cryptophytes 118

Cultural eutrophication 198

Cyanosis 219

Cyclic succession 153

Cyclones 205

D

Dark bottle method 34

Death rate 81

Death Valley 70

Deccan Peninsula 188

Deciduous leaf 75

Declining Arctic sea ice 243

Decomposers 30, 53

Decomposition 53

Defensive mutualism 124

Definitive host 127

Deforestation 68

Degraded forest 68

Demographic Allee effects 92

Demography 79

Denitrification 50

Density-dependent regulation 91

Density-independent factors 92

Density-independent regulation 92

Deposition zone 65

Derived savanna 73

Desert 56, 70

Desert biome 73, 77

Desert ecosystem 70

Desertification 71

Determining population size 80

Detritivores 29

Detritus 29

Detritus feeders 29

Detritus food chains 41

Development function 179

Diazotroph 50

Diminishing population 83

Direct competition 129

Direct effects 122

Direct life cycle 127

Disclimax 155

Dispersal 84

Dispersion 82

Dispersive mutualism 124

Dissolved oxygen 214

Disturbance 111

Disturbance climax 155

Diversity index 106

Diversity indices 105

Diversity-invasibility hypothesis 167

Diversity-stability hypothesis 115, 167

Diversity-stability paradox 115

Dobson Units 257, 259, 261

Dodo 170

Doha Amendment 255

Domesticated ecosystem 56

Dominance indices 106

Dominant species 102

Donor 122

Drought evaders 18

Drought resistant plants 18

Drought-enduring plants 18

Dry biomass 30

Dry deposition 203

Drylands 71

Dust 196

Dynamic stability hypothesis 41

E

Early successional species 150

Earth Summit 242, 253

Ecad 25

Ecesis 154

Ecocline 24, 119

Ecofactor 3

Ecological amplitude 23

Ecological character displacement 148

Ecological communities 28

Ecological community 101

Ecological compression 143

Ecological efficiency 43

Ecological equivalents 142

Ecological factor 3

Ecological footprint 270

Ecological indicator 233

Ecological interdependence 122

Ecological mortality 81

Ecological niche 24, 139

Ecological or realized natality 80

Ecological pyramids 44

Ecological succession 149

Ecological system 27, 28

Ecology 1

Ecophene 25

Ecospecies 24

Ecosphere 29

Ecosystem 27, 28

Ecosystem diversity 162

Ecosystem impacts 252

Ecosystem services 54, 164

Ecosystems ecology 28

Ecotone 119

Ecotype 24

Ectoparasites 127

Ectothermic 19

Edaphic (local) climax 155

Edaphic savannas 73

Edge effect 119

Edge species 120

EIA guiding principles 236

EIS presentation 235

Electronic waste 227

Electrostatic precipitators 206

Element cycling 46

Elliptical orbit 14

Eluviation 6

Emergent layer 75

Emigration 84

Emission reduction units 255

Emission trading 255

Endangered 172

Endemic species 166

Endoparasites 127

Endothermic 19

Endotherms 19

Endothermy 19

Energetic hypothesis 41

Energy flow 36

Energy flow webs 113

Entropy 36

Environment 3

Environment Protection Act 209, 266

Environmental factor 3

Environmental footprints 268

Environmental heterogeneity hypothesis 168

Environmental impact assessment 234

Environmental indicator 233

Environmental resistance 85

Eolian soil 3

EPA 199

Ephemerals 18

Epilimnion 63

Epiparasite 127

Epipelagic zone 58

Epiphytes 125

Equilibrium point 135

Equinox 15

Estivation 19

Estuarine 67

Estuary 61

Ethanol 206

Eupagurus predeauxi 123

Euphotic zone 57

Euryhaline 23

Euryhydric 23

Euryoecious 23

Euryphagic 23

Eurythermal organisms 22

Eutrophic lakes 65

Eutrophication 198, 219

Evergreen tree 73

Evolutionary history hypothesis 162

Exosphere 9

Expanding population 83

Exploitation competition 129

Exploitation efficiency 43

Exponential growth 85

Ex-situ conservation 174

Extension forestry 69

Extinct 170

Extinction 120, 168

F

Facilitation model 156

Facultative mutualism 123

Farm forestry 69

Fecundity 81

Feeding cascade 55

Feeding characters 148

Fens 66

Fertility 81

F-gases 265

Filters 206

Fine suspended particulate matter 196

Fire climax 155

Flagship species 175

Floodplains 65

Flora 71

Fluorinated gases 245, 265

Fluvial deposits 65

Food 164

Food chain 40

Food webs 41

Forced ventilation 203

Forest 56, 67

Forest Conservation Act 186, 266

Forest ecosystem 67

Fossil fuels 49

Frequency 111

Frequency-dependent selection 128

Freshwater ecosystem 56, 62

Fringing reefs 61

Fugitive species 96

Fulvic acids 4

Fume 196

Functional webs 113

Fundamental niche 140

Fungicides 215

Fungus roots 124

G

Galapagos Islands 182

Gamma diversity 104

Ganga action plan 220

Gangetic Plains 188

Gaseous cycles 47

Gaseous pollutants 192

Gause’s principle 143

Gene bank 175

Generalist species 142

Genet 79

Genetic diversity 161

Geographic range 172

Geometric growth 85

Geophytes 118

Germplasm banks 175

Glacial retreat 243

Glacial soil 3

Global cycles 47

Global hectares 271

Global temperature rise 243

Global warming 198, 249

Glycophytes 62

Gobi desert 71

Good bioindicator 233

Grain alcohol 206

Grand Canyon 182

Grassland 56

Grassland ecosystems 69

Gravitational water 5

Grazing food chains 41

Great barrier reef 182

Green carbon 270

Green water 271

Green water footprint 270

Greenhouse effect 198, 244

Greenhouse gases 244

Grey water 271

Grey water footprint 270

Gross photosynthesis 38

Gross primary productivity 30

Gross production 38

Gross production efficiency 44

Gross reproductive rate 90

Groundwater 212

Groundwater pollution 209

Groundwater pollution 212

Growth form 117

Guilds 114

H

Habitat 166

Habitat degradation 166

Habitat destruction 166

Habitat fragmentation 166

Habitat heterogeneity hypothesis 110

Habitat loss 166

Habitat specificity 172

Hadal zone 59

Hadalpelagic zone 58

Hailey national park 178

Hailstones 16

Halley Research Station 261

Halocarbons 198

Halons 259

Halophytes 62

Harvest analysis method 35

Hawaiian crow 170

Hazardous air pollutants 193

Hazardous waste 226

Hazardous waste treatment 226

Hazardous wastes rules 226

Heart-weight rule 20

Heavy metals 215

Hekistotherms 16

Helophytes 118

Hemicryptophytes 118

Herbicides 215

Herbivores 29

Herbivory 125

Hesse’s rule 20

Heterotrophic succession 153

Heterotrophs 29

Hibernation 19

Highly concave curve 81

Highly convex curve 81

Himalaya 175, 187

Home range 98

Homeotherm 19

Homeothermic animals 18

Homeothermy 19

Horizons 5

Host 126

Host-parasite coevolution 128

Hot hydrothermal vents 59

Humic acids 4

Humic substances 4

Humidity 16

Humins 4

Humus 4

Hyacinth 166

Hydrarch succession 150

Hydrobromoflurocarbons 259

Hydrochlorofluorocarbons 198, 259

Hydrofluorocarbons 265

Hydrofluoroolefins 265

Hydrology 66

Hydrophytes 118

Hydrosere 150

Hydrosphere 47

Hygroscopic water 5

Hyperparasitism 127

Hypolimnion 63

I

Idiosyncratic hypothesis 117

Ignitable 226

Illuviation 6

Immigration 84, 120

Immobilization 53

Indian desert 187

Indian forest act 266

Indigenous species 166

Indirect competition 129

Indirect effects 122

Indirect life cycle 127

Individual-based 109

Individualistic concept 102

Indoor air pollution 202

Indoor air quality 202

Industrial discharges 210

Industrial materials 165

Infiltration 203

Information statistic indices 106

Infrasound 208

Ingestion 43

Inhibition model 157

Inland deserts 71

Inorganic materials 211

Inquilinism 124

Insecticides 215

In-situ conservation 174

Intensity 111

Interaction chain 122

Interaction compass 131

Interaction food webs 113

Intercellular 127

Interference competition 129

Interior deserts 70

Intermediate disturbance hypothesis 111

Intermediate host 127

International conservation strategies 181

International emissions trading 254

Interpreting graph 136

Interspecific competition 129, 131, 154

Inter-tidal zone 58

Intracellular 127

Intraspecific competition 89, 130, 132, 154

Invasive species 166, 167

Inverse stratification 64

Inverted pyramids 44

Ionosphere 9

Island biogeography 120

Islands 189

Itai-Itai disease 219

Iteroparous 82

J

Jhum cultivation 69

Jhumia 69

Jim Corbett national park 178

Joint implementation 255

J-shaped growth curve 86

K

Kalahari desert 70

Keystone hypothesis 117

Keystone species 102

Kigali Amendment 264

K-selected species 97

K-selection 95

K-strategists 97

Kyoto mechanisms 254

Kyoto Protocol 254

Kyoto units 255

L

Lacustrine 67

Lacustrine ecosystem 62

Lake 62

Landfarming 231

Landfills 228

Landscape ecology 72

Lantana 166

Lapse rate 15

Late successional species 150

Latitudinal gradient 162

Latitudinal location 13

Law 268

Leachate 212

Lead 197

Least concern 172

Lecanora conizaeoides 233

Lentic ecosystem 56, 62

Lichens 124

Life forms 117

Life history 94

Life history theory 94

Life history trade-offs 94

Life history traits 94

Life table 81, 89

Life-forms 62

Light 11

Light bottle method 34

Limnetic zone 62

Limnology 62

Lincoln-Peterson index 80

Lindeman’s efficiency 43

Linkage density 112

Liquefied petroleum gas 207

Liquid waste 225

Lithosere 150

Lithosphere 47

Littoral zone 58, 62

Living Planet Index 183

Local cycles 47

Local population size 172

Logistic function 179

Logistic growth 86

Logistic growth equation 87

London Amendment 264

London smog 195

Los Angeles smog 195

Lotic ecosystem 56, 62

Lotka-Volterra model 131

Lower canopy 75

LPG 207

M

MAB 178

Macroparasites 127

Macrophytes 62

Malarial parasite 127

Mangrove forest 61

Mangroves 61

Man-made sources 192, 208

Marine 67

Marine ecosystem 56, 58

Marine protected areas 178

Mark and recapture method 80

Marrakesh Accords 254

Marshes 66

Mass extinction 168

Maximum natality 80

Mean species abundance 183

Measuring primary productivity 34

Medicines 165

Megadiverse nation 164

Megatherms 16

Mesopause 9

Mesopelagic zone 58

Mesosphere 9

Mesotherms 16

Mesotrophic lakes 65

Metabiosis 125

Metabolic rate 21

Metacommunity 94

Metalimnion 63

Metapopulations 93

Methane 246

Methane forming bacteria 223

Methanobacillus 223

Methanobacterium 223

Methanococcus 223

Methylene chloride 193

Methylmercury 219

Microparasites 127

Microtherms 16

Midnight zone 58

Midwater zone 58

Migration 84, 154

Mimicry 126

Minamata disease 219

Mineralization 50, 53

Minimum mortality 81

Mist 196

Mitigation 235, 252

Mobile sources 192

Moderately dense forest 67

Modular organisms 79

Monarch 126

Monocarpy 82

Monoclimax theory 155

Montreal Amendment 264

Montreal Protocol 263

Morphological species concept 23

Mortality 81

Mortality rate 81

Mouth 65

Müllerian mimicry 126

Municipal solid waste 226

Mutualism 123

Mycorrhizae 124

N

Nagoya Protocol 184

Namami Gange Programme 220

Natality 80

Natality rate 81

National Air Quality Monitoring Programme 202

National Biodiversity Authority 184

National conservation strategies 184

National Ganga River Basin Authority 220

National Green Tribunal 182

National Green Tribunal Act 267

National Mission for Clean Ganga 220

National parks 178

National River Conservation Plan 220

National Wildlife Action Plan 185

Native species 166

Natural ecosystem 56

Natural eutrophication 198

Natural greenhouse effect 199

Natural refrigerants 265

Natural sources 192, 208

Natural ventilation 203

N-dimensional hypervolume niche 139

Near threatened 172

Negative allelopathy 129

Negative frequency-dependent selection 128

Negative interaction 122, 125

Nekton 62

Neritic zone 58

Net community productivity 31

Net primary productivity 30

Net production efficiency 44

Net reproductive rate 90

Neutral interaction 122

Niche breadth 142

Niche differentiation 145

Niche overlap 142

Niche paradox 141

Niche size 142

Niche width 142

Nile perch 166

Nitrification 50

Nitrobacter 50, 222

Nitrococcus 50

Nitrogen cycle 49

Nitrogen fixation 49

Nitrogen footprint 269

Nitrogen-fixing bacteria 124

Nitrosococcus 50

Nitrosomonas 50, 222

Nitrosospira 50

Nitrospira 50

Nitrous oxide 246

Noise pollution 208

Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules 267

Nonbiological nitrogen fixation 49

Nonforest land 68

Non-hazardous waste 226

Non-humic substances 4

Non-municipal solid waste 226

Non-point source 210

Non-succulent plants 18

Normal extinction rate 168

North-east India 188

Nudation 154

Nuisance organisms 211

Nutrient cycling 46

Nutrients 215

O

Obligate mutualism 123

Ocean acidification 243, 251

Oceanic zone 58

Oceans 58

Odor 214

Oligotrophic lakes 65

Omnivores 29, 39

Open community 102

Open forest 67

Open ocean 58

Open population 84

Open systems 28

Opportunistic species 96

Organic materials 211

Organismal concept 101

Organismal ecology 28

Osmotroph 30

Outstanding Universal Value 182

Overexploitation 167

Oxidation pond 222

Oxides of sulfur 196

Oxidizing smog 195

Oxygen emission method 34

Ozone 194

Ozone depleting substances 263, 267

Ozone depletion 198, 257

Ozone depletion potential 259

Ozone hole 261, 262

Ozone-depleting substances 198, 258

P

Palustrine 67

Pampas 70, 74

Paracoccus denitrificans 50

Parasite 30, 126

Parasitism 126

Parasitoid 127

Paris Agreement 256

Paris climate accord 256

Particulate matter 192, 196

Passenger pigeon 167, 170

Pathogenic organisms 211

Peatlands 66

Pedology 3

Pelagic zone 58, 62

Per capita birth rate 85

Per capita death rate 85

Perchloroethylene 193

Perfluorocarbons 265

Periodicity 119

Periphyton 62

Permafrost 72

Permanent parasites 127

Permanent wilting percentage 4

Permanent wilting point 5

Pesticides 215

Pests 215

pH 214

Phagotrophs 30

Phanerophytes 117

Phenology 119

Phenotypic plasticity 25

Phoresy 124

Phosphorus cycle 51

Photic zone 57

Photoautotrophs 29

Photochemical oxidants 194

Photochemical smog 195

Photosynthetically active radiation 11

Physical disintegration 3

Physical dryness 18

Physical indicators 213

Physical treatment 221, 226

Physiognomy 117

Physiological dryness 18

Phytoaccumulation 231

Phytodegradation 231

Phytoextraction 231

Phytoimmobilization 231

Phytomining 231

Phytoplankton 62

Phytoremediation 231

Phytostabilization 231

Phytotransformation 231

Pielou’s evenness index 108

Pioneer community 150

Pioneer species 150

Pioneer stage 150

Plankton 62

Plant communities 117

Plastic waste 228

Plastic waste management rules 268

PM10 196

PM2.5 196

Poikilotherm 19

Poikilothermic animals 18

Point sources 192, 210

Polar deserts 71

Polar stratospheric clouds 262

Polar vortex 262

Polishing ponds 222

Pollutant 191

Pollution 191

Pollution control equipments 205

Pollution prevention approaches 205

Polycarpy 82

Polyclimax theory 155

Population 28, 79

Population characteristics 79

Population density 80

Population ecology 28, 79

Population growth 84

Population regulation 91

Positive allelopathy 129

Positive directional selection 128

Positive frequency-dependent selection 128

Positive interaction 122

Postclimax 155

Postcombustion controls 206

Post-decision monitoring 236

Post-reproductive ages 83

Prairies 70, 74

Precipitation 16

Preclimax 155

Precombustion controls 206

Predation 125

Predation efficiency 137

Predator 125

Predator defenses 125

Predator efficiency 137

Predator–prey system 136

Pre-reproductive 83

Prey 125

Primary air pollutants 192

Primary consumer 39

Primary footprint 269

Primary forest 68

Primary host 127

Primary particulate matters 196

Primary productivity 30

Primary standard 193, 199

Primary succession 152

Primary treatment 221

Production efficiency 43

Productivity 30

Profundal zone 62

Progressive succession 153

Project Elephant 185

Project Tiger 185

Protocooperation 123

Psammosere 150

Pseudomonas 222

Public Liability Insurance Act 267

Puszta 70

Pyramid-shaped age structure 83

R

Radiative forcing 250

Radioactive pollutants 225

Radioactive tracer method 35

Radon 203

Rain 16

Rain shadow deserts 70

Ramet 79

Ramsar 66

Ramsar Convention 67, 182

Random dispersion 82

Rank-abundance plot 105

Rare species 172

Raunkiaer’s system 117

Real competition 129

Realized natality 80

Recycling 228

Red Queen coevolution 128

Reducing smog 195

Redundancy hypothesis 116

Regolith 5

Regular dispersion 82

Relative humidity 16

Reproductive 83

Reproductive character displacement 148

Reproductive isolation 23

Reproductive potential 85

Residual soil 3

Resilience 114

Resistance 114

Resource partitioning 145

Respirable suspended particulate matter 196

Retrogressive succession 153

Revolution 14

Rhizobium 124

Rio Conventions 253

Rio Declaration 253

Riparian zones 65

River channel 65

River corridor 65

Riverbed 65

Riverine 67

Riverine ecosystem 62

Rivers 65

Rivet hypothesis 116

Rodenticides 215

Rotation 13

R-selected species 96

r-selection 95

r-strategists 96

Ruderals 97

S

Sacred groves 181

Sahara desert 70

Saline intrusion 212

Salinity 59, 213

Sample-based approach 109

Saprotrophs 30

Saturated zone 212

Savanna biome 73, 77

Scientific consensus 243

Scimitar oryx 170

Scoping 234

Screening 234

Sea level rise 243, 251

Secondary air pollutants 193

Secondary consumers 39

Secondary footprint 269

Secondary forest 68

Secondary hosts 127

Secondary particulate matters 196

Secondary production 38

Secondary productivity 31

Secondary settlement 222

Secondary standard 193, 199

Secondary succession 152

Secondary treatment 221

Sedimentary cycle 47

Seed bank 175

Semelparous 82

Semi-arid 187

Sentinel organisms 233

Septic systems 212

Seral stages 150

Sewage 210

Shannon diversity index 107

Shannon-Wiener index 107

Shifting cultivation 69

Shrinking ice sheets 243

Shrubland 76

Sigmoid (S-shaped) growth curve 88

Simpson’s diversity index 106

Simpson’s index 106

Single-channel energy flow model 41

Sleet 16

Sludge treatment 223

Slurry bioreactor 231

Smoke 196

Sociability 118

Social forestry 69

Soil air 4

Soil composition 4

Soil erosion 6

Soil pollution 224

Soil profile 5

Soil texture 4

Soil water 4

Solar insolation 11

Solid waste management 225, 227

Solid wastes 225

Soot 196

Source zone 65

Space exploration 242

Space technology 242

Spatial (or habitat) niche 139

Spatial comparison 105

Specialist species 142

Species accumulation curve 108

Species composition 102

Species diversity 103, 111, 161

Species evenness 103, 161

Species richness 103, 161

Species-area curve 110, 111

Species-area relationship 110

Species-energy hypothesis 162

Specific density 80

Spring overturn 63

Stable coexistence 135

Stable population 83

Stable species 97

Standing crop 31

Standing crop method 35

Standing state 52

State-space graphs 133

Static 89

Stationary sources 192

Steller’s sea cow 167

Stenoecious 23

Stenohaline 23

Stenohydric 23

Stenophagic 23

Stenothermal organisms 22

Steppes 70, 74

Strategic environmental assessment 239

Stratification 118

Stratopause 9

Stratosphere 9

Stratospheric clouds 262

Stratospheric ozone 194

Stratospheric ozone depletion 258

Stratospheric ozone formation 257

Streams 65

Stress tolerator ruderal strategists 97

Stress tolerators 97

Subclimax 155

Subtropical deserts 70

Succulents 18

Sulfur cycle 52

Sulfurous smog 195

Summer Solstice 15

Sundaland 175

Sunlight zone 57, 58

Surface run-off 210

Surface water pollution 209

Surfactants 216

Survivorship curve 81

type I curve 81

type II curve 81

type III curve 81

Suspended growth treatment 221

Suspended sediments 66

Swamps 66

Symbiosis 123

Sympatric 148

Synecology 29

T

Taiga biome 76, 77

Taiga forest 67

Tanami desert 70

Taxonomic (or phylogenetic) diversity 162

Temperate broadleaf forests 68

Temperate coniferous evergreen forests 68

Temperate deciduous forest biome 75, 77

Temperate deciduous forests 68

Temperate forests 68

Temperate grasslands 70, 74

Temperate LPI 183

Temperate rainforests 68

Temperate region 63

Temperature 13, 213

Temporal comparison 105

Temporal heterotherms 19

Temporary parasites 127

Terrestrial ecosystem 56, 67

Territory 98

Tertiary treatment 222

Thermal destruction processes 227

Thermal incinerator 206

Thermal pollution 211

Thermal stratification 63

Thermocline 63

Thermodynamic system 28

Thermopause 9

Thermosphere 9

Therophytes 118

Thiobacillus denitrificans 50

Threatened species 170

Tissue growth efficiency 44

Tolerance model 156

Topological food webs 113

Topology 112

Total dissolved solids 213

Total suspended solids 213

Toxic air pollutants 193

Transesterification 207

Transfer efficiency 43

Transfer zone 65

Trans-Himalaya 187

Transition zone 119, 179

Transmitter 122

Transported soil 3

Treatment processes 221

Treaty 265

Trickling filters 222

Trophic cascade 55

Trophic efficiency 44

Trophic level 39

Trophic niche 139

Trophic structure 54

Bottom-up control 55

Top-down control 55

Trophic transfer efficiency 44

Tropical forests 68

Tropical grassland 70, 73

Tropical LPI 183

Tropical rainforest biome 77

Tropical rainforests 74

Tropopause 9

Troposphere 8

Tropospheric ground level ozone 194

Tropospheric ozone 246

Tsetse fly 127

Tundra biome 72, 77

Turbidity 213

Twilight zone 58

Two-channel energy flow model 42

U

Ultrasound 208

Umbrella species 176

Uniform or even distribution 82

Unitary organisms 79

Universal energy flow model 38

Unsaturated zone 212

Unstable coexistence 135

Upper canopy 75

Upright pyramids 44

V

Vadose water 212

Vector 127

Vegetation 71

Veldt 70, 74

Verhulst-Pearl logistic growth 87

Very dense forest 67

Vienna Convention 263

Vigour 119

Vitality 119

Volatile organic compounds 193, 203

Vulnerable 172

W

Warm-blooded 18

Warning coloration 126

Washington Convention 181

Waste disposal 228

Waste recycling 228

Waste stabilization ponds 222

Wastewater treatment 220

Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 266

Water footprint 270

Water pollution 209

Water quality parameters 213

Water quality standards 216

Water table 212

Water vapor 246

Waterborne diseases 218

Water-contact diseases 218

Weather 241

Western Ghats 175, 187

Wet biomass 30

Wet deposition 203

Wet scrubbers 206

Wetlands 66

White smokers 59

Whittaker plot 105

WHO air quality guidelines 201

Wildlife (Protection) Act 184, 266

Wildlife Crime Control Bureau 185

Wildlife sanctuary 178

Winter Solstice 15

World Heritage Convention 182

World Ozone Day 262

World Wetlands Day 67

X

Xerohalophytes 62

Xerophytes 18

Ephemerals 18

Non-succulent 18

Succulents 18

Xerosere 150

Y

Y-shaped model 42

Z

Zero isocline 133, 136, 138

Zoological garden 174

Zooxanthellae 61, 124





Copyright © 2024 Pearson India Education Services Pvt. Ltd

Published by Pearson India Education Services Pvt. Ltd, CIN: U72200TN2005PTC057128.

No part of this eBook may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without the publisher’s prior written consent.

This eBook may or may not include all assets that were part of the print version.

The publisher reserves the right to remove any material in this eBook at any time.

ISBN 978-81-198-9604-2

eISBN 978-93-615-9643-8

Head Office: 1st Floor, Berger Tower, Plot No. C-001A/2, Sector 16B, Noida - 201 301, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Registered Office: Featherlite, ‘The Address’ 5th Floor, Survey No 203/10B, 200 Ft MMRD Road,

Zamin Pallavaram, Chennai – 600 044, Tamilnadu, India.

Website: in.pearson.com, Email: companysecretary.india@pearson.com





