rosymn1\

NA

AN,

une

A Lives

ANNU

avast

AERA
NN
WY

Hu

i

Wi

ite

oy

ON ne
ee

i

LIBRARY

150237

-

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation

https://archive.org/details/patternprocessinOD00Oborm

a
es 5 ¥ _
=
CO
2

i
-

|
ee
a

ee
en
|

eee

ae

ee
ee

Pattern and Process

Forested Ecosystem

in a

F. Herbert Bormann

Gene

E. Likens

Pattern and Process

ina

Forested Ecosystem
Disturbance, Development and the Steady State
Based on the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study

Springer-Verlag
New

York

Heidelberg

Berlin

F. Herbert Bormann
School of Forestry and Environmental
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA

Studies

Gene E. Likens
Section of Ecology and Systematics
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York 14853, USA

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Bormann,

F. Herbert,

1922-

Pattern and process in a forested ecosystem.

Bibliography: p.
Includes index.
1.

Forest ecology—New

Hampshire—Hubbard

Brook

Valley. I. Likens, Gene E., 1935—
joint author.
II. Title.
QH105.N4B67
574.5'264
78-6015
ISBN 0-387-90321-6
All rights reserved.

No part of this book may be translated or reproduced
in any form without written permission from Springer-Verlag.
© 1979 by Springer-Verlag New York Inc.

Printed in the United States of America

03 7 OS 4! 3h 7 il
ISBN 0-387-90321—6 Springer-Verlag

New York

ISBN 3-540-90321-6 Springer-Verlag

Berlin

150237

Heidelberg

SEP 19 1979

KEENE STATE COLLEGE
LIBRARY

Preface

The advent of ecosystem ecology has created great difficulties for
ecologists primarily trained as biologists, since inevitably as the field grew,
it absorbed components of other disciplines relatively foreign to most
ecologists yet vital to the understanding of the structure and function of
ecosystems. From the point of view of the biological ecologist struggling
to understand the enormous complexity of the biological functions within
an ecosystem, the added necessity of integrating biology with geochemistry, hydrology, micrometeorology, geomorphology, pedology, and applied
sciences (like silviculture and land use management) often has appeared
as an impossible requirement. Ecologists have frequently responded by
limiting their perspective to biology with the result that the modeling of
species interactions is sometimes considered as modeling ecosystems, or
modeling the living fraction of the ecosystems is considered as modeling
whole ecosystems. Such of course is not the case, since understanding the
structure and function of ecosystems requires sound understanding of
inanimate as well as animate processes and often neither can be understood without the other.
About 15 years ago, a view of ecology somewhat different from most
then prevailing, coupled with a strong dose of naiveté and a sense of
exploration, lead us to believe that consideration of the inanimate side of
ecosystem function rather than being just one more annoying complexity
might provide exceptional advantages in the study of ecosystems. To
examine this possibility, we took two steps which occurred more or less
simultaneously. We developed an ecosystem model that heavily involves
inanimate as well as animate processes, and we devised a way of

vi

Preface

calculating some of the major parameters of that model that hitherto
could be estimated only with great difficulty.
Our model, which will be described more fully in the subsequent text,
conceives of the terrestrial ecosystem as a delimited part of the biogeochemical cycles of the earth. The ecosystem is an open system; it receives
energy from the sun and materials and energy from the biogeochemical
cycles. It processes these materials and discharges outputs to the larger
cycles. Activities within the ecosystem are largely governed by the nature
of inputs, and man can have major effects on the structure and function of
ecosystems by advertent or inadvertent effects on inputs. Similarly, man
can have major effects on the nature of outputs from ecosystems by the
kinds of manipulations he consciously or inadvertently promotes within
ecosystems. These outputs enter the larger biogeochemical cycles and
have the potential of affecting interconnected ecosystems; in other words,
one system’s outputs become another’s inputs. In this light, inputs and
outputs can be seen as linkages transmitting the effects of natural or
man-made activities between ecosystems. Not only does our concept of the
ecosystem emphasize relationships between systems, but it provides a
frame whereby the ecosystem can grow or decline in response to
natural or man-made developments imposed upon it. Phenomena such as
weathering, nitrogen fixation, or biomass accumulation can be evaluated in an ecosystem context, and species strategies can be studied in
relation to temporal and spatial biogeochemical variations.
Our ecosystem model probably would have remained an intellectual
curiosity had we not conceived of the “small watershed technique” for
measuring input-output relationships. This technique considers a small
watertight watershed as the delimited ecosystem. As explained in the text,
this permits a fairly precise measurement of both input and output of
certain nutrients and it permits the construction of partial nutrient
budgets. These budgets, coupled with the measurement of parameters
within the ecosystem such as productivity, biomass accumulation, canopy
leaching, litter fall, and so forth allow the quantification of more complete
nutrient budgets. By budget balancing, often we are able to estimate
processes that are otherwise very difficult to estimate such as rock
weathering, nitrogen fixation, or sulfur impaction.
Not only does the small watershed technique allow quantification of the

structure and functions of natural ecosystems, but once having established
base-line biogeochemistry, it is possible to develop a program in
experimental ecosystem ecology wherein treatments are imposed on
entire watershed-ecosystems and responses of the treated system are
compared to undisturbed systems. This approach not only yields considerable information on the effects of the treatments but also allows
quantification of some processes occurring in the undisturbed system that
are otherwise unmeasureable.
In our first volume, Biogeochemistry of a Forested Ecosystem, we
presented a detailed examination of the biogeochemistry of an aggrading

Preface

vii

northern hardwood watershed-ecosystem. The primary consideration was
on the physical aspects of hydrologic and nutrient flow through the
ecosystem and on hydrologic and nutrient budgets.
This volume has as its major concern the presentation of an integrated
view of the structure, functions, and development of the northern
hardwood ecosystem. It concentrates on the interrelationships among
biogeochemical processes, animate and inanimate structure of the ecosystem, species behavior within the ecosystem, and how these relationships
change through time following a perturbation. For biogeochemical information it draws heavily on our first volume, but emphasis is placed on the
role of biological processes in controlling destabilizing forces to which
every ecosystem is continually subjected.
Not only was it our goal to present an integrated view of ecosystem
development, but we thought the text should serve, as well, as a teaching
tool for natural scientists interested in the structure and function of
ecosystems. To that end, we have made a special attempt to detail the
reasoning used to reach pivotal conclusions, to separate conclusions based
largely on fact from those based largely on speculation and, in general, to
write for the reader interested in the ecology of ecosystems rather than
for the ecosystem specialist. This is not to deny that concentrated effort
on the part of the reader will be required. After all, the ecology of
ecosystems is among the most complex of subjects and inevitably some of
that complexity must be reflected in the text.

Acknowledgments
Any scientist working to develop new knowledge owes an incredible debt
to those who came before. We wish to acknowledge four persons whose
divergent influences converged in a kind of spontaneous generation to
give rise to the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study. Eugene P. Odum set
the scene with his articulate and enthusiastic advocacy for the ecosystem
as a basic unit of study in ecology. Murray F. Buell and Henry J. Oosting
with their research and teaching emphasis on succession and climax
provided the time frame for the developmental aspects of our study, while
Arthur D. Hasler’s success with experimental manipulation of lake
ecosystems lead us to believe that similar success with our systems would
be possible. To this group, we add W. Dwight Billings whose encouragement and gentle hectoring led to the writing of this volume.
The Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study is the product of the minds,
hands, and enthusiasm of scores of people. In our first volume, we
acknowledged 151 persons whose contributions, great and small, made
that volume and the present volume possible. To that list we now add: A.
Bormann, H. Buell, T. Butler, J. Cole, P. Coleman, P. Doering, E.
Edgerton, J. Ford, C. Goulden, M. Hall, R. Hall, W. Hanson, R. Harkov, T.
Hayes, G. Hendrey, D. Hill, W. McDowell, R. Moore, S. Nodvin, J.
Sherman, J. Sloane, and J. Teffer. We are also indebted to L. Auchmoody, J.

viii

Preface

Baker, R. Campbell, V. Jensen, V. Johnson, E. Kelso, and R. McDonald of

the U.S. Forest Service, and especially to J. Miller of the Yale Library for
ideas and information on fire and other subjects. For major contributions
to the preparation of the manuscript and editorial assistance, we thank
Chris Bormann and Rebecca Bormann. Phyllis Toyryla not only typed the
manuscript, but provided vital and enthusiastic assistance throughout the
preparation of the manuscript.
For keeping us within modest bounds of scientific rigor, we are
indebted to colleagues who generously gave their time to read portions of
our manuscript. As a result of insightful criticism, perceptive editing, and
timely ideas we think the manuscript improved. We also have been made
aware that a few of our cherished conclusions are viewed by some as
thickets of muddled thinking. We thank all of the following for trying to
keep us on a straight and narrow path: S. Bicknell, J. Eaton, R. Holmes,
J. Hornbeck, S. Levin (in vino veritas), J. Melillo,

D.Ryan, T. Siccama, L.

Tritton, and T. Wood. Special thanks are due J. Aber, W. Covington, A.
Federer, C. Hall, O. Loucks, P. Marks, W. Martin, W. Niering, S. Pilgrim, K.

Reed, G. Whitney, and R. Whittaker who reviewed major sections of the
book and made dozens of thoughtful suggestions.
We also acknowledge our debt to the National Science Foundation
which has supported our work during the last 15 years and to the U.S.
Forest Service for making it possible for us to use the Hubbard Brook
Experimental Forest as well as to share in the ideas and data accumulated
by scientists of the U.S. Forest Service at Hubbard Brook. We add,
however, that the ideas expressed here are not necessarily those of the
U.S. Forest Service. Finally, space is too short to adequately recognize
the overall contributions of Robert S. Pierce. Not only has he been our
colleague in the design and execution of science, but major credit for
the success of the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study is due to his unobtrusive but extraordinary capacity to coordinate and manage a complex
enterprise.

Contents

Preface

Chapter 1

The Northern Hardwood
Development

Forest: A Model for Ecosystem

Objectives
Limits for Our Theoretical Model of Ecosystem Development
Biomass Accumulation After Clear-Cutting
The Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study
Summary
Chapter 2

Energetics, Biomass, Hydrology, and Biogeochemistry of
the Aggrading Ecosystem
Solar Energy Flow
Biomass: Development of Regulation and Inertia
Detrital-Grazing Cycles
Biotic Regulation of Biogeochemical Flux
Nutrient Reservoirs Within the Aggrading Ecosystem
Sources of Nutrients for the Aggrading Ecosystem
Circulation and Retention of Nutrients
Summary

50

x

Contents

Chapter 3

Reorganization: Loss of Biotic Regulation
A Deforestation Experiment
Relationship of the Deforestation
Clear-Cutting
Summary

81
82

Experiment to Commercial
100
101

Chapter 4

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting: Species
103
Strategies and Plant Community Dynamics
What is Secondary Succession?
Reproductive and Growth Strategies Responsive to Perturbations That Open the Forest Canopy
The Buried-Seed Strategy
Floristic Response to Removal of the Forest Canopy by
Clear-Cutting
Differentiation of the Vegetation Established Immediately After
Clear-Cutting
Growth Strategies Underlying Initial Canopy Differentiation
Morphogenesis and Growth Strategy
Endogenous Disturbance
Interactions Between Reproductive Strategies and Degree of
Canopy Disturbance
Composition of the Dominant Layer During Ecosystem Development After Clear-Cutting
Species Richness
Summary

103
104
108
113
its
118
125
129
el
133
(FS)
136

Chapter 5

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation
Primary Productivity
Recovery of Biotic Regulation Over Ecosystem Export
Coupling of Mineralization and Storage Processes
Replacement of Lost Nutrient Capital
Ecosystem Regulation
Summary

138
139
143
£53
Sy
1357
163

Chapter 6

Ecosystem

Development and the Steady State

Evidence for a Steady State
Steady-State Models
Living Biomass Accumulation

164
165
166
167

Contents

Total Biomass Accumulation
The Plot as a Unit of Study
Trends Associated With Ecosystem
Summary

Development

xi

168
168
G7:
191

Chapter 7

The Steady State as

a Component of the Landscape

192

Exogenous Disturbance Defined
Comparative Effects of Major Perturbations
Disturbance in Presettlement Northern Hardwood Forests
Postsettlement Disturbance
Increased Regularity of Whole-System Biomass Oscillation
Summary

194
195
197
207
210
ial

Chapter 8

Forest Harvest and Landscape
Air Pollution
Forest Harvesting Practices
Landscape Management

Management

213
213
216
papal

References

229

Index

245

Pattern and Process ina

Forested Ecosystem

CHAPTER

1

The Northern Hardwood
Forest: A Model for

Ecosystem

Development

A. S. Watt in his classic paper, “‘Pattern and process in the plant
community” (1947), isolated a central dilemma of modern ecology.
. . clearly it is one thing to study the plant community and assess the effects
of factors which obviously and directly influence it, and another to study the
interrelations of all components of the ecosystem with an equal equipment in
all branches of knowledge concerned. With a limited objective, whether it be
climate, soil, animals or plants [populations] which are elevated into the
central prejudiced position, much of interest and importance to the subordinate studies and...to the central study itself is set aside. To have the
ultimate even if idealistic objective of fusing the shattered fragments into the
original unity is of great scientific and practical importance; practical because
so many problems in nature are problems of the ecosystem rather than of
soil, animals or plants [populations], and scientific because it is our primary
business to understand.... [As] T. S. Eliot said of Shakespeare’s work: we
must know all of it in order to know any of it.

OBJECTIVES
Even though such a goal remains idealistic today, it is our objective to
present an integrated picture of the structure, function, and development
over time of the northern hardwood ecosystem in northern New England.
Our ecological studies in the Hubbard Brook Valley within the White
Mountains of northern New Hampshire represent a detailed case history
of one portion of the northern hardwood forest (Figure 1-1). Over the

2

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

we

‘oe

ae
bi

%

Figure 1-1. A young second-growth northern hardwood forest at about 600-m
elevation on Mount Moosilauke, Warren, New Hampshire. The forest was heavily
cut about 65 years ago.

The Northern

Hardwood

Forest

3

past 15 years these studies have investigated the biogeochemistry and
ecology of a variety of forests of different ages. Our basic unit of study
has been both natural and experimentally manipulated watershedecosystems. These small units of the landscape permit quantitative
measurement of biogeochemical input and output. Comprehensive ecological and biogeochemical study of these watershed-ecosystems allows the
coupling of animate and inanimate processes to be examined and shows
how these internal processes may affect or be affected by the larger
biogeochemical cycles of the earth.
We have no grand computerized model where all the animate and
inanimate components and processes of the dynamic ecosystem are
elegantly linked and where the details of the interactions can be spilled
forth by a conversation with the computer. Indeed, no such model exists
for any ecosystem. Although we have successfully computerized subcomponents of the northern hardwood ecosystem, our major integration
tool is our desire to integrate rather than to dissect. We recognize the
enormous limitations to this process in the capability of the human mind,
technology, and method. However, even though our analyses are often
rudimentary and qualitative or consider only two or three interactive
subcomponents, an integrated picture of ecosystem development over
time emerges. It is our opinion that this integrated picture provides the
most secure base from which we can examine important ecological
problems such as the limits to primary production and biomass accumulation, the relationship between species diversity and stability, variations in

biogeochemical behavior over time, and the effect of the weathering—
erosion interaction on productivity. Most importantly, from this holistic
foundation, ecologically sound programs of landscape management can
be developed.
Our general philosophy was that, at this stage in the evolution of
ecosystem science, a carefully defined and documented case history would
provide the best vehicle for generating principles regarding structure and
function of an ecosystem. Some principles, rigorously based, could then
be tested by ecologists and extrapolated or modified for other ecosystems.
The

Biomass

Accumulation

Model

Based on measured and projected changes in total biomass, we propose a
biomass accumulation model of forest ecosystem development after
clear-cutting (Figure 1-2). This model is divided into four phases of
development: Reorganization, a period of one or two decades during
which the ecosystem loses total biomass despite accumulation of living
biomass; Aggradation, a period of more than a century when the
ecosystem accumulates total biomass reaching a peak at the end of the
phase; Transition, a variable length of time during which total biomass
declines: and the Steady State, when total biomass fluctuates about a

mean.

4

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

3s}

\

o
UD

c
G
D
fe

Clear- yj

>
7)
7)

E

@
7

=

<
arcieth

oO

forest

=
Aggradation

A777
w1/

edie

Steady

IMM
Time

State

——»>

phase

—————>

Figure 1-2. Proposed phases of ecosystem development after clear-cutting of a
second-growth northern hardwood forest. Phases are delimited by changes in
total biomass accumulation (living biomass and organic matter in dead wood, the
forest floor, and the mineral soil). It is assumed that no exogenous disturbance
occurs after clear-cutting.

We define a Steady State in terms of biomass and species composition
and biogeochemical function. For the ecosystem as a whole, over a
reasonable period of time gross primary production equals total ecosystem respiration, and there is no net change in total standing crop of living
and dead biomass. Species composition and relative importance of species
are fairly constant. However, any point within the ecosystem is constantly
cycling through changes in both biomass and species composition and
function.

We

use

the word

Steady

State

with some

trepidation,

since

ample evidence suggests that the condition we define above is at very best
one of slow net changes or possibly a period of quiet antecedent to a
cyclic revolution.
Our model of ecosystem development is presented in two parts.
Chapters 1 through 5S consider the Reorganization and Aggradation
Phases. These chapters contain the greatest degree of realism, since they
are based on the wealth of quantitative data accumulated by direct
measurement of second-growth forests by the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem
Study, the U.S. Forest Service, and other investigators.

Almost all of the present-day forests in northern New England are
second-growth forests. They have been cut once or twice within the last
century or have been subjected to occasional damage from fire and
hurricanes (see Chapter 7). Understanding the behavior of these young
forests is thus the key to understanding the theoretical and practical
ecology of the present-day northern hardwood ecosystem. In fact,
second-growth forests represent the only starting point for an analytical

The Northern

and experimental

study, since so-called

‘climax’

Hardwood

Forest

5

forests are extremely

rare in New England (Nichols, 1913; Lyon and Bormann, 1961; Bormann
and Buell, 1964; Lyon and Reiners, 1971; H. Art, R. Livingston, and T.

Siccama, personal communication) or are of questionable history.
The second part of the book, Chapter 6, considers the Transition and

Steady State that might develop in the absence of major exogenous
(catastrophic) disturbance. This chapter is more hypothetical than earlier
chapters since man has virtually eliminated undisturbed old-aged stands
in northern New England (see Chapter 7). Chapter 6 draws heavily on
the earlier chapters for quantitative aspects of ecosystem dynamics like
production, hydrology, and nutrient cycling. Indeed, it is our contention
that many aspects of the proposed Steady State are represented in the
earlier developmental phases. The Steady-State Phase merely contains
spatial diversity that allows for coexistence of conditions that exist earlier
along a temporal gradient. Our Steady-State concept, the Shifting-Mosaic
Steady State, is based on substantial knowledge of species strategies and
behavior developed largely by observational and experimental studies
conducted by the U.S. Forest Service and various scientists at Hubbard
Brook and by long-term computer simulation of living biomass changes
after clear-cutting. Many aspects of the reproductive behavior of the
forest associated with later phases of our biomass-accumulation model
closely approximate those set forth for forest ecosystems more than a
quarter of a century ago in the landmark paper by A. S. Watt (1947).
Ecosystem development may be considered as a battle between the
forces of negentropy and entropy or between development of ecosystem
organization and its diminishment (Odum, 1969, 1971). Every ecosystem
is subject to an array of external energy inputs: radiant energy, wind,
water, and gravity. All of these represent potentially destabilizing forces
that may destroy or diminish ecosystem organization or sweep away the
substance of the ecosystem. For an ecosystem to grow or even maintain
itself, it must be able to channel or meet these potentially destabilizing
energetic forces in such a way that their full destructive potential is not
achieved within the ecosystem.
Some aspects of the control of destabilizing forces in an ecosystem are
analogous to a controlled nuclear reaction, in which the enormous energy
of the atom is released in small usable amounts rather than in one big
bang. Movement of water through an ecosystem, for example, bears many
similarities to a controlled chain reaction. Precipitation is first intercepted
by the canopy, then by litter on the ground. It is channeled by soil
structure through the ground rather than over the ground, and before
streamflow from the ecosystem can occur, hydrologic storage capacity
must be satisfied. Storage capacity is continually made available by
evapotranspiration. Water enters the forested ecosystem with the potential of a lion and, most often, leaves meek as a mouse,

with much of its

potential energy lost in small frictional increments or simply by conversion of the liquid to vapor by evapotranspiration.

6

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

Sometimes incremental dispersion of potential energy is not possible,
and structures or strategies (or both) are developed to resist or cope with
these destabilizing forces; for example, coastal vegetation is aerodynamically adjusted to strong on-shore winds (Art et al., 1974; Art, 1976), or
high-altitude forests maintain themselves in an extremely windy and harsh
environment by a strategy of ecosystem development adjusted to wind
(Sprugel, 1976; Sprugel and Bormann, 1979).
Control or management of destabilizing forces (e.g., wind, water, and
gravity) is the essence of ecosystem development and stability. The
success of an ecosystem in resisting destabilization may be judged by its
ability to minimize the loss of liquid water and nutrients and to control
erosion. Surprisingly, our developmental model indicates that maximum
control of destabilizing forces, or maximum ‘“‘stability,” is not the
hallmark of the steady-state condition. We shall show that closest control
of destabilizing forces is associated with the Aggradation Phase, least
control with the Reorganization Phase, and intermediate control with the

Transition and Steady-State Phases.
Our model also suggests that ecosystem development is not simply a
time when gross primary production exceeds ecosystem respiration.
Indeed, there is a fairly substantial period when the reverse is true; for
example, the ecosystem has a net loss in total biomass during Reorganization. However, this period is not considered a time of ecosystem
degradation but rather a time when the ecosystem “‘digs deeply” into its
nutrient capital to effect rapid repair. Rapid recovery of vegetation tends
to minimize

erosion

and nutrient

loss after disturbance.

In essence,

the

ecosystem draws on a bank account of energy and nutrients built up over
a long period of time to solve an immediate crisis that threatens stillgreater capital losses.
Our proposed Steady State develops in the absence of exogenous
disturbance, but relatively small-scale endogenous disturbances operating
over long periods of relative quiescence play a major role in its
development. Larger-scale exogenous disturbances (e.g., clear-cutting,
intense fire, or extensive windthrow) operating over shorter periods of
time prevent completion of the development process and drive the
ecosystem back to a less developed condition.

LIMITS FOR OUR THEORETICAL
OF ECOSYSTEM DEVELOPMENT

MODEL

Our primary goal is to develop, from our detailed case history and other
studies, a theoretical understanding, in terms of structure and function, of

the temporal relationships of a northern hardwood ecosystem undergoing
secondary development. To accomplish this goal, we found it necessary to
impose certain limits and to state carefully the assumptions upon which
our developmental model is based. As our thinking evolved, four such

The Northern

Hardwood

Forest

7

limits were imposed. These dealt with the geographical extent of the
northern hardwood ecosystem, the starting point of development, the role
of soil erosion, and the role of exogenous disturbance.

Relationship of the Ecosystem to the Main Body
of the Northern Hardwood Forest
A major question facing us at the outset was, what is the areal extent of
the ecosystem to which our findings and hypotheses would apply most
directly? To establish some position on this question, we considered the
relationship of the northern hardwood forest ecosystem at Hubbard
Brook to the main body of forest vegetation of North America. Ideally, it
would be more satisfying to establish this relationship by some kind of
objective statistical analysis, but a wide-ranging, objective statistical
system of vegetational classification awaits development (McIntosh, 1967;
Whittaker, 1967). Therefore, we determined the position of our forests
within several subjective systems of vegetation classification—systems
based

on

the

concept

of the

community

as

a discrete,

well-defined,

integrated unit. Later we will briefly discuss the application of continuum
concepts to the northern hardwood ecosystem.
Nichols (1935) includes the Hubbard Brook area in the Hemlock—White
Pine Northern Hardwood Region which extends from Nova Scotia to
northwestern Minnesota. His classification of forest stands as northern
hardwood ecosystems generally rests on the presence of a loosely defined
combination of deciduous and coniferous species that may occur as
deciduous or mixed deciduous—evergreen stands. Principal species are:
deciduous—beech (Fagus grandifolia) [all scientific names of plant species
follow Fernald (1950), except where authorities are cited]; sugar maple
(Acer saccharum); yellow birch (Betula alleghaniensis Britt.); white ash
(Fraxinus americana); basswood (Tilia americana); red maple (Acer
rubrum); red oak (Quercus rubra); white elm (Ulmus americana); and
coniferous-hemlock (Tsuga canadensis) red spruce (Picea rubens); balsam
fir (Abies balsamea); and white pine (Pinus strobus). Stands classified as
northern hardwoods occur under a variety of geologic, topographic,
climatic, and historical circumstances.

Within that unit, Braun (1950) would classify northern hardwood
forests at Hubbard Brook as red spruce—hardwoods in the New England
section of her Northern Appalachian Division. Spruce—hardwood forest is
considered to be predominant in northern New England and to grade
imperceptibility into boreal spruce-fir forest to the north or at higher
elevations and into hemlock—northern hardwoods to the south or at lower
elevations.
Oosting (1956) more or less agrees with Braun’s interpretation of
northern hardwoods but emphasizes the occurrence of boreal forest,
mostly at higher elevations, in northern New England (Oosting and
Billings, 1951) and shows northern hardwoods extending along the Blue

8

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Ridge Mountains in Virginia and North Carolina (Figure 1-3). Kichler
(1964) maps the northern hardwood forest of the United States as extending from Maine to northern Wisconsin and distinguishes four types.
The Hubbard Brook area is:in Type 108, northern hardwood-spruce
forest.
Thus, the northern hardwood forest ecosystem at and around Hubbard
Brook is part of an extensive forest type that lies between boreal forest to
the north and the main body of the deciduous forest to the south.
The forest at Hubbard Brook also is subject to altitudinal variation. In
the mountains of New England and New York one passes through three
biomes (deciduous forest, boreal forest, and alpine tundra) with an
increase in altitude of a littke over 1500-m. This zonation is clearly
recognized by students of vegetation and is reflected in a number of
regional classification systems (Figure 1-4). However, with the exception
of the transition from deciduous northern hardwood forest to evergreen
boreal forest at about 760-m, there is little agreement among these
systems on units of vegetation or their elevational boundaries. This
suggests that the units and their boundaries are rather arbitrarily drawn

Figure 1-3. The approximate range of northern hardwood forest in eastern North
America (after Nichols, 1935; Braun, 1950: Oosting, 1956). Areas of boreal forest

occur within the eastern part of the area mapped as northern hardwoods but are
not delineated.

‘(OZ61 “Je }@ UURWOg

Jaye) JSe104 |eJUSWIedxXy YOOIg PIeQGNH

ou} Ul ‘QM ‘peyusiejyeM BoUdIAJaI

sal4uueHG96

‘div

I

0081

pue uuews0g

UOS|aN £961

eased

414

T

oovl

G961 VOs|oYysIN

pL6lL ewesdrIs

pue Aajmey

TLEL SOMEH

Aeig
GL6L

SY31L3SW-NOILVA313

M3AN

adojs aonuds

N33SY9-LNOWYSA

é

aonidS-4i4
auidjeqns

Sac

uneug
OQNV19ON3

0001

aueluoy

aonids aseyd

SNIVLNNOW

ISa1O4 jea10g

eypun|
auidiy

OS6L

if

UJDYLION —3Uld BUYM—AIOjUWIH

SUPJUOL\

“WO4

uonewso4
MAN

4-a9nidsS
4)

3

©

Wafy
dO;
spoompiey-

SPOOMPIEH

aes

UWjayJON

POOMPJEH

UOIeIDOSSY

poompieH

Jdayog

sadojs aonids

3LIHM-3SYIHSdNWH

yoirg

AYOA

ji

009

—9onsds

00c

SPOOMPARH

We

oP ln

SXOVGNOYIOGV

SNIVLNNOW

GO61 Uapuarlyo

9G61
Sunsoo

—}90|WaH

aseyd 490}WaH

(aonids)

poompieH

|eas0g

a|PPIIN

WsYyION
eonidS
aseud

MAN

ysasO4

UJaYyON

ay) Aq pessedwooua juaipes6 uolenaja ay) JO UOIO Jeu} S}JUeSaidaJ Bale papeys “SJa}owW U! UOHWeARI|a JSUIeHe payojd aie SauOz UOI}eEjaba/
“S¥ayJOM SnoueA Aq pasodoid se ayelS JOA MON puke pue|buy MaN WeUYOU JO UOHe}eHaA ay} 10; SwWaySAS UOITEOWISSe|O “p-, aunbi4

SPOOMPJEH

9
Forest
Hardwood
The Northern

10

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

and do not reflect discrete community types. In fact, vegetation zones are
often defined by the gradual loss or acquisition of species as one moves
along an elevational gradient. This situation pictures a complex elevational gradient in which species populations broadly and nonsynchronously overlap along the gradient, which results in a gradual and
continuous change in community composition (Whittaker, 1967). Direct
gradient analyses in the mountains of New York (Nicholson, 1965) and
New Hampshire (Bormann et al., 1970; Leak and Graber, 1974) confirms
the independent distribution of tree species along a complex elevational
gradient. Observations along a 120-km north-south elevational transect
in central New Hampshire also indicate that ‘“‘successional”’ as well as
‘“climax”’ species are distributed in an individualistic pattern (Bormann et
al., 1970). Siccama (1974) points out, however, that not all species changes
along the elevational gradient are gradual and that the change between
northern hardwood forest and spruce-fir forest in the mountains of New
England occurs rather abruptly and may reflect a much steeper environmental gradient between 760- and 900-m elevation.
This brief discussion emphasizes that the northern hardwood forest
ecosystem at Hubbard Brook is not part of a rigidly defined continental
or regional community type but rather is part of a continental vegetation
pattern composed of a system of interacting species populations, with the
balance between populations shifting in response to changing patterns in
the environment and human cultural patterns imposed upon the landscape. This seems to suggest that the concept of the northern hardwood
ecosystem is itself untenable. Yet changes in controlling environmental
variables or genetic flexibility within species are such that extensive
forests of the eastern half of North America are loosely classified by
ecologists and foresters as northern hardwood forests. Certainly, field
experience throughout northern New England suggests considerable
similarity among stands of northern hardwood forests. Until more
objective, quantitative means of evaluating relationships between ecosystems arise, we think it useful to retain the concept of a northern
hardwood ecosystem bound together by a similarity of vegetation structure, species composition, and ecosystem development processes. However,
it is important to recognize that this ecosystem is by no means uniform
in biotic and abiotic aspects throughout its geographical range.
To minimize some of the potentially confusing variation in the broad
concept of the northern hardwood ecosystem, we defined our system as
northern hardwoods occurring within fairly narrow geographical, elevational, and geological limits. Most of our data and ideas are drawn from
the ecosystem we have studied most intensively, namely, northern
hardwood ecosystems occurring on relatively fine till derived from granite
or acid metamorphic rock between elevations of about 250 to 750-m
above mean sea level (MSL) in northern New Hampshire. This is roughly
equivalent to the area bounded by the White Mountain National Forest.
Leak (1978) has classified some of the spatial variation in vegetation

The Northern Hardwood

Forest

11

occurring within the White Mountains. Almost all of the forests in this
area have been cut once or twice, but some of the older forests
approximate the maximum living and dead biomass accumulation possible
under the prevailing climatic regime.
In later chapters we consider the role of a number of plant species that
are generally important within the defined elevational zone. However, we
do not consider in detail some species that may be locally important in
the lower portion of the zone, such as white pine, hemlock, gray birch,

and red oak.

Initiation of Ecosystem

Development

Development of the northern hardwood ecosystem could be initiated in a
variety of ways, such as abandonment of agricultural fields, selective or
clear-cutting, heavy or light fires, wind storms, or combinations of these.
Fach initiating cause would introduce variations in the subsequent
developmental) pattern, particularly in the early stages.
To simplify this situation, we decided to limit our discussion to one
starting point, a northern hardwood stand that had been clear-cut. Not
only did this provide a uniform starting point, a veritable time zero, but
clear-cut areas in all stages of development were available for study
within the defined area. We have not only studied commercially clear-cut
areas (Pierce et aJ., 1972; Aber, 1976; Covington, 1976) but also designed,

executed, and studied experimental cuttings involving total deforestation,
strip-cutting, and control\led commercial cutting (Likens et al., 1970; Pierce
et al., 1972; Hobbie and Likens, 1973; Hornbeck, 1973a,b; Bormann et al.,
1974; Likens and Bormann, 1974b; Hornbeck, 1975; Hornbeck et al.,

1975a,b).

Soil Erosion
Soil erosion is a major destabilizing force in disturbed ecosystems, and
occasionally massive erosion results from sloppy harvesting techniques or
poorly planned and constructed roads. Such erosion might drive an
ecosystem back to an extremely early developmental stage. Our objective
is to examine how an average forest ecosystem develops through time
after removal of living forest biomass, without massive destruction of
biological, hydrological, and nutrient properties of the soil as a direct
consequence of the cutting process. Therefore, in fashioning our ideas on
secondary development we limited consideration to clear-cut sites with
relatively little erosion resulting from mechanical disturbance of the site
during the harvesting procedure. Since erosion is of such importance in
destabilization, this limitation is basic in that it allows us to evaluate the

effect of forest destruction on erosion in the absence of mechanical
disruption. This has a very practical aspect because it permits the forest
manager to evaluate the effects on ecosystem function of cutting alone.

12

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Exogenous

Disturbance

At any time

a stand

such

as

wind,

may

be subjected

to powerful exogenous

harvesting,

or fire. These

forces

are

basic

forces

elements

in

determining the structure and function of ecosystems, and they play a
major role in shaping the landscape. In many instances, one or all of these
forces interrupts the temporal pattern of development; however, we
arbitrarily exclude the action of strong exogenous forces and model
ecosystem development in the absence of such disturbances. This allows
us to examine the role of forces intrinsic to the ecosystem (autogenic
forces) in shaping ecosystem development. Later, in Chapter 7, we
evaluate the importance of exogenous forces in deflecting our hypothetical pattern of development.

BIOMASS
Flow

ACCUMULATION

of biomass

within

the

AFTER

ecosystem

CLEAR-CUTTING

forms

a continuum

from

the

moment of formation in gross primary production (GPP) to ultimate
dissolution in autotrophic and heterotrophic respiration (Ra and Ry) or
export from the system. We can think of the biomass of northern
hardwood ecosystems as located in five major subcompartments: living
biomass in green plants and heterotrophs (animal and plant) and dead
biomass in dead wood, the forest floor, and the mineral soil (Figure 1-5).
Woody plant species account for the great bulk of green plants.
Heterotrophs, although functionally vital, at any one time constitute a
small fraction, <1% (Gosz et al., 1978), of the total living biomass of the
ecosystem. The dead wood compartment is composed of branches and
trunks on the ground, standing dead trees (Figure 1-6), stumps, and larger
dead roots. This material includes bark but is predominantly wood with
low nutrient-to-carbon ratios, and is therefore relatively slow to decay.
Under some circumstances (e.g., immediately after a clear-cut) the dead
wood compartment can represent a sizable portion of the system’s
biomass. The forest floor is part of the soil profile and is composed of all
the organic matter (not including living roots and dead wood) resting on
top of the mineral soil (Figure 1-7). Annually the forest floor receives
large inputs of relatively easily decomposable fine litter (leaves, twigs,
reproductive parts, and fine roots) directly from the living biomass. It also
receives input from the dead wood compartment as decay reduces woody
material to forms that are incorporated in the soil organic matter. The
great bulk of the organic matter in the forest floor is composed of humic
compounds which are the products of complex interactions between
organic materials and soil organisms. Organic matter in the mineral soil is
composed of organic compounds in close physical and chemical relationship with the mineral fraction of the soil. The mineral soil receives
organic matter from the forest floor in the form of particulate matter and

The Northern

Green Plant
Living

Hardwood

Forest

F-------—---—---------

=R

Biomass

Branches
Boles
Stumps

=

13

A

O.2cm

:

Diameter

Roots

Dead

Wood

Particulate

tees

And

Dissolved

Organic
Matter

Matter

Dissolved

Leaves

Organic

=

Reproductive Parts
Dissolved Organic Matter
Twigs
&
:
Roots
<0.2cm Diameter

Organic Matter
In Forest Floor

Roots <O.2cm Diameter
Dissolved Organic Matter

(i.e. Root

Exudates)

OIVODAODMA

Particulate
And
Dissolved
Organic
Matter

Organic Matter
In Mineral Soil

Figure 1-5. Biomass distribution within the ecosystem. The location of the
standing crop of living and dead biomass within the northern hardwood ecosystem and transfers between compartments. Gross Primary Production (GPP)
drives the system. Plant and animal heterotrophs represent a very small standing
crop but their respiration Ay, along with autotrophic respiration Ra, is responsible
for the ultimate dissolution of biomass within the ecosystem. Arrows to and from
the heterotrophic compartment represent the uptake of dissolved and/or particulate organic matter and release resulting from exudation, excretion, fecal
material, and death. One asterisk represents activity of saprobes, while two
represent activity of green plant parasites and herbivores. For a steady-state
ecosystem GPP=Aa+Au,
while for a growing system GPP = A,a+ Ay+ net
increase in the sum of the five biomass subcompartments. Input of organic
matter in precipitation and output in stream water are not shown in this diagram.

dissolved organic matter and from heterotrophs and roots that decay in
place in the mineral soil. The bulk of the humic compounds in the mineral
soil is thought to be significantly different chemically from that in the
forest floor and presumably has a much longer half-life (Dominski, 1971).

14

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Figure 1-6. A large standing dead American elm tree. Note the gap in the
overstory canopy created by the death of the crown. Elevation about 550-m.
Northern hardwood forest at Gifford Woods State Park, Vermont.

The Northern

“So

Ss

:

:

Hardwood

ee

Forest

15

a

Figure 1-7. A spodosol soil (Becket Pedon) at Hubbard Brook. Subdivisions of
the B- and C-horizons are mapped but not shown. The forest floor is mostly
organic matter with a low bulk density and is usually sharply demarcated from the
underlying mineral soil.

In the ecosystem that we follow through time, development is initiated
by clear-cutting and the removal of large quantities of biomass. Almost all
subsequent biomass originates within the ecosystem from gross primary
production (GPP); only a very small amount of organic carbon enters the
ecosystem in precipitation and dry fallout (Gosz et al., 1978). Ecosystem
biomass is reduced by autotrophic respiration of green plants (Ra), by the
respiration of heterotrophs (Ry), and by export of dissolved organic
matter and particulate organic matter in water draining the ecosystem.
Generally, export of organic matter in water has been shown to constitute
a small part of the total loss (Likens et al., 1977). Throughout, we assume
that the importation and exportation of organic matter by animals
crossing the boundary of the ecosystem is about balanced (Bormann and
Likens, 1967), but during early regrowth after clear-cutting net removal
by grazing animals may be a factor of some importance. This matter is
currently under study at Hubbard Brook.
Organic matter is physically transferred along a variety of pathways
within the ecosystem (Figure 1-5). Transfers of organic matter are made
from the green plant compartment to dead wood, forest floor, and

16

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

mineral soil, as well as to herbivores and parasites. Net primary
productivity (NPP) equals the sum of the accumulation of green plant
biomass plus any net transfer of organic carbon from the green plant
compartment to other compartments within the ecosystem. The whole is
— Ra = NPP.
summed by the equation GPP

Living Plant Biomass
At the inception of the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study we assumed
that the second-growth forests cut during the period 1909-1917 were
more or less phytosociologically stable or close to a “climax” condition
in the traditional sense. Vegetational analysis (Bormann et al., 1970;
Siccama et al., 1970; Forcier, 1973) confirmed species arrays and
population structures that conform well to traditional phytosociological
concepts of climax (Nichols, 1935; Braun, 1950; Oosting, 1956). New data
(Botkin et al., 1972a,b; Gosz et al., 1973, 1976; Whittaker et al., 1974)
indicate that rates of net accumulation of living biomass are relatively
high and that on a production basis it is not feasible to consider these
forests as approaching steady state, rather they are young, rapidly
changing forests. Later in our discussion of steady state, we will show that
present-day Hubbard Brook forests do not conform to phytosociological
‘climax’ criteria either.
Whittaker et al. (1974), using dimension analyses, estimated production
characteristics of the second-growth forest at Hubbard Brook (Table 1-1).
Samples taken in 1966 indicated an abrupt and curious decline in
productivity from the period 1956-60 to 1961-65. These workers proposed
that the growth period 1956-60 represents the more normal situation, while
data from 1961-65 reflect a period of subnormal growth that currently
dominates northern New England. We have combined these two periods to
approximate an ‘‘average”’ growth period.
Table 1.1. Production

Hubbard

Characteristics

of a 55-Yr-old

Second-Growth

Forest

at

Brook*. Dry Grams per Square Meter per Year.
Gross Primary
Production
(GPP)

Net Primary
Production
(NPP)

Net Living
Biomass
Accumulation

Period of
Measurement

Aboveground

Total

Aboveground

Total

Aboveground

Total

1956-60

New,

2547

957

1147

350

435

1961-65

1760

2090

To2

941

238

290

Average

1944

2319

875

1044

294

363

“The forest was selectively cut about 1909 and then heavily cut about 1917. As a matter
of convenience we use 55 years, but various ecological measurements have been made

over the last 15 years. From

Whittaker et al. (1974).

The Northern

Hardwood

Forest

17

Net primary production (NPP) for the entire ecosystem is estimated to

be 875g of dry matter/m’-yr aboveground NPP and 1044 g/m?-yr total
NPP for the average period. The data (Table 1-1) indicate that for the
average period about 363 g/m’-yr, or 35%, of the current NPP is being
incorporated as a net increase in living biomass of the ecosystem. The
Hubbard Brook forest is thus comparable to other young second-growth
temperate deciduous forests (Whittaker et al., 1974).
It is impossible to consider living biomass accumulation over several
centuries by a study of a sequence of existing stands: other methods must
be used. Whittaker et al. (1974), using 1956-60 estimates of current
production and woody litterfall, project a living biomass for the climax
condition at Hubbard Brook of about 420 t/ha, 90% of which would be
achieved within 250 years after cutting.
We can also estimate long-term living biomass trends using JABOWA,
a computer model for northern hardwood forests (Botkin et al., 1972a,b).
JABOWA,

with some

of its data base derived from the Hubbard

Brook

Ecosystem Study, simulates the growth of individual trees in a mixed
species forest on 10 x 10-m plots, taking into account competition among
trees, response of individual species to environmental variables such as
soil moisture,

light, and nutrients, introduction

of new

individuals,

and

growth and survival characteristics of species. It does not take into
account predators or parasites or interplot effects. The basic model keeps
track of the number and diameter of stems by species. This has been
expanded through the application of dimension analysis (Whittaker et al.,
1974) and tissue nutrient concentrations (Likens and Bormann, 1970) to
yield changes in total plot living biomass and nutrient content through
time.
Using the computer output from 100 plots, we can estimate, on an
annual basis, a variety of species and ecosystem parameters (e.g., density,
frequency, basal area, biomass, nutrient standing crop) on a hectare basis.
Throughout the text we use JABOWA to predict long-term biomass
and nutrient content for a northern hardwood ecosystem on deep till, at
an elevation of 600-m, and under average growing conditions. Under
these environmental conditions, projections from JABOWA show a peak
living biomass of about 410 t/ha about 170 years after clear-cutting.
Although we use JABOWA projections (Figures 1-8 and 1-10), we
recognize that any simulation is only as good as the assumptions
underlying it and that, for lack of knowledge, some assumptions are
rough estimates. To evaluate these projections we used stand data from a
number of present-day older northern hardwood forests (Chittenden,
1905; Siccama, 1974; H. Art, personal communication; W. Leak, personal
communication) and Whittaker’s dimension-analysis regressions (Whittaker et al., 1974) to calculate living biomass. For these stands, living
biomass

ranged

from

both the Whittaker
reasonable.

325 to 390 t/ha. When

and

JABOWA

compared

living biomass

with these data,

estimates

appear

18

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

JABOWA has the added advantage that it yields detailed information
on annual production and nutrient characteristics by species and by plant
parts and for the ecosystem as a whole. These data allow us to make a
variety of mass-balance calculations which are utilized throughout the
text. Finally, with JABOWA we can produce a 500-yr biomass curve that
is quite different from the asymptotic curve projected by Whittaker et al.
(1974). We believe that the biomass curve from JABOWA represents a
rational index of ecosystem development and we later use it as the basis
for our discussion of the steady-state ecosystem.

Dead Wood

Compartment

Until recently, rotting wood in the forest was the special preserve of the
entomologist and mycologist hunting specimens; now it is realized that
dead wood plays an important role in ecosystem dynamics.
Despite its recognized importance, dead wood is rarely included in
biomass estimates, which usually focus on living biomass and organic
matter in the soil profile. This void in data on dead wood exists in part
because of the great difficulties involved in its estimation. Dead wood
occurs in locations difficult to sample such as dead limbs on living trees or
standing dead trees. It is often difficult to determine when dead wood
ceases to be dead wood and becomes part of another ecosystem
compartment; for example, the same fallen log will often contain sound
wood and all degrees of decayed wood, including some material properly
considered part of the forest floor. Finally, dead wood is probably the
least predictable component of the ecosystem because it is greatly
influenced by stochastic events like local wind and ice storms which can,
at infrequent intervals, add large amounts of previously living biomass to
the dead wood compartment.
Dead wood flux is of considerable importance in northern hardwood
ecosystems, and we recently instituted an intensive study of dead wood at
Hubbard Brook. That study will be completed in several years. In the
meantime, we use preliminary data to estimate changes in dead wood
during ecosystem development following clear-cutting. We approximated
dead wood relationships in several ways.
Observations in a sequence of different-aged successional stands after
clear-cutting indicated (1) that a large amount of dead wood (slash) is left
immediately after cutting and (2) that dead wood declines to a minimum
about two decades after clear-cutting when most of the dead wood
present at time zero (clear-cutting) has been respired or transferred to
other compartments and before there has been appreciable transfer of

new dead wood from the living plant biomass compartment (Figure 1-5).
Thereafter, the dead wood compartment once again increases in size.
The amount of woody debris transferred from formerly living trees to
dead wood as a result of clear-cutting depends on the age and condition
of the stand at the time of cutting and the wood products removed from
the ecosystem. We estimated this transfer using data from a 55-yr-old

The Northern Hardwood

Forest

19

stand with 169t/ha of above- and belowground living biomass. We
computed that 81t/ha were removed in forest products (saw logs,
pulpwood, and millwood) and that 3t/ha of leaves and twigs were
transferred directly to the forest floor. Thus 85 t/ha of slash, stumps, and
roots were added to an estimated 36 t/ha of dead wood in the stand at the
time of cutting to yield 121 t/ha of dead wood in the ecosystem immediately after clear-cutting.
To gain a rough estimate of the standing crop of dead wood at different
times we sampled two stands of different ages: a 56-yr-old stand at the
Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest and the Charcoal Hearth Forest, a
so-called virgin forest about 20km from Hubbard Brook (Table 1-2).
Using plot techniques, dead wood on the forest floor and in dead stumps
with attached roots was collected and its oven-dry weight was obtained.
Diameters and heights of standing trees were also measured; biomass
content was estimated from the diameter using dimension-analysis
regression equations (Whittaker et al., 1974) and then reduced by a
fraction derived from the actual height of the dead tree divided by the
estimated height for a living tree of that species for that diameter. Since
biomass thus estimated is solid wood and bark, we reduced the estimate
by 50% to account for decay that had already occurred. In a separate
study, J. Roskoski (personal communication) sampled dead wood in
10 X 50-m areas laid out on the forest floor in various-aged stands (Table
1-2). Although both sets of estimates are rough, they show substantial
agreement and provide a reasonable guide to the amounts of dead wood
that might be expected in various-aged stands.
Dead wood may be lost from the dead wood compartment by oxidation
or consumption by heterotrophic organisms and by the transfer of
Table 1-2. Estimates

of Dead Wood

in Northern

Hard-

wood Stands of Various Ages
Dead Wood

Stand Age
(Years)

On or In
Forest Floor*

(t/ha)

Standing

Total

4°

ST

8.4

Sie,

8°

58.6 + 31.8

58.6

18°
40°
56°

O.Qae Wail
Ono
29.4+ 5.4

4.44

6.9
9.1
33.8

Sie
> 170°
> 1705

20.9+ 5.1
34.4+17.6
23,622 55

4.94

20.9
34.4
28.6

@Mean

+ standard error of the mean.

’From Roskoski (1977); based on five 10-m? plots.
°Based on fifty 1-m°’ plots.
4includes estimate of dead roots.

20

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

partially decomposed organic matter to the forest floor or to the mineral
soil (Figure 1-5). We considered these two ways of removal as a single
output called the disappearance rate. The disappearance rate of dead
wood is difficult to estimate because dead wood includes a variety of plant
materials of different sizes and nutrient contents located in various
positions aboveground (Figure 1-6) and belowground. To arrive at a
rough approximation, we simulated disappearance from the dead wood
compartment using assumptions based on Spaulding and Hansbrough’s
study (1944) of the disappearance of northern hardwood logging slash and
on personal observations.
The simulation began with 121 t/ha in the dead wood compartment
(slash plus dead wood in the ecosystem at the time of cutting); thereafter, all input of dead wood

resulted from tree death as stand develop-

ment proceeded. Annual additions of dead trees were computed using
JABOWA. Input of dead wood resulting from clear-cutting and from the
death of trees during development was added to the following classes of
materials within the dead wood compartment: (1) roots, (2) tops of trees
<20-cm dbh [diameter at breast height], (3) tops of trees >20-cm dbh, (4)
trunks of trees <20-cm dbh, and (5) trunks of trees >20-cm dbh. Classes 2
and 3 contained a variety of branches, limbs, and trunks. For all classes
we assigned a delayed-exponential disappearance rate such that disappearance starts slowly, speeds up as the rate of decay and transfer to
other compartments increases, and then slows as more recalcitrant woody
tissues become an increasingly important part of the decay substrate. For
roots, Class 1, we assumed

that relatively little weight would

be lost for

2 years after death and that all but 5% would disappear in 10 years; for Class
2, 3 years of slow loss with 5% remaining in 12 years; Classes 3 and 4, 4.and 15
years; and large trunks, Class 5, 5 and 25 years. Input, output (disappearance), and standing crop were computed annually (Figure 1-8).
The simulator was tuned somewhat to reflect field observations. During
the first 20 years after clear-cutting there is a sharp decline in the standing

crop of dead wood. Dead wood reaches a low point after about 20 years and
then begins to increase. From Year 50 through Year 170, the standing
crop fluctuates between 29 and 44 t/ha. In our biomass summary (Figure
1-10), dead wood is represented by a hand-fitted curve based on the rough
simulation shown in Figure 1-8.
The Forest Floor

Dominski (1971) has shown for the experimentally deforested watershed
at Hubbard Brook where all regrowth was suppressed that after 3 years the
depth of the forest floor had decreased by an average of 3cm with a loss
of 24% of the original weight. Hart (1961) also found that 20 to 30 years after
clear-cutting of forest stands in the Hubbard Brook area forest floor
depths were as much as 2.5cm less than estimated original depths.
Several major questions arise from these observations. For how long and
to what degree does the forest floor undergo a net loss of organic matter

The Northern

‘7

-

Hardwood

Forest

21

|

lOO
>

oO oO

ep)+ Q =

=) aQ

t/ha
Wood,
Dead

© ° zo)
3Oo

r&

Dead

Wood

Input
a
a

Wenn

O

O

50

a Re

100

Years

After

a as a

4s

ae tevy© Pye

a

150

Clear-Cutting

Figure 1-8. Simulation of the standing crop of dead wood in northern hardwood
forests at various times after clear-cutting. The large quantity of dead wood at the
beginning is largely due to slash left from the clear-cutting. Dead wood input after
clear-cutting results from the death of trees as predicted by JABOWA, the forest
growth simulator.

after clear-cutting, and how and when is this material replaced?
Studies by Morey (1942), Sartz and Huttinger (1950), and Trimble and
Lull (1956) indicate that the forest floor under northeastern northern
hardwood forests continues to decrease in depth for one to two decades
after cutting. Thereafter, it begins to increase in depth, leveling off about
100 years after cutting. These observations point up a remarkably interesting aspect of ecosystem dynamics. Apparently the forest floor continues to
lose organic matter even after the cutover area is fully vegetated, litterfall
is reinstituted, and conditions of soil temperature and moisture are not
greatly different from the precutting conditions. Only after one or two
decades does the forest floor begin to regain biomass.
Because these publications on northeastern forests gave little precise
information on stand history, local environment, or biogeochemistry,
Covington (1976) repeated the work of previous workers (Morey, 1942;
Sartz and Huttinger, 1950; Trimble and Lull, 1956). He selected a
sequence of 14 northern hardwood stands of known history in the White
Mountain region. These stands had been clear-cut at various times, and all
met similar site, aspect, geology, and elevation requirements.
Each stand was sampled with thirty 10x10-cm plots randomly
distributed within a 50 x 100-m rectangle. The forest floor was harvested,
oven-dried, and passed through a 2-mm sieve. All living roots, stones, and
dead wood that could not be forced through the sieve with modest

22

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

pressure were removed and the organic matter content of the remainder
was obtained by loss-on-ignition.
Covington’s data provide a detailed quantification of forest floor
behavior after clear-cutting. Organic matter content decreased for about
15 years before reaching a minimum (Figures 1-9 and 1-10). A dry-weight
loss of about

31 t/ha, a decline

of 51%,

occurred

during

this period.

Accretion began about Year 15 and continued asymptotically achieving
about 95% of the projected asymptote, 56 t/ha, by Year 65. Determination of the time at which rate of accumulation of forest floor biomass
levels off is difficult because of an almost complete lack of older stands
with a known cutting history. However, Covington’s conclusion of a forest
floor asymptote fits with conclusions of other workers (Sartz and
Huttinger, 1950; Trimble and Lull, 1956; Lull, 1959; Leak, 1974) based on

the study of presumably old-aged stands.
Control of the dynamics of the forest floor, i.e., a net drop in biomass
over a decade and a half, while the living biomass is accumulating rapidly,
is not yet fully understood. Covington (1976) has suggested that several
factors are involved. Immediately after cutting, increased soil temperature, soil moisture, and nutrient availability may speed decomposition.
Within only a few years, however, development of dense vegetation
produces microclimatic conditions in the forest floor not greatly different
than those of the 60-yr-old forest. Covington (1976) suggested that the
continued loss of forest floor material may be due to changes in the
quality and quantity of litter. That is, living biomass, during the first stage

60
1e}
AS

2

iN
5 GO) =

g

5=:

=

y

co

(e)

O

O

1O

20

30

40

Years

After

Clear-Cutting

30)

Go

>170

Figure 1-9. The weight of organic matter in the forest floor in relation to the age
of northern hardwood stands after clear-cutting. The oldest stand, over 170 years,

was probably never cut. Points are means of 30 samples per stand with 95%
confidence intervals. The curve is a least-squares fit of a gamma function.
Organic matter levels are adjusted to eliminate sampling bias (after Covington,
1976).

The Northern

Hardwood

Forest

23

of ecosystem development after cutting, not only produces less litter but
this litter has a higher proportion of leaf to woody material and is
generally more decomposable than that of later stages. Leaves of pin
cherry, Prunus pensylvanica, and raspberry, Rubus idaeus, important
early developmental species, have higher nutrient content, are softer, and
have less fiber content than leaves of species that dominate the ecosystem a
little later in development. Covington (1976) proposed that the forest floor
shifts from a mode of net loss to one of net gain as the litter becomes more
resistant to decomposition and the proportion of wood to leaf litter increases
during ecosystem development.
The Mineral Soil
The largest quantity of organic matter in our second-growth forests is
incorporated in the mineral soil (Figure 1-7). We estimate the amount
to be about 173,000 kg/ha to a depth of 45-cm in a 55-yr-old forest
(calculated from Dominski, 1971). The error associated with this estimate
is unknown, but it might be as much as +20%. The source of error comes
from the spatial variability of the soil profile due to rock outcrops, very
rocky horizons, and local pit and mound topography.
A net increase or decline of organic matter in the mineral soil after
clear-cutting could have a major effect on the biomass balance of the
ecosystem as a whole. Such change is difficult to measure, yet because of
the large quantity of organic matter in the mineral soil it is important to
attempt some evaluation of potential changes in response to clear-cutting.
To do so requires a brief discussion of the dynamics of organic matter in
the mineral soil.
Organic matter may be added to the mineral soil by several routes
(Figure 1-5). Some material may be added by the mixing of organic
particulate matter from the forest floor into the uppermost part of the
mineral soil, but this route is not well developed since large populations
of mixing animals are absent from these soil profiles (Lutz and Chandler,
1946). Generally, there is a fairly discrete disjunction between the lower
part of the forest floor and the upper part of the mineral soil (Dominski,
1971). Often the forest floor lies directly on top of a leached A,-horizon
(Figure 1-7). Another route of transfer is by addition of decomposition
products from dead roots in the mineral soil. Larger roots in the mineral
soil constitute a relatively small part of the dead wood compartment since
most dead wood is located aboveground and in the forest floor. Fine roots
also tend to be concentrated in the forest floor. A major route of organic
matter transfer is by translocation of dissolved organic compounds from
upper horizons and their precipitation or coprecipitation in the B-horizon
of the soil profile (Hurst and Burges, 1967; Stevenson, 1967; Brady, 1974).
Recent evidence suggests that some fine particulate matter may be transported to the B-horizon in percolating water (Ugolini et al., 1977).
In terms of flux rates (Figure 1-5), the forest floor is the greatest

24

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

recipient of dead organic matter from the living biomass compartment.
Annual aboveground litter input to the forest floor is 5.7 t/ha. Belowground litter is estimated to be about 1 t/ha, most of which is also
deposited in the forest floor (Gosz et al., 1976).

It seems likely that organic matter input into the forest floor is one or
two orders of magnitude greater than organic matter input into the
mineral soil based on standing crop/input. Dominski (1971) and Gosz et al.
(1976) estimate that the standing crop of organic matter in the forest floor
at Hubbard Brook turns over, on the average, every 7 or 8 years. Although
we have no direct data on turnover times of organic matter in the
B-horizon, Hurst and Burges (1967) cite ages of humic materials based on
4C analysis of 360 + 60 yr for gray-wooded podzolic soils, 370 + 100 yr for
the B-horizon of a Swedish podzol, and 1580 to 2860 yr for the B-horizon
under a heathland podzol in East Anglia. There are difficulties with

interpretation of 'C analysis in soil (O’Brien and Stout, 1978). However,
if we assume an average residence time of about 300 years for organic matter
in the mineral horizons at Hubbard Brook, this would suggest an average
annual input of about 0.6 t/ha (173 t/ha/300 yr = 0.6 t/ha/yr). This input to
mineral horizons is about one-tenth of the input estimated for the forest
floor.
Although the standing crop of organic matter in the mineral soil is
about three times greater than that in the forest floor, it may be
considered as far less responsive to environmental change. During the
first two decades after clear-cutting one would not expect the organic
matter content of the mineral soil to increase reciprocally as the dead
wood and forest floor compartments decreased. Some increase might be
expected as a result of increased translocation of dissolved substances to
the mineral soil or possibly increased mixing of particulate organic matter
in upper mineral soil. On the other hand, some decrease in standing crop
might occur as a result of increased decomposition due to warmer soils
(Dominski, 1971) and an abundance of dissolved nutrients in the mineral
soil.
We found it difficult to make a direct measure of short-term changes in
the standing crop of dead biomass in the mineral soil because such
changes are small in relation to the size of the standing crop and because
spatial variability of the soil profile and rockiness of the horizon presents
a difficult sampling situation with a relatively high associated error.
However, two lines of evidence suggest that the standing crop of dead
biomass in the mineral soil does not increase significantly after clearcutting. For our experimentally deforested watershed where revegetation
was prevented for 3 years, approximately 360-kg of nitrogen/ha were flushed out of the ecosystem in stream water (Likens and Bormann, 1974a). At
the same time the depth of the forest floor on the watershed decreased

about 3cm with an estimated loss of 470-kg of nitrogen/ha (Dominski,
1971). Although not conclusive, these data indicate that the bulk of the
missing forest floor organic matter was mineralized, the end products

The Northern Hardwood

Forest

25

were flushed out of the ecosystem, and a relatively small proportion of
organic matter may have been added to the mineral soil. During this same
period, Dominski (1971) measured a decrease in both the nitrogen and
organic matter content of the mineral soil, but the loss was relatively
small and the estimate was subject to a relatively large error.
Based on the above data, we use the following working hypothesis for
dead biomass in the mineral soil after clear-cutting. Biomass in the
mineral soil compartment (Figure 1-5) is the end product of relatively
slow accumulation over time. It is, in general, less responsive to change,
particularly in the B-horizon, than biomass in either the dead wood or
forest floor compartments. Immediately after clear-cutting, the standing
crop of dead biomass in the mineral soil may increase or decrease in weight,

but the net change will be relatively small in relation to the other biomass
compartments and will have relatively little effect on the total biomass of the
ecosystem.
Given the great difficulty in actually measuring changes in organic
matter content of the mineral soil through time, and in view of the
arguments just presented, we assume that changes in organic matter
content in the mineral soil during development after clear-cutting have
only a minor influence on the overall biomass balance of the ecosystem
(Figure 1-10). This is probably a reasonably sound assumption for a period
of several decades after clear-cutting but is less so over several centuries
of time.

Early Phases of Ecosystem Development
Based on Changes in Total Biomass
Given the assumptions in the previous sections, changes in the total
standing crop of biomass for the ecosystem over a 170-yr period after
clear-cutting can be estimated by summing biomass in the individual
compartments (Figure 1-10). A positive slope in the total biomass curve
indicates a net accumulation of biomass for the ecosystem as a whole;
e.g., GPP is greater than R,.—energy fixed by photosynthesis exceeds
that dispersed by total-system (autotrophic + heterotrophic) respiration. A
negative slope indicates a net loss of biomass where Ra+u is greater than
GPP or a situation where total-system decomposition exceeds photosyn-

thesis.
This analysis reveals a number of interesting features about ecosystem
functions. The first and most significant aspect of the total biomass curve
is that ecosystem behavior after clear-cutting is not characterized by a
simple curve for biomass accumulation. For about 15 years after clear-cutting there is a net loss in biomass, and only after that does accumulation
occur. The cause of this pattern resides in the nonsynchronous behavior
of the standing crops of dead and living organic matter. Both the forest
floor and the dead wood compartments show marked initial declines in
standing crop, which together outweigh the net accumulation of living

26

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

500

Living

biomass

Dead

wood

Forest

floor

250

Ally
100

50

£
x
a

O

oO

5

€ 50
2
25

O

800

et

ae

Sn Aggradation

Reorganization
Total

O

50

Years

After

100

biomass

150

Clear—Cutting

Figure 1-10. Biomass summary for a northern hardwood forest following clearcutting. Living biomass is from a JABOWA simulation, dead wood is from Figure
1-8, and forest floor is from Figure 1-9. Organic matter in the mineral soil,
173 t/ha (after Dominski, 1971), is assumed to undergo little quantitative change.
Total biomass is the sum of living biomass and dead organic matter in dead
wood, the forest floor, and in the mineral soil. Only the Reorganization and
Aggradation Phases of ecosystem development are shown. Later phases will be
discussed in Chapter 6.

biomass. This relationship is of exceeding interest because the coupling
of decline in dead biomass with increase in living biomass underlies a
transfer (which we explore in detail later) of nutrients from dead biomass
components to living biomass during the very critical phase of recovery
after clear-cutting. It is also interesting to note that the ratio of dead to

The Northern

Hardwood

Forest

27

living biomass changes throughout the 170-yr period, with dead biomass
more abundant during the first third of the period.
Study of a number of stands of various ages that have grown up after
cutting indicates that there are a number of biogeochemic, hydrologic,
and ecologic differences between stands, associated with the descending
or ascending portions of the total biomass curve. We propose that the
curve of total biomass accumulation is intimately related to the changing
dynamics of the ecosystem.
For the purpose of comparative study, we have broken the 170-yr
period into two primary parts: the Reorganization Phase from 0 to 15
years, during which the ecosystem has a net loss of biomass, and the
Aggradation Phase from 15 to 170 years, when the ecosystem has a net
increase in total biomass. Aggradation is a period characterized by
accumulation and building of living biomass, forest floor, and dead wood
components. It also involves relatively slow species changes, shifts in
species dominance, and changes in the structure of the living biomass, as
well as the storage of nutrients in biomass.
The term reorganization rather than degradation is used for the 0- to
15-yr period since this period is characterized not only by degradation (in
the sense of a net loss of biomass) but also by an enormous and relatively
rapid change in the abundance and importance of species (higher plants,
microbes, and animals) and changes in biogeochemistry and hydrology. In
essence, after disturbance the ecosystem exhibits maximum flux rates and
undergoes a rapid but transient reorganization. The net effect is to call
into action a variety of processes that limit degradation to a minimum
and rapidly return the system to biogeochemic-hydrologic conditions that
characterize the Aggradation Phase.

THE

HUBBARD

BROOK

ECOSYSTEM

STUDY

In the next four chapters, our goal is to present data and propose
hypotheses that characterize structural, functional, and dynamic aspects
of the Aggradation and Reorganization Phases. To do this, we draw
heavily on studies done at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest.
There, in close cooperation with the U.S. Forest Service, we have studied

intensively for the last 15 years the hydrology, biogeochemistry, and ecology of six small watershed-ecosystems covered with second-growth forest.
One watershed-ecosystem,

W6, has served as a reference system, and we

have examined in detail species composition, production characteristics,
internal nutrient cycling, forest dynamics, and other ecological characters
in this ecosystem. One watershed, W2, was experimentally deforested and
maintained bare for 3 years before vegetation was allowed to regrow.
Another, W4, was clear-cut in strips over a 4-yr period. Behavior of both
of these watersheds was monitored during the entire period. Still another
watershed, W101, was cut in a commercial forestry operation, and the

28

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Figure 1-11. The Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest showing monitored Watersheds 1, 3, 5, and 6, and experimentally manipulated Watersheds 2 (deforested), 4 (strip-cut), and 101 (commercially clear-cut). Note elevational gradient with northern hardwoods giving way to spruce-fir forest at higher elevations
and on knobs. (Photograph courtesy of R. S. Pierce, U.S. Forest Service.)

effects were monitored during the recovery period (Figure 1-11). To
evaluate the generality of results obtained at Hubbard Brook, we have
also studied various aspects of dozens of northern hardwood stands
throughout northern New England. In view of the weight placed on data
from the Hubbard

Brook Ecosystem

Study, it seems

essential to review

study methods and conditions found at Hubbard Brook. General
characteristics and biogeochemistry have been treated elsewhere in detail
(Likens et al., 1977) and will be briefly summarized here.

Study Area
The Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest is fairly representative of
forests in northern New England growing at intermediate elevations
and under relatively oligotrophic conditions (Likens et al., 1967; Bormann
et

al., 1970;

Siccama

et al., 1970).

The

Experimental

Forest

covers

approximately 3000 ha and ranges in altitude from about 200 to 1000-m.
The climate is predominantly continental. Precipitation is more or less
evenly distributed throughout the year; it averages about 130-cm/yr and is

The Northern

Hardwood

Forest

29

about one-quarter to one-third snow. The bedrock of the area is a
medium- to coarse-grained sillimanite-zone gneiss of the Littleton
Formation and consists of quartz, plagioclase, and biotite. Generally,
bedrock is covered by a shallow layer of glacial till of similar mineralogy
(Johnson et al., 1968).

Soils
Soils are mostly well-drained spodosols (haplorthods) with little clay, a
sandy loam texture, and a thick surface organic layer (the forest floor)
(Figure 1-7). Soils are acid, pH <4.5, and infertile (cf. Pilgrim and Harter,
1977). The principal soil series are Herman (most extensive), Becket,
Waubec, Canaan, Berkshire, Peru, Leicester, and Coltin. Surface topography is very rough due to pits and mounds resulting from tree falls and
surface boulders. Profiles are very stony, and soil depths are highly
variable, averaging about 0.5-m to the till layer. The forest floor tends
toward a mor type and depths range from about 3 to 15-cm (Hart et al., 1962;
Dominski, 1971; Hoyle, 1973; Likens et al., 1977). Quantitative sampling of
the mineral soil presents one of the most difficult sampling problems
encountered in the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study.

Hydrology
One of the main concerns about small experimental watersheds is how
representative they are of regional hydrology. This is a particularly
important question at Hubbard Brook because hydrologic flux is the basis
for estimating chemical flux through the ecosystem. Sopper and Lull
(1965, 1970) have compared streamflow from the Hubbard Brook
experimental watersheds with that of seven other forested watersheds
within the northern hardwood region of northern New England. Taking
into consideration the relatively small size of the Hubbard Brook
watersheds, it was found that streamflow characteristics closely approximate those of the other watersheds and, consequently, that measurements
at Hubbard Brook are fairly representative of the region (Likens et al.,
1977).

History of the Hubbard

Brook Forest

The lowlands of the Hubbard Brook area (Thornton township) began to
be settled by Europeans in 1770. Like the rest of northern New England,
the population increased to a peak, approximately 1000 people, about 1830
(Likens, 1972b). Prior to that time, no record exists of cutting at the
location of the small watershed-ecosystems we have under intensive
study. In 1830 a small sawmill was located at a distance of 5.5-km and at
an elevation 400-m below the study sites. It burned and was replaced by
another in 1860 (Likens, 1972b). It seems unlikely that much, if any,

30

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

cutting occurred at that time in the headwater areas of the present
Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, owing to the distance and the
rugged terrain and the extensive areas of merchantable timber available
at lower elevations. A railroad was completed to nearby North Woodstock in 1883-84, and more intensive logging was possible thereafter
(Brown, 1958a,b; Gove, 1968). Some time after 1900, the entire Hubbard

Brook watershed was logged. At the study site red spruce was cut around
1909,

and

all merchantable

trees

were

removed

in a heavy

cutting

completed about 1917 (Bormann et al., 1970). A scattering of large old
culls as well as some smaller trees was left. Possibly the forest was
selectively cut prior to 1909 (Whittaker et al., 1974). Consequently, the
composition of the present-day forest is mostly composed of trees
established after the cuts plus a mixture of trees predating the 1909 and
LOTT outs:

Forest Composition and Elevational Gradients
The present forest at Hubbard Brook is fairly typical of similarly aged
second-growth hardwood forests found throughout northern New England at comparable elevations and underlain by similar acid geologic
substrate (Bormann et al., 1970; Siccama et al., 1970). Basal area at
Hubbard Brook averages about 24-m’/ha, while Barrett (1962) reports
28-m7/ha as fairly representative of second-growth stands in the northeastern United States.
The vegetation of our reference watershed, W6, is fairly typical of
present-day forests at intermediate elevations in the White Mountain
region of New Hampshire. The overstory is dominated by sugar maple
[Importance Value (IV) based on relative basal area, frequency, and
density, 33], beech (I[V 28), and yellow birch (IV 25), with a mixture of
red spruce (IV 4), balsam fir ([V 3), and white birch (IV 4), and the
herbaceous layer, 0 to 0.5m, is dominated by the evergreen fern
Dryopteris spinulosa, the shrub Viburnum alnifolium, and seedlings of
sugar maple and beech (Bormann et al., 1970; Siccama et al., 1970; and
Forcier, 1973, 1975). Erythronium americanum, a vernal photosynthetic,

is the second most important herb in terms of aboveground biomass
(Muller, 1975). Oxalis montana, Maianthemum canadense, Dennstaedtia
punctilobula, Clintonia borealis, Lycopodium lucidulum, Aster accuminatus, and Smilicina racemosa are important summergreen herbaceous
species (Siccama et al., 1970). The vascular flora of the northern hardwood forest at Hubbard Brook contains about 96 species: 14 trees, 11
shrubs, and 71 herbs (Likens, 1973).

The importance values presented above represent average values for
W6, which ranges over 245 m of elevation from 546 to 791-m above MSL.
Direct gradient analysis (Bormann et al., 1970) indicates that both species
distributions and ecosystem structure vary in response to an elevation
complex gradient. Tree species are individualistically distributed over the

The Northern Hardwood

Forest

31

gradient, with principal deciduous tree species gradually dropping out at
higher elevations while species common to higher elevation boreal forests
gradually increase (Figures 1-12 and 1-13). Structural characteristics of
the ecosystem also change. Basal area per hectare, basal area per tree,
deciduousness, and canopy height decrease with increasing elevation and
increasing nearness to the ridge forming the divide of the watersheds.
Conversely, tree density, herbaceous productivity, evergreenness, and
species diversity increase with elevation (Figure 1-13). These changes are
part of the general transition from northern hardwood forests, which are
predominately deciduous, to boreal forests, which are predominately
coniferous. The transition occurs at about 760-m in the mountains of New
Hampshire.

50
40
30
Beech (#)

20

“vy Yellow Birch (v)

10
Sugar Maple (oc)

Paper Birch (v)
Balsam Fir (4)
Red Spruce (e)

10
O

et

re

Importance
2-7Ocm
Value,
Class

Mountain Maple (4)

10

550

600

650

700

y~4 Striped

Maple (2)

o> Mountain

Ash (0)

750

800

Elevation, m
Figure 1-12. Running averages of species importance values versus an elevation complex gradient on Watershed 6 are shown for nine species. Points include
30.5-m elevation bands with 7.6-m increments between points. Importance
values are based on density, basal area, and frequency in each elevation band.
Mountain maple, Acer spicatum; Striped maple, Acer pensylvanicum; Mountain
ash, Pyrus americana. Based on 208 randomly stratified plots (from Bormann et

al., 1970).

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

32

2
Oo
x

40

ro

ee

a5o

20

oa

oO
se fe!

Bike
=—N

ae

io)

iva)

10
29

is
2\

® @ 200

IE

oon

150

# E 100

oO
.

50

65200

Os

9

ee ene

ee a

2

<=

10

550,600

650,
7007 750)"
Elevation,m

600

Figure 1-13. Running averages of ecosystem characteristics along the elevational gradient on Watershed 6. Points in the average include 30.5-m bands with
7.6-m increments. All values based on stems =2-cm dbh on 208 randomly
stratified 10 x 10-m plots. Importance values are based on density, basal area,
and frequency. The maximum importance value is 100% (from Bormann et al.,
1970).

Work by Thomas Ledig and his students has added further to our
understanding of spatial variation along the elevation complex gradient at
Hubbard Brook. Their study of the photosynthetic response of balsam fir
(Fryer et al., 1972) indicated that there was a continuous change in the
genetic structure of the population along the gradient such that the
temperature at which the photosynthetic maxima occur progressively
decreased with altitude roughly in relation to the adiabatic lapse rate (i.e.,
temperature decline in relation to elevation increase). Other studies
indicate that the genetic structure of the sugar maple population is more
complex. Sugar maple populations do not differ in their photosynthetic
temperature response, and the apparent absence of local “‘temperature
races” may explain the more restricted altitudinal distribution of sugar
maple as compared to balsam fir. However, there is a suggestion that

The Northern Hardwood

Forest

33

Sugar maples near the species’ upper altitudinal limit have higher rates of
photosynthesis than those at midaltitude; perhaps this is an adaptation to
compensate for the shorter leafy period at higher altitudes (Fryer and
Ledig, 1972). These photosynthetic characteristics affect the patterns of
productivity and competition along the elevation gradient.
Ledig’s studies indicate that within an ecosystem as small as several
hectares there may be significant subspecific populations specially adapted
to local conditions, a point that is largely ignored in ordination modeling.
Relating this genetic variation to whole-ecosystem parameters is indeed a
difficult task. However, the JABOWA Forest Growth Simulator (Botkin
et al., 1972a,b) is designed so that genetic variation of the balsam fir type
can be indirectly built into the model in such a way that production
characteristics will vary in relation to elevation. However, such refinements in ecosystem modeling are years away because, among other
things, sufficient genetic information is simply not available.
As a consequence, we do not attempt to deal with genetic variation at
an intrapopulation level. Data presented in subsequent chapters are for
whole ecosystems that cover a segment of the elevational complex
gradient and include a range of genetic variability.

The Small Watershed Technique as a Method of
Biogeochemical Study
In the following discussion of the Aggradation and Reorganization Phases
of development after clear-cutting we use biogeochemical data to
characterize the phases. These data are of two kinds: input-output
budgets in which the ecosystem is considered as a black box and
nutrient-cycling analysis where input-output budget data are combined
with biogeochemical data internal to the ecosystem to give a more
complete picture of nutrient flow within and through the ecosystem. Each
of these approaches has its rewards, which are best understood by a brief
discussion of several approaches to the study of the biogeochemistry of
humid terrestrial ecosystems.
Terrestrial ecosystems are open systems, and solid, liquid, and gaseous
materials continuously flux through them. Materials are moved through
ecosystem boundaries by three major forces or vectors. These are: the
meteorologic

vector,

in which

wind

or gravity is the motive

force; the

geologic vector, in which flowing water or gravity is the motive force;
and the biologic vector, in which animal power (including man) moves
materials from place to place. Meteorologic input to and output from the
ecosystem consist of chemicals in airborne organic or inorganic particulate matter, dissolved substances in rain or snow, and gases. Geologic
flux includes dissolved and particulate matter transported by surface or
subsurface drainage water and mass movement of colluvial materials.
Biologic flux results when chemicals gathered by animals or man are
deposited in or removed from the ecosystem.

34

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
\

x

Nutrient and hydrologic parameters of a terrestrial ecosystem (for
example, 1 to 100 ha in size) may be studied by considering the ecosystem
as a black box in which attention is focused on input and output and little
is done to quantify internal relationships. Meteorologic inputs can be
fairly readily measured under most circumstances following techniques
described in Likens et al. (1977). Quantitative data can be obtained on the
amount of water and nutrients added to the ecosystem. If the boundaries
of the defined ecosystem are not coincident with those of a small
watershed, additional input as well as output vectors must be measured to
develop a complete budget (Figure 1-14).
The potential of this nonwatershed approach to biogeochemical study is
THREE

LEVELS OF BIOGEOCHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF HUMID TERRESTRIAL

ECOSYSTEMS

1. The ecosystem is considered as a black box, and its boundaries are not coincident with those of
a small watershed.

INPUT

OUTPUT

METEROLOGIC VECTOR
gases, solids*in water or air
GEOLOG/C VECTOR
solids in surface and
subsurface drainage,

METEROLOGIC VECTOR
gases, solids in air
GEOLOGIC VECTOR
solids in surface and
subsurface drainage and deep

colluvium

seepage, colluvium

BIOLOGIC

VECTOR

deposition by animals

BIOLOGIC

VECTOR

removal

by animals

=mAV<KNOOM

Potential for biogeochemical study
1. Hydrologic and nutrient input in precipitation

2. Partial estimate of geologic output
3. Insight into aspects of ecosystem biogeochemistry
Solids = dissolved chemicals or particulate matter
2. The small-watershed technique where the ecosystem is considered as a black box, but its
boundaries are coincident with those of a small watershed underlain by an impermeable

substrate.

The watershed is in a biologically homogeneous area.

measure input-output vectors shown in italics.

INPUT

It is not necessary to

OUTPUT

METEOROLOGIC VECTOR
gases, solids in water or air
GEOLOGIC VECTOR
solids in surface and
subsurface drainage,
colluvium
BIOLOGIC VECTOR
deposition by animals

Zzman<noom

METEOROLOGIC VECTOR
gases, solids in air
GEOLOGIC VECTOR
solids in surface and
subsurface drainage
deep seepage, colluvium
BIOLOGIC VECTOR
removal by animals

Additional potential for biogeochemical study

. Complete hydrologic budgets
Estimate of evapotranspiration
Input-output budgets for sedimentary elements
Partial input-output budgets for gaseous elements
Net change patterns for individual elements
Estimate of minimum weathering rates
Establish relationship between streamwater flow rate and streamwate
r chemistry
G1)
S'S)
00)
NS
CO Insights into annual and seasonal aspects of system biogeochem
istry

Figure 1-14. Three
ecosystems.

levels

of

biogeochemical

analysis

of humid

terrestrial

The Northern

Hardwood

Forest

35

3. The small-watershed technique coupled with measurement of internal features according
to the
Hubbard Brook Nutrient Flux and Cycling Model. (After Bormann and Likens
1967, Likens and

Bormann 1972.)

d

INPUT

OUTPUT
ECOSYSTEM

METEOROLOGIC
VECTOR

METEOROLOGIC
VECTOR

gases, solids in
water and air

Decomposition
Leaching,
Exudate

ae

Weathering
Secondary

~ Mineral Formation—

GEOLOGIC

VECTOR

solids in stream-

—

——

— —

Intrasystem Cycle

— — — —

—

water

Additional potential for biogeochemical study
Annual nutrient uptake by living biomass
Nutrient accretion in living and dead biomass
Estimates of leaching, exudation, and decomposition
Estimates of nutrient input by gaseous uptake, impaction, and nitrogen fixation
{IS
SUES
More complete estimate of weathering

Figure 1-14 (Continued from facing page.)

limited. In many circumstances it is virtually impossible to construct
quantitative input-output budgets because of the great difficulty involved
in measuring geologic flux into and out of the system. Despite these
limitations, the black box approach on nonwatershed ecosystems can
yield valuable information on an ecosystem’s biogeochemistry. Useful
quantitative data can be obtained on the amount of nutrients and water
added to the ecosystem by meteorologic input, while measurement of
dissolved substances in first-order streams draining the area can give a
qualitative idea of one aspect of geologic output as well as some insights
into the internal biogeochemistry of the ecosystem.
In some systems that are relatively level and well drained, and where
the water table is out of reach, geologic input is minimal, and geologic
output might be estimated by lysimeters to yield reasonable input—output
budgets.
The small watershed technique adds greatly to the analytical power
of the approach just described (Figure 1-14). In this technique, the
ecosystem is still considered as a black box, but its boundaries are
conceived of as being coincident with those of a small watershed. The

36

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

technique has several other requirements that add considerably to its
usefulness. These are (1) that the watershed be underlain by a watertight
substrate so that all liquid water leaving the ecosystem will flow over a
weir anchored in the bedrock at the mouth of the watershed, (2) that
the watershed be underlain by a uniform geology, so that conclusions
regarding weathering rates will not be confused by mixed geologies within
the ecosystem, and (3) that the biota of the ecosystem be part of a larger
homogeneous biota surrounding the watershed.
At Hubbard Brook all of these conditions are met, and this greatly
simplifies the problems of biogeochemical measurement and interpretation (Figure 1-14). Since the lateral boundaries of our ecosystems are
coincident with both topographic and phreatic divides surrounding the
watersheds, nutrient inputs are thus restricted to meteorologic and biologic vectors since by definition there can be no transfer of geologic inputs between adjacent watersheds. Output is composed of meteorologic,
biologic, and geologic output. However, in constructing input-output
budgets, major emphasis is on net change within the system and it may
be assumed that biologic input balances biologic output because the
watershed-ecosystem is part of a much larger more or less homogeneous
biologic unit, i.e., second-growth

northern

hardwood

forest. Of course,

the biological balance can be upset by such animal activities as timber
harvesting, removal of deer by hunters, or possibly differential grazing in
recently cutover areas.
The small watershed technique allows, for nongaseous elements, fairly
complete input-output budgets. Nongaseous elements are usually not
significantly

involved

in meteorologic

output;

therefore,

budgets

may

be simply determined from the difference between meteorologic input
(dissolved substances and particulate matter in rain and snow) and
geologic output (dissolved substances and particulate matter in drainage
water).
Meteorologic
Input

Geologic ___ Net
Output
Change

(1)

The amount and chemical quality of precipitation are measured with a
series of rain-gauging stations, and because of the impermeable substrate,
the quantity and quality of all drainage water can be accurately measured
at the weir. Input—output budgets for elements with gaseous phases are
less complete, because this method does not measure either gaseous input
or output.
The small watershed black box approach has a considerable potential
for biogeochemical study. It allows measurement of a number of important ecosystem parameters. First of all it allows a complete assessment of
the ecosystem’s hydrologic cycle and an evaluation of the equation:
Input
_
Output
(Precipitation)
(Streamflow)

Output
(Evapotranspiration).

(2)

The Northern

Hardwood

Forest

37

This understanding, in its daily, seasonal, and annual dimensions, is basic

to the calculation and understanding of the input-output relations of
individual chemical elements.
Using input-output hydrologic and nutrient data it is possible to
establish the connection between the ecosystem and the larger biogeochemical]

cycles that influence

the ecosystem.

Furthermore,

man

may

influence this relationship through air pollution or climate modification. On the other hand, it is through outputs that the terrestrial
ecosystem influences the larger cycles as well as the immediately
interconnected ecosystems, for example, streams and lakes (Likens and
Bormann, 1974b). Man may drastically alter ecosystem outputs by
manipulations within the system such as careless forest harvesting or
fertilization.
Input-output budgets have considerable value in interpreting ecosystem functions. Consider the meaning of ‘“‘net change” in Equation (1) for
elements with a sedimentary cycle, i.e., without a gaseous phase (Odum,
1971). An algebraically positive net change measured by the small
watershed technique means that the ecosystem is accumulating the
element from meteorologic input. An algebraically negative net change
means that there is a net loss of the element from the ecosystem. That net
loss must be accounted for by a decrease of the element somewhere
within the ecosystem.
For atmospheric elements, those with a prominent gaseous phase, such
as nitrogen, carbon, and sulfur, net change as measured by the small

watershed technique has far less interpretive value. This is because
gaseous inputs and outputs such as those resulting from biological
nitrogen or carbon fixation or denitrification are not measured in

Equation

(1),

which

is concerned

with

measurement

of elements

associated with movement of water (precipitation and streamflow).
Methods for direct measures of gaseous input and output are currently
not available.
Input—output budgets also allow an estimate of weathering rates within
the ecosystem. In a forested ecosystem, net losses of sedimentary
elements like calcium or sodium provide a measure of the rate at which
these elements are being released by weathering of substrate minerals
within the ecosystem (Johnson et al., 1968). This is a minimum estimate
because the small watershed black box technique supplies no information
on the accumulation of these elements in various sinks within the
ecosystem (e.g., accumulating biomass). Such accumulation may significantly increase the rate of weathering so calculated (Likens et al., 1977).
The small watershed black box technique allows coupling of streamwater flow measurements with measurements of stream-water chemistry
and sediment loads. This permits the development of equations relating
dissolved substance and particulate matter concentrations to stream-water
flux rates, and allows prediction of nutrient output from the hydrologic
record alone.

38

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem
\

~

The analytical value of the small watershed technique can be enhanced
still further by coupling it with a simultaneous analysis of internal features
of the ecosystem. The scientific rewards obtained from this enlargement
of scope are very great, but the work load increases enormously.
Investigators with limited resources should choose very carefully how
they wish to invest their resources in the study of internal features of the
ecosystem.

In the earliest phase of the Hubbard Brook Study we designed a
nutrient flux and cycling model specifically to exploit the small watershed
technique (Bormann and Likens, 1967). One of the major features of the
model is that many components and flux rates can be measured directly
by well-known techniques. These data, when coupled with input—output
data derived from small watershed analysis, allowed for the estimation of
still other parameters by the budget balancing method, in which some
aspect of a nutrient budget is expressed as an equation with all but one
element

known,

and

the

unknown

is estimated

by solution

of the

equation.
In the Hubbard Brook nutrient flux and cycling model, nutrients are
thought of as occurring within the ecosystem in four compartments:
atmospheric; living and dead organic matter; available nutrients; and
primary and secondary minerals in soil and rock (Figure 1-14). The
atmospheric compartment includes all elements in gaseous form both
above and below the ground. Available nutrients are ions that are
absorbed on clay—humus exchange surfaces or dissolved in the soil
solution. The organic compartment includes all nutrients incorporated in
living and dead biomass (the dead wood, forest floor, and mineral soil
compartments,

as discussed

above;

see

Figure

1-5). The

soil and

rock

compartment is composed of unavailable nutrients locked in primary and
secondary minerals.
The biogeochemical flux of elements involves an exchange between the
various compartments of the ecosystem. Available nutrients and gaseous
nutrients may be taken up and assimilated by the vegetation and
microorganisms, with some passed on to heterotrophic consumers and
made available again through respiration, biological decomposition,
exudation, or leaching from living and dead organic matter. Insoluble
primary and secondary minerals may be converted to soluble available
nutrients through the general process of weathering; soluble nutrients
may be redeposited as secondary minerals. Because nutrients with a
sedimentary biogeochemical cycle are largely recycled within the boundaries of the ecosystem between the available nutrient, organic matter,
and primary and secondary mineral compartments, they tend to form an
intrasystem cycle.
Coupling the data obtained from the small watershed technique with
measurements of internal features specified by the ecosystem model
allows estimates of ecosystem functions not possible when the ecosystem
was simply considered as a black box. Perhaps the most important aspect

The Northern

Hardwood

Forest

39

of this relationship is that it allows coupling of energy flow, as measured
by productivity data, with nutrient flow as measured by input-output data
(Likens and Bormann, 1972b).
At Hubbard Brook we have measured such important productivity
features as gross primary productivity, net primary productivity, and
living and dead biomass accretion. From these biomass data we have
enlarged our understanding of input-output relationships in several ways
(Likens et al., 1977). For example, net annual input of gaseous and
impacted sulfur may be estimated by subtracting sulfur input in
precipitation, sulfur release through weathering, and sulfur accretion in
total biomass from sulfur output in stream water. This is a minimum
estimate of total sulfur flux because gaseous losses for the ecosystem are
not measured. Net nitrogen fixation may be estimated by subtracting
nitrogen losses in stream water from nitrogen accretion in total biomass
plus input in precipitation (Bormann et al., 1977). Again this is a
minimum estimate of gaseous flux since gaseous losses due to denitrification are not measured. Finally, a better estimate of chemical weathering
may be made by adding the amount of an element, e.g., calcium or
sodium,

locked

up in biomass

accretion

to net losses measured

by the

output-input data obtained by the small watershed technique.
Our nutrient flux and cycling model also provides a framework for
quantitative evaluation of the development or degradation of an
ecosystem and the effects of changing volumetric dimensions through
time (Likens and Bormann, 1972b). This may be expressed in several ways:
by (1) alterations in the internal flux rates, (2) changes in the size of
compartments, and (3) change in output relationships. These matters will
be considered in more detail in subsequént chapters.

Summary
1.

A model of biomass accumulation that portrays the long-term
development of the northern hardwood ecosystem is proposed. The
model is derived from numerous data collected by scientists of the
Hubbard

Brook

Ecosystem

Study

and

the U.S.

Forest

Service,

and

others working in northern New England.
2. The model is constructed to meet certain limits:
a. It starts with clear-cutting;
b. it applies to the mountain phase of the northern hardwood
ecosystem within a specified geographical and elevational range;
and
c. only minor exogenous disturbance occurs after clear-cutting.
3. The model is based on changes in total ecosystem biomass, i.e., living
biomass plus dead biomass in dead wood, the forest floor, and in the

mineral soil.

40

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

4. The model contains four phases of development: Reorganization, a
period of one or two decades immediately after clear-cutting, during
which time the ecosystem loses total biomass despite accumulation of
living biomass; Aggradation, a period of more than a century when the
system accumulates total biomass reaching a peak at the end of the
phase; Transition, a variable length of time during which total biomass
declines; and the Steady State, when total biomass fluctuates about a
mean.
. The model provides the framework, used in subsequent chapters, to
present an integrated picture of ecosystem development that couples
biotic and abiotic phenomena.
. The northern hardwood forest ecosystem at Hubbard Brook is
characterized. A nutrient flux and cycling model and the small
watershed technique as instruments for ecosystem study are presented
and evaluated.

CHAPTER

2

Energetics, Biomass,
Hydrology, and
Biogeochemistry of the
Aggrading Ecosystem

A. logical place to begin our discussion of ecosystem development might
be with the Reorganization Phase that immediately follows clear-cutting.
However, for a number of reasons that seem to outweigh the risk of a
temporary discomfiture to the reader’s sense of time, we shall begin our
discussion with the Aggradation Phase.
The Aggradation Phase is the one we have most intensively studied. It
is characterized by a storage of biomass and nutrients and by maximum
biotic regulation over energy, nutrient, and hydrologic flux. Its output
relationships are the most predictable of all of the proposed phases. It is
our perception that the biogeochemistry and ecology of all the other
phases is best understood in terms of departures from the highly
predictable parameters of the Aggradation Phase.
Aggradation begins about 15 years after clear-cutting, when the total
biomass curve of the ecosystem (Figure 1-10) shifts from net loss to net
accumulation. This pattern continues until about Year 170, when total
biomass reaches a peak for the ecosystem. The period of aggradation is
not one of uniform development or biomass accumulation. The rate of
biomass accumulation is at first relatively rapid as accumulation occurs in
the living biomass, dead wood, and forest floor compartments (Figure
2-1). Later the rate slows as accumulation is limited primarily to living
biomass, which at that time is also accumulating at a lesser rate. Marked
changes in forest structure, species composition, and dominance also
occur during this 155-yr period (these changes are discussed in Chapter 4).

Compared

to the Reorganization

Phase (from 0 to 15 years after clear-

cutting), when there is a net loss in total biomass and fairly rapid and
drastic changes in other ecosystem parameters, the Aggradation Phase is

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

42

800

600

400

Living

Biomass

t/ha

___Dead Wood

200 am
Mineral

20

60

100

Years

Figure 2-1. The accumulation
ecosystem development.

Soil

After

140

Clear—Cutting

of biomass

during

the Aggradation

Phase

of

one of-relative stability. That is, its energetic, hydrologic, and biogeochemic relationships remain fairly constant and predictable. Many
of the stability relationships examined in this chapter are for the most
part the least subtle ones. More subtle aspects of the long-term
relationships are discussed in the chapter that deals with reorganization
(Chapter 3).
Forests in the Aggradation Phase currently are found over most of
northern New England and are the base from which we have obtained our
empirical and experimental data. Since this phase represents a continuum
of change, some of the conclusions about ecosystem functions such as
weathering, nitrogen fixation, and control of stream-water chemistry
based on young aggrading stands (i.e., 50-60 years old) may need
modification before they are fully applicable to older stands within the

Aggradation Phase. On the other hand, conclusions on hydrology and
erosion would seem to apply with little modification to the entire phase.
Throughout this section we will draw on information presented in an earlier
text, Biogeochemistry of a Forested Ecosystem (Likens et al., 1977).

The Aggrading Ecosystem

SOLAR

ENERGY

43

FLOW

The stable conditions that characterize the aggrading ecosystem result in
large part from its capacity to utilize or control the flow of radiant energy
impinging on it. This is done by reflection, heat loss, evapotranspiration,
and photosynthetic use. The ecosystem has its greatest effect on energy
flow during the growing season (June through September), when 15% of
the incoming radiation is reflected, 41% is lost as heat, 42% is used in the

evaporation of water (transpiration plus evaporation), and about 2% is
fixed in photosynthesis (Gosz et al., 1978).
Solar energy fixed in photosynthesis not only provides most of the
energy necessary to drive the biological functions of the ecosystem but is
also stored within the ecosystem in the form of the carbon compounds
that make up ecosystem structure (Table 2-1). The 55-yr-old forest at
Hubbard Brook contains about 7 X 10° Kcal/ha in living biomass, which
accumulates at a net rate of 1.2 x 10’ Kcal/yr. About 1.4 x 10° Kcal/ha is
stored

in

dead

biomass,

which

accumulates

at

a

net

rate

of about

1.2 x 10° Kcal/yr. Living and dead biomass provide the organic structure

Table 2-1. Energy Relationships of a 55-Yr-Old Aggrading Forest
Ecosystem
of the Hubbard
Brook
Experimental
Forest

Kcal x 10°/ha
Energy stored in ecosystem biomass
Living biomass
Dead wood
Dead biomass (organic matter in soil)
Total
Incident solar energy
Annual

10.10

Growing season (June-September)

4.43

Annual conversion of solar energy
Photosynthesis (GPP)
Transpiration
Total

0.71
0.15
1.30
2.16

0.10
eS
1.85

Efficiency (%)?
Photosynthesis alone

Annual
Growing season
Photosynthesis and transpiration
Annual
Growing season

4Modified from Gosz et al., 1978.
> Ratio of conversion/incident energy.

1.0
2.3
18.3
41.8

SyeI9qg POO|4 jo
saijddns sae

quawajeqy
4al4ijeaH
Oj,
Bulsealg
<x
JayeEMpuNnosg

[!0S yo Ayioeded
Buipjoy-sarey

[10S
s}ooy
pulg

sanea] yBnosyl
dayeny Ms $O uoIzesOden |

aye] AJIPOW
yey] sassad0ig

Va
5)

s}ooy Aq

syeoiwayy fo exe1d/)

Sajoiweg JO j|eAOWAaYy

aoejins yeaq Aq

Buimojj-yBnosyy asuea|d
Ajjeotwmayg yey] Sassad01qg

Wealls JI\y Woy
sjeoiwmayy 40 ayxeid¢ yeaq

uolso19 doipuiey
Sjuanasg 19}}17 1S8s04

xe

$9J9114eg |10S UO
sjeoiumayy 4o uolWdiospy

=|

Ky

pue sa} eW D1UebIC |!0S

|!0S OJUI JaIeNA
JO UOIJEITIYU] 9JOWOJY
sjauueyy jewiuy pue }OOY

XN

“xa S

)

NSS =)
eee

jo Ayoasig yaiym Absau3 e105 jo uolexi4

$ASS8901g J9YIO ISO SAIOWOJg AjjOa1!PU|

JO UO!Da|}ay
~1YBI|UNS
oem
\

Sa

jO BwOS
‘(g/6} ‘uueWw0g) }Se10) Builpes66e oy} u! ABsoua sejOs yO Sasn JOaJIpUl PUL JO9J4IP ay}

syeaq poo|4
pue ‘s}uauipas JO UuoIsos ‘Jyouny

BdejINS soNpay Jey] Sassado1g

6

erae

ae

EA

4)
re

la

7 \S“C waishsoo3, leanyeny Sa
too 4e|OS

ees

pue, sweais

pue sweass Oo}
Jaye 19Uea|9

ayew|g JawWwns
Bulseajq aow
S}UR}N||Og 7B ISNG
‘Wweais

{

ah

ssa

diy sauea|D

=

“g-zg ainbiyg

SadUeISQNS
Bulny||od
Pue jeinjeny

pue 47

BuluieyUuod
uoljeldioaidg

The Aggrading Ecosystem

45

upon which are based many of the ecosystem’s functions—the most notable of which is photosynthesis itself (Figure 2-2). Energy in dead biomass
may be considered to be in a “bank” that can be drawn upon in times of
stress. This idea will be developed more fully in Chapters 3 and 5S.
Photosynthesis is often thought to occur during a growing season
defined as the period between the last killing frost in spring and first
killing frost in autumn, but in natural ecosystems photosynthetic
strategies of component species may extend the energy-fixing season well
beyond these points. Muller (1975) has defined three such strategies at
Hubbard Brook: summergreen species whose leaf display more or less
corresponds to the period between last and first killing frosts, evergreen
species that in New England are able to carry on appreciable photosynthesis on either side of the last-first frost (Bourdeau, 1959; Sprugel et
al., unpublished), and vernal species that complete much of their life cycle
prior to the last killing frost in spring. An analysis of photosynthetic
strategies within the Hubbard Brook forest indicates that species with
summergreen strategies produce 94% of the aboveground production
(Table 2-2). This situation probably holds for most aggrading northern
hardwood ecosystems, but the reader should bear in mind that there is a
potential for northern hardwood forests to contain a much larger proportion of evergreens.
Finally, we point out that the importance of a particular group of plants
in regulating ecosystem function may be greater than their energy-fixing
capacity implies. For example, the aboveground activity of the spring
herb Erythronium americanum is restricted to the period between
snowmelt and forest canopy development. Its phenology and production
characteristics closely adapt the species to this temporal niche in northern
deciduous forests. Although FE. americanum contributes less than 0.5% of
the ecosystem’s aboveground production (Table 2-2), it may significantly
reduce losses of potassium and nitrogen from the ecosystem during the

Table

2-2. Relative Distribution in Percent of Aboveground
Production in a 55-Yr-Old Northern Hardwood Forest
at Hubbard Brook?

Photosynthetic Strategy
Layer

Evergreen

Vernal

Summergreen

Total

Tree
Shrub
Herb
Total

D8
<0.1
ile
oes)

0
0
0.5
0.5

94.3
0.7
1.0
96.0

96.6
0.7
Dil
100.0

4Distribution is according to photosynthetic strategies and by layers
within the forest. Herbaceous layer, 0-0.5m; shrub layer, 0.5-2.0m, and
tree layer, >2.0m

(after Muller,

1975).

46

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

spring runoff period (Figure 2-3). This temporal pattern suggests that
Erythronium acts as a short-term sink or ‘“‘vernal dam,” with nutrients
incorporated in accumulating biomass during the spring flushing period
and released by shoot decomposition during the early summer. Such a
mechanism would reduce nutrient losses in spring streamflow, make them
available to early summer growth, and thus preserve the nutrient capital
of the ecosystem (Muller and Bormann, 1976).

During one year, about 1.3 x 10’ Kcal of solar energy are received by
each hectare at Hubbard Brook (Table 2-1). About 1% is converted by
photosynthesis into gross primary production. Approximately 55% of the
GPP is used to sustain green plant respiration, the remaining 45% (NPP)
supports all heterotrophic activities and storage in living and dead
biomass.
The photosynthetic conversion efficiency of 1%/yr suggests a relatively
Snowmelt

March

April
Snowmelt

May

June

1973

Change
Biomass,
/ha-day
In
kg

March

Z
Z

April

Stream-water,
NOz
mg/
Liter
In

~ May

June

Figure 2-3. (©) Stream-water nitrate concentrations and ( ) biomass increase in
Erythronium americanum in 1972 and 1973. Biomass increase was calculated as
the rate of biomass change between any two consecutive harvest dates. Period
of snowmelt and closure of the overstory canopy are shown (Muller and
Bormann, 1976).

The Aggrading Ecosystem

47

modest capacity of the ecosystem to capture and use solar energy.
However, the utilization of solar energy in photosynthesis supports life
and growth of the green plants and makes it possible for the ecosystem
to- utilize a large amount of solar energy in the evaporation of water
by the process of transpiration. As a result, water that would leave
the ecosystem as liquid water in streamflow is converted to a gas and
leaves as water vapor. The 1.7x 10° Kcal/ha-yr of solar energy used in
transpiration (the calculations of energy used in transpiration will be
given in Chapter 3) greatly enhances the capacity of the ecosystem to
resist external destabilizing forces to which it is continually subjected,

such as wind, water, and gravity.
The use of energy in transpiration represents about 13% of all incident
energy received by the ecosystem during 1 year. When energy used in
transpiration is added to that of photosynthesis, annual efficiency is 14%.
However, if we calculate efficiency on the basis of incident energy in June
through September, the months when almost all production and transpiration occurs, efficiency is about 37%.
Solar energy channeled into photosynthesis and transpiration may be
thought of as sustaining active and passive ecosystem processes which
greatly affect the overall biogeochemistry of the ecosystem. Transpiration,
carbon assimilation, nitrogen fixation, and water and nutrient uptake may
be thought of as active processes that require a continuous expenditure of
biologically fixed or biologically mediated solar energy. Whereas passive
processes may be thought of as nonbiological (physical or chemical)
processes that require little immediate expenditure of biologically fixed or
biologically mediated solar energy, such as reflection of sunlight, impaction of aerosols, filtration, and exchange processes in the soil. These processes remove chemicals or particles from the streams of air and water
moving through the ecosystem (Figure 2-2). The relationship between
active and passive processes is complex. For example, soil exchange
processes may be viewed as passive, yet biologically derived exchange
sites on humus play an important role in the process. Impaction, the
process of removal of aerosols and dust from the airstream, presents
another interesting case. Although this is a physical process, the biological
structure and composition of the ecosystem exercises considerable control
over the intercepting surface and thus affects the rate of impaction. The
architecture of the major impaction sites, i.e., the vegetation, changes
both on a seasonal basis with deciduousness and on a longer-term basis
with ecosystem development.
Through regulation of the flow of solar energy and the use of solar
energy to support both passive and active processes, the aggrading
ecosystem gains substantial control over internal microclimate as well
as biogeochemistry. Regulation of internal humidity and temperature
regimes in summertime is achieved by the reflective capacity of the upper
canopy and by transpiration, which evaporates approximately 3 x 10°
liters of water/ha-yr at Hubbard Brook. The highly buffered microclimate

48

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

within the system plays a major role in regulating the decomposition
regime within the soil, and in this way is probably closely related to the
highly predictable biogeochemistry of the aggrading ecosystem (Likens et
al., 1977).

BIOMASS: DEVELOPMENT
AND INERTIA

OF REGULATION

The amount and distribution of living and dead biomass are among the
most important structural features of northern hardwood ecosystems and
are closely and functionally linked to their stability.
Analysis of the second-growth forest at Hubbard Brook (Table 2-3)
provides data roughly equivalent to a 55-yr-old stand in our hypothetical
sequence (Figure 1-10). Total biomass is about 42,000 g/m’. Of this, about
16,000 g/m? is living plant biomass distributed about 82% aboveground
and 18% belowground. Eighty percent of the fine roots (<3-mm) are
concentrated in the upper 30cm of the soil (Safford, 1974). Although the
forest has a leaf area index of 5.8, only 315 g (2.4%) of the aboveground
biomass is in leaves (Whittaker et al., 1974). The bulk (61%) of the total
biomass is dead. However, inspection of Figure 2-1 suggests that living
biomass predominates from about 80 years after clear-cutting to the end
of the Aggradation Phase. It should be noted, however, that accumulation

of living biomass is primarily the accumulation of wood in the interior
of living trees.
Concentrations of both living and dead biomass vary markedly

Table 2-3. Living and Dead Biomass in a 55-Yr-Old Aggrading Forest Ecosystem
at Hubbard Brook?

Biomass (g/m”)
Category of Biomass
Above

Vertical Distribution
(m)

Living

0.00-20.0

13.281"

Dead

soil surface

Living plant biomass
Dead wood
Below soil surface

0.00—20.0

Living roots

0.00-0.5

Dead wood
Forest floor

0.00-0.5
0.00—0.09

Mineral soil
Total

0.09-0.45

440

2,826°
2,900
4,800
17,300

16,107

ew Dominski, 1971; Whittaker et al., 1974; Gosz et al., 1976; Melillo,
Does not include herbs and shrubs, but these are <1%.

25,440
1977.

The Aggrading Ecosystem

49

throughout the vertical dimension of the ecosystem. The concentration of
biomass per unit volume in the upper 45-cm of the soil is about 90 times
greater than average concentrations aboveground. This distribution
reflects the functional requirements of distributing leaves through a large
volume of air to facilitate energy interception and gas exchange and
of concentrating roots in a relatively small volume of soil containing
available nutrients and water.
Dead

Biomass

and the Forest Floor

About 60% of the organic matter below the soil surface (Table 2-3) is
incorporated in the mineral soil, but concentrations are quite variable
spatially owing to pit and mound topography and the generally rocky
nature of the profile. Most (90%) of the organic matter in the upper 45 cm
of the soil is dead and is largely the product of microbiological alterations
of plant material. The mineral soil is generally covered with a welldeveloped

forest

floor which

averages

about

8.6cm

(Dominski,

1971;

Melillo, 1977) in depth and contains about 4800 g/m? of organic matter
(Figure 1-7). Organic matter in the forest floor and in the B-horizon of the
mineral soil are not the same. The organic matter of the forest floor is
considered more labile and nutrient-rich, while most of the organic matter
in the deeper horizons is thought to be more refractory and less subject to
rapid change (see Chapter 1).
Dead biomass in the soil has very strong effects on both hydrologic and
nutrient-cycling characteristics of the ecosystem. Organic matter reduces
bulk density, increases water-holding and cation-exchange capacity, and
serves as a reserve store of plant nutrients (Hoyle, 1973). Because of the
low bulk density of the forest floor (0.2 kg/liter; Dominski, 1971), these
soils, in common with most other forest soils (Lull and Reinhart, 1972),
have enormous infiltration capacities (ca. 76-cm/hr; Trimble et al., 1958),
as well as excellent percolation rates. Because of the relative lack of clay
in our northern hardwood soils, humus also serves as the principal
cation-exchange site within the soil profile, and the highest concentrations
of exchangeable

cations are found within the forest floor (Hoyle,

1973;

Pilgrim and Harter, 1977).
The growth of the forest floor during the Aggradation Phase, from
26 t/ha at 15 years after clear-cutting to 57 t/ha at 80 years after cutting
(Covington, 1976), indicates that both available water-storage and
cation-exchange capacity grow as well. We estimate that between Years
15 and 60 water retention capacity (mostly available water storage;
Trimble and Lull, 1956) grows by 0.7-cm and that the cation-exchange
capacity of the forest floor increases by about 100%. Since water and
nutrients are vital to production, it would appear that the productive
capacity of the aggrading ecosystem increases during the first third of the
Aggradation Phase coincident with the growth of the forest floor.

50

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

CYCLES

DETRITAL-GRAZING

energy and
The detrital cycle is overwhelmingly dominant in terms of
em. In an
ecosyst
d
hardwoo
n
norther
ng
aggradi
the
nutrient flux within
vity
producti
primary
net
the
of
26%
about
that
average year we estimate
form
the
in
em
ecosyst
the
within
stored
is
forest
ng
in a 55-yr-old aggradi

of a net gain in living biomass, mostly wood and bark (Figure 2-4).
Seventy-four percent of NPP plus a small addition of dissolved organic

matter in precipitation represents that proportion of the current crop of
energy available to support the sum of all heterotrophic activities. Less
than 1% of this energy is consumed by grazing animals in an average
year. The principal herbivores, in approximate order of importance, are
chipmunks, mice, foliage-eating insects, birds, deer, and hares (Gosz et
al., 1978; Hanson, 1977). The remaining energy is added to the dead

Organic Matter
In Precipitation

Solar
Energy
Ecosystem

Gross Primary
Productivity
5720

Aut
u sigei

(Heat)

‘Respiration

Net Primary
=
Productivit

0400

1210

a

4680

2B

:

3470

S ore: In Living
t

:

d

.

ry

Biomass

351

( Se
Grazing
Detrital
eye

op ic
Heterotrophi

(Heat)

Respiration

Remainder For All
Other Uses

Cycle <I%
Cycle>99%
Sie

In Dead

120

Biomass
Organic

Matter

In

Stream-water
Figure 2-4. The flow of energy in carbon compounds through a 55-yr-old
aggrading forest at Hubbard Brook; numbers give energy values in kilocalories
per square meter (after Gosz et al., 1978).

The Aggrading Ecosystem
wood,

forest

floor, and

litter, leachates,

mineral

and exudates.

soil compartments

There

in various

51

forms of

it is subject to utilization

in the

detrital cycle (Figure 2-4). In an average year, an amount of energy
equivalent to about 95% of that added to the detrital cycle (but not
necessarily the same energy) is released as heat due to heterotrophic
respiration, while about 5%

is added to net dead biomass accumulation.

Energy consumed in all heterotrophic respiration, grazing and detrital,
is coupled to the biogeochemical process of mineralization or the release
of ions previously locked in organic compounds. In effect, these ions are
added to the available nutrient compartment in our nutrient flux and
cycling model (Figure 1-14).
We have not identified the principal saprobic plants (microflora) or
invertebrate detritivores at Hubbard Brook; however, the major groups
have been reported for acid mor soils elsewhere in the Northeast (Eaton
and Chandler, 1942; Lutz and Chandler, 1946). Fungi are thought to be
the principal agents of decomposition since the relative importance of
bacteria declines markedly in acid soil. Major invertebrate detritivores
are probably similar to those reported for mor soils in New York State
where, in terms of numbers, the following groups predominated:
Arachnida (mites, false scorpions, and spiders), Collembola (springtails),
Coleoptera and Diptera (beetles and flies), Hymenoptera (ants), Symphyla, and Annelida (earthworms). Earthworms, millipedes, and isopods
were absent in the New York State sample, but all have been found in
small numbers at Hubbard Brook (R. Holmes, personal communication).
The complex relationship and relative importance of the microflora and
detritivores in decomposition remains to be determined at Hubbard
Brook. However, it would appear that as soon as soft tissues such as
leaves or bud scales fall to the forest floor they are subject to a
coordinated attack (Lutz and Chandler, 1946; Jackson and Raw, 1966;
Schaller, 1968; Brady, 1974). Fungi and bacteria initiate the action but are
soon joined by springtails, bark lice, and various larvae which eat or tear
holes in the tissue (fenestration), opening it to more rapid microbial
attack. Larger larvae and mites bring about further perforation and
skeletonization. Large amounts of feces, or frass, are produced, which
may be consumed again by other fauna. The activities of the soil fauna
and microflora are thus closely linked. Chewing, ingestion, and digestion
by fauna not only result in decomposition of the organic matter but
simultaneously create surface and moisture conditions more favorable to
microbial action both within the faunal gut and in the resultant frass. It
seems likely that the detritivores obtain their principal energy supplies
from the easily decomposable substances within the litter such as sugars,
starches, and simple and crude proteins. Exoenzymes of fungi and
bacteria not only attack these easily decomposable substances but are
largely responsible for the decomposition of the more resistant compounds, such as hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignins, which compose the
bulk of the leafy and wood litter.

52

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

The rate of detrital decomposition by the microflora and the detritivores is regulated by many factors including the dimensions and physical
and

chemical

structure

of

the

substrate.

In

general,

boles

of trees,

particularly large ones, decay slowly, while leaves decay fairly rapidly.
Litterbag studies at Hubbard Brook (Gosz et al., 1973) indicate that
yellow birch leaves decompose more rapidly than sugar maple leaves,
which in turn decay more rapidly than beech; we estimate that 5, 9, and
11 years, respectively, are required for 95% of the original dry weight of
the above species to disappear after a leaf falls to the forest floor.
Soil invertebrates also play a role in the physical transport of
decomposing organic matter. However, owing to the relatively small
populations of earthworms and other larger invertebrates at Hubbard
Brook, there is relatively little mixing activity within the forest floor or
with the underlying mineral soil. The relatively happy circumstance of a
fairly clear distinction between the forest floor and the mineral soil made
it possible for us to carry out the study of the decline and growth of the
forest floor discussed in Chapter 1.
The microflora and detritivores are themselves food sources for
parasites and predators, including carnivores such as mites, centipedes,
salamanders, and shrews, as well as microfloral feeders. To some degree,
mites and springtails regulate fungal populations by feeding on hyphae
(Mitchell and Parkinson, 1976), and protozoa may exercise some control
over bacterial populations (Lutz and Chandler, 1946).
Lack of knowledge of the details of saprobic decomposition represents
one of the major gaps in our knowledge at Hubbard Brook, yet this is
of key importance in understanding the ecosystem’s biogeochemistry,
and particularly changes through time. For example, on the basis of
input-output budgets (Figure 1-14) we know that when an aggrading
ecosystem is clear-cut the output of nitrate may increase severalfold. This
is due primarily to a marked increase in the populations and activities of
autotrophic nitrifying bacteria (Smith et al., 1968) and other heterotrophic
nitrifying organisms (J. Duggin, personal communication) within the soil.
What we do not know is how the rest of the saprobic plant—detritivore
system responds. Do the new conditions result in marked expansion or
contraction of various detritivore and microfloral populations? A comparative study of changes in saprobic populations in the forest floor of
undisturbed and recently clear-cut forests would seem to be an informative way of attacking this problem.
The division of energy flow between the detrital and grazing food webs
is not constant from year to year, and in some years there is a dramatic
rise in herbivory, principally due to rapid increases in populations of
leaf-eating insects. High rates of defoliation occurred at Hubbard Brook
in the years 1969-71 when a species of defoliating caterpillar, the
saddled prominent (Heterocampa guttivita Walker), was in outbreak
phase. During the peak year of defoliation, about 44% of the total leaf
tissue was

consumed,

while in local areas patches of forest were

totally

The Aggrading

Ecosystem

53

stripped of leaves (Holmes and Sturges, 1975: Gosz et al., 97S wiveaves
of yellow birch were preferred by the larvae of the defoliating insects (R.
Holmes, personal communication). Although these insects consume large
quantities of leaf tissue, the amount of energy they assimilate is relatively
small, about 14% of the total contained in the ingested tissue. The
remainder (86%) is added to the detrital cycle in the form of frass.
The potential of these organisms to affect system biogeochemistry goes
far beyond their energy utilization, because their grazing activities strike
directly at the ecosystem’s primary source of energy fixation and
hydrologic and energy regulation, which is leaf tissue. Not only is there a
strong potential to reduce gross primary productivity temporarily and
hence diminish the amount of energy available to support all organisms
within the ecosystem (Figure 2-4), but by reducing leaf area it seems likely
that the ecosystem would undergo proportionate reductions in transpiration and nutrient uptake by green plants. According to Hibbert’s review
(1967) of various forest-thinning experiments, streamflow is increased
approximately in direct proportion to the reduction in leaf area. In
undisturbed

hardwood

forests

of North

Carolina,

it has been observed

that defoliation by the fall cankerworm (Alosophila pometaria) is
associated with concentrations of nitrate in stream water that are about
five times higher than those measured in nondefoliated watersheds
(Swank and Douglass, 1975). Increased nitrate loss is thought to result from
the influence of defoliation on the forest floor, for example, from higher soil
temperatures or lower nutrient uptake by plants. At Hubbard Brook, no
significant increase in nitrate concentration in stream water was observed
during 1970, the year of peak insect defoliation.
The following effects emphasize the large destabilizing potential that
severe outbreaks of leaf-eating insects may have on an ecosystem: (1)
conversion of living leaf tissue to CO;, insect biomass, and frass; (2)
increased output of stream water, the chief vehicle for removing
nutrients; (3) decreased uptake of nutrients by green plants, perhaps
leading to increased nutrient concentrations in soil and stream water; (4)
more radiant energy flow to the forest floor; (5) increased transfer of
living biomass to dead organic matter (Figure 1-5); and (6) possible
alterations in microbiologic activities in the soil leading to increased
nitrification (implications to be discussed later). Production may be
temporarily lowered, and the system may become more open in terms of
stream-water and nutrient loss. Not only does defoliation affect major
aspects of the system’s biogeochemistry, but the detrital cycle also must
be affected. During heavy outbreaks of defoliators, leaves are consumed
in the canopy, and we wonder what effect this has on the detritivore
populations. For example, certain populations of soil invertebrates
carrying out fenestration and skeletonization rely heavily on newly fallen
leaf litter (Schaller, 1968).
It is exceedingly difficult to evaluate the long-term role of defoliating
insects in regulating the biogeochemistry of natural ecosystems. On the

54

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

one hand, insects may constitute a major destabilizing force causing
numerous rate changes and an increased loss of nutrients from the
ecosystem. On the other hand, because of differential grazing and other
internal ecosystem responses, they may act to channel the flow of radiant
energy, nutrients, and water to better-adapted individuals and species and
thus function something like a cybernetic regulator of primary production (Mattson and Addy, 1975). At Hubbard Brook these defoliating organisms apparently operate within bounds that allow the aggrading
ecosystem to continue its accumulation of living biomass at the fairly
predictable pace reported by Whittaker et al. (1974).
Holmes and Sturges (1975) and Gosz et al. (1978) report a behavior
pattern of predatory animal species at Hubbard Brook that may illustrate
another animal-based biogeochemical regulatory mechanism. They point
out that many of the major predators are almost entirely opportunistic in
their diet preferences and that these animals cannot be identified with
either the grazing or detrital cycles. In most years, however, it seems
likely that major predators such as birds, shrews, salamanders, and
rodents and invertebrates such as centipedes, beetles, and spiders gain
their major energy inputs by feeding on a variety of detritivores and their
invertebrate predators. They also consume defoliating insects, and during
years when they are common many of these predators have the capacity
to substantially shift their diet to the newly available food source.
The intensive study of birds by Holmes and Sturges (1975) provides
data for one group at Hubbard Brook. In general, birds consume only a
small part, about 0.2%, of the annual net primary productivity occurring
aboveground and probably have no major direct effect on ecosystem
structure or overall energy flow rates. During average years, when most
energy is flowing to the detrital cycle, the summer diet of the bird
community consists largely of adult Dipterans whose larvae are detritivores in the forest floor and in streams, adult Coleopterans whose larvae
prey on soil-dwelling organisms, and adult Hymenopterans which are
themselves secondary and tertiary consumers. In most years, then, the
bird community is closely linked by energy flow with the forest floor.
However, Holmes and Sturges (1975) have shown that during the years
when Heterocampa was in outbreak phase, many birds concentrated on
this new and abundant source of food. During the years of outbreak, 1969
to 1971, and for one year afterward, the total number of individuals in
breeding bird populations increased progressively, presumably because of
a more abundant and easily available food supply. Studies of animal
behavior during outbreaks of gypsy moths suggest that other predatory
populations such as mice (Peromyscus) and beetles (Calasoma) behave in a
fashion similar to the bird population at Hubbard Brook (Campbell,
1975).
These behavior patterns suggest that these vertebrate and invertebrate
populations of opportunistic predators, although playing a minor role in
energy flow patterns, may perform important biogeochemical regulatory

The Aggrading Ecosystem

55

functions in both the detrital and grazing cycles. They must play some
role in regulating the process of mineralization through effects on
detritivore populations and the processes of transpiration, nutrient
cycling, and primary production through effects on populations of insect
defoliators. Holmes (personal communication) believes that populations
of defoliating insects at Hubbard Brook are kept at low numbers by
two factors: (1) defense systems of the plants themselves, including the
low food quality of plant tissues and (2) predators. When plant defenses
are lowered because of stress or other factors, the insects consume more
plant tissue, reproduce and grow faster to a point where they are
uncontrollable by the predators, and thus enter an outbreak phase.
Campbell (1975, personal communication) suggests that once an outbreak
‘begins other factors such as parsitoids, disease, and starvation are much

more important in bringing about its termination. It is most interesting
that these diverse predators are firmly attached to the detrital cycle, the
most predictable aspect of energy flow within the ecosystem, and in a
sense are facultative with regard to the less predictable grazing cycle.

BIOTIC

REGULATION

OF BIOGEOCHEMICAL

FLUX

Regulation of the Hydrologic Cycle
Personnel of the U.S. Forest Service have monitored and maintained
accurate records of precipitation and streamflow at Hubbard Brook since
1956 (Likens et al., 1977; Figure 2-5). On the average the area receives
130-cm/yr of precipitation, of which 70% is rain and 30% is snow. In
agegrading forests, about 62% runs off as liquid water in stream channels,
while the remainder is lost as vapor through evapotranspiration.
In any particular year, monthly inputs of precipitation may show
random extremes, but for the longer term the monthly pattern is quite
regular (Figure 2-5). In contrast to seasonal uniformity of precipitation,
monthly streamflow is widely variable and in fact defines four seasons
(Figure 2-5). Streamflow during the “growing season,” approximately
June through September, is very low. Most of the annual streamflow,
54%, occurs during the spring snowmelt period, March through May, with
30% in April alone. A second minor peak in streamflow occurs from
mid-October

through

mid-December,

after

leaf fall but before

heavy

development of the snowpack; whereas streamflow is diminished during
the winter, January through mid-March, as cold winter conditions prevail
and precipitation accumulates as a snowpack.
The living and dead biomass of the Aggradation Phase exercise
considerable and fairly predictable control over the hydrologic cycle for
the ecosystem. Control is expressed largely by effects on the storage of
water within the ecosystem and on the pathways by which water moves
through and out of the ecosystem.

56

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Pars)

GMM

Precipitation

[__] Streamflow

Water
of
cm

Ae!

J
Growing

A
Season

S70

N
Autumn

Ecological

D

J
Winter

F

M

A

M

Spring

Seasons, Months

Figure 2-5. Monthly average distribution of precipitation and streamflow in centimeters of water. Ecological seasons are the growing season; autumn; winter,
accumulating snow; and spring snowmelt and runoff period (after Likens et al.,
G77).

The living biomass of the aggrading ecosystem affects the streamflow
characteristics during all seasons (Figure 2-5). During the autumn,
increased streamflow is correlated with the cessation of transpiration. In
the hard winter, and in spring snowmelt periods, timing of streamflow is
affected. by the shade of standing leafless trees, but this is of minor
importance. ““Growing season” effects, however, are important and concern
not only timing but amount of streamflow. In this, the biological process of
transpiration plays a central role.
Hydrologic data from June through September, when the forest is in
full leaf, show that, while precipitation ranges from 32 to 50-cm, streamflow averages only S-cm. As is well known (Kittredge, 1948; Colman,
1953; Hibbert, 1967), during the growing season evapotranspiration
(mostly transpiration) has first call on water stored in soil, thus evacuating storage space. Only after storage space is refilled by precipitation
does streamflow occur.
During the Aggradation Phase, no destruction of the forest canopy is
visualized and thus it seems probable that the hydrologic conditions just
described are generally applicable to the entire period, although minor
variations due to variable proportions of evergreen trees might occur
(Swank and Douglass, 1974).

The Aggrading Ecosystem

57

The effect of transpiration is so strong that when 18 years of data on
annual evapotranspiration (which includes evaporation throughout the
year as well as transpiration during the growing season) and annual
streamflow are graphed against annual precipitation (Figure 2-6), evapotranspiration remains relatively constant despite major fluctuations in
precipitation, while streamflow is highly correlated with amount of
precipitation. This indicates that the aggrading ecosystem has a remarkably constant transpirational demand over a wide range of environmental
variables.
When precipitation crosses the boundary of an ecosystem, it has both
potential energy and potential solvent power which, as it passes through
and

out

of

the

ecosystem,

could

be

utilized

in

the

erosion

and

transportation of particulate matter and in the removal of dissolved
substances. The vegetation of the aggrading ecosystem acts to minimize
these degrading activities by the utilization of solar energy in transpiration. Thus streamflow is reduced, and a variety of other mechanisms allow
145
13¢
127

10°
(2x
/ha)
Evapotranspiration
Streamflow
Annual
or
7 lire

4

Te

=

4

ib

al

—

4

——

10

1

AZ

13

14

15

16

17

Annual

J

18

19

Precipitation (2x 10° /ha)

Figure 2-6. Relationship between precipitation, streamflow, and evapotranspiraet al.,
tion for the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest during 1956-74 (Likens
1977).

58

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

the ecosystem to absorb the kinetic energy of flowing water while yielding
a minimum of eroded material.
Physiologists often portray transpiration as a necessary evil, or at the
very most as useful in cooling leaf tissue on hot days. From the broader
perspective of the ecosystem, in humid systems transpiration is a major
regulatory process exercising important control over a variety of
ecosystem responses. Solar energy, impinging on the forest canopy, is
utilized to increase evaporation over what it would be if no vegetation
were present. This transfer of liquid water to vapor has these actual or
potential ecosystem effects:
1. Transpiration markedly reduces stream-water output during the
growing season. We estimated an average annual reduction of
stream-water output of 25% at Hubbard Brook due to transpiration
(Pierce et al., 1970).
2. This reduction acts as a nutrient conservation mechanism because
reduced streamflow means less nutrients carried out of the
ecosystem.

3. Transpiration not only reduces streamflow, but also diminishes
summertime-peak discharge rates during storms (Reinhart et al.,
1963; Pierce et al., 1970; Hornbeck,

1973b; Bormann

et al., 1974).

This regulation has important effects on the process of erosion,
since erosion is closely related to storm peaks. Obviously, during
exceedingly heavy and/or prolonged periods of rain, transpiration
would have relatively little effect on flood peaks.
4. Transpiration “‘powers” a large part of the circulation of nutrients
within the ecosystem. Some nutrients are drawn to root surfaces in
the mass flow of water immediately after rainfall and some are
lifted to the canopy by transpirational “‘pull,’’ and in contrast to
streamflow, which carries nutrients out of the system, transpiration
may be viewed as a “‘distillation”’ process in which nutrients are left
behind in the leaves where they are eventually recirculated by leaf
drop, resorption, or leaching.
5. Finally, the complicated positive-feedback relationship between
transpiration and availability of soil water plays an important role in
regulating primary production of the ecosystem through well-known
effects of available water on photosynthesis (Bormann,
1953;
Kramer and Kozlowski, 1960) and, indirectly, in regulating decomposition within the soil. Transpiration also may be of some
importance as a soil-aerating mechanism by removing soil water
after rainfall and, in effect, opening air passages into the soil. This
effect is well known

for wet sites (Dansereau,

1957).

Biomass not only exerts control over the hydrologic cycle by transpiration but in several additional ways. Living leaves and forest litter
intercept and disperse the energy of falling drops of water. The heavy
concentrations

of dead biomass in the Ay-horizon and in the mineral soil

greatly augment both retention and detention water storage in the soil

The Aggrading Ecosystem

59

and create excellent conditions for infiltration and percolation of water.
This latter factor determines the route of liquid water passing through the
ecosystem, because it permits almost unlimited infiltration. Overland flow
is negligible in forested ecosystems at Hubbard Brook (Pierce, 1967); asa
consequence, water moves to the stream by lateral flow within the soil.
This relationship exists even during the winter, because organic layers
coupled with snow accumulation insulate the soil, and normally there is
no soil freezing during the winter (Hart et al., 1962). This routing of water
has important implications for both ecosystem biogeochemistry and
erosion. Finally, interception and evaporation of both rain and snow by
dormant and nondormant northern hardwood forests at Hubbard Brook
reduce the amount of precipitation reaching the ground by about 12%
(Leonard, 1961).

Control of Particulate Matter Export
In terms of overall ecosystem stability, soil erosion is perhaps the most
important potential destabilizing force for terrestrial ecosystems. Chronic
erosion of exposed mineral soil tends to remove the finer inorganic
fractions and organic matter. These fractions are rich sources for available
nutrients and also contribute to the moisture-holding capacity of the soil;
hence erosion has the potential to seriously diminish ecosystem production (Brady, 1974). In its most severe form, erosion can remove a Significant
proportion of both organic and inorganic exchange surfaces within the
ecosystem. Not only will this have immediate drastic effects on the
productivity of the ecosystem, but it may have substantially long-term
effects. The rebuilding of exchange surfaces to pre-erosion levels by the
production of clay minerals through weathering and accumulation of soil
organic matter and the reacquisition of lost nutrients may take several
centuries. In essence, the developed ecosystem may be forced back to a
more primitive level of development with lower production and less
control over its immediate environment. Loss of control may for a time
act as a positive feedback and delay the rate at which the ecosystem
develops after serious erosion. It is interesting to note that this most basic
and important perturbation to ecosystem stability, erosion, long known to
agriculturalists and foresters, hardly enters the current ecological debate
on stability of ecosystems. In fact, the word erosion is not even found in
the subject index in a number of recently published ecology texts.
Aggrading northern hardwood ecosystems in the Hubbard Brook area
have low rates of erosion due to geological circumstances (Hunt, 1967;
Lull and Reinhart, 1972), but the biological fraction of the ecosystem also
plays an important regulatory role. Rates of erosion of particulate matter
for second-growth forests are among the very lowest recorded for humid
ecosystems. Losses average 3.3+ 1.3 t/km’-yr, despite the fact that these
forests occur on rather steep slopes, 12 to 13° and are subject to an
average annual precipitation of 130-cm (Figure 2-5). This output is small

60

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

compared to other forests and represents an extremely low rate when
compared to potential outputs of thousands of metric tons per year from
seriously disturbed sites (Table 2-4).
At Hubbard Brook we have found, as have others elsewhere, that
particulate matter losses are directly but nonlinearly related to the
(Figure 2-7). The shape of the
rate of the stream
discharge
concentration-flow rate curve is determined by the erodibility of the
ecosystem and the fact that the capacity of running water to do work
increases roughly as the square of its velocity (Bormann et al., 1969).
Erodibility is a complex function of the ecosystem, and disturbance of the
ecosystem can shift the curve (Figure 2-7) to the left, making low flow
rates more effective in the erosion of particulate matter.

Table

2-4. Particulate Matter Output (Sediment Yield) from Forested Ecosystems, Small River Watersheds with Mixed Cultural Conditions, and
Small Man-Manipulated Ecosystems in the Northeastern United

States?

Location
Forested ecosystems
Mature forest ecosystem, Hubbard Brook
(8-yr average)
Protected second-growth forest, mountains,
West Virginia
Wooded watershed, Somerset, Kentucky
Selected small rivers
Tributary basins
Susquehanna River, 88% forest cover
Potomac River, 88% forest cover
Streams draining New England upland in New Jersey
Scantic River, Connecticut
George Creek, Maryland (rural and wooded)
Tributary basins

Susquehanna River, 25% forest cover
Potomac River, 15% forest cover
Small man-manipulated ecosystems

Watershed
Size

Sediment
Yield

(km’)

(t/km*-yr)

0.12

33

0.39
Pip)

ZO
o.3)

2
?
?

12
12
3.5-35
26
Zz

?
zy

85
160

0.16
0.16
0.30

19
38
302

0.09
0.006

3,600
49,000

253
188

Deforested ecosystem, Hubbard Brook

(4-yr Average)
(Maximum annual)
Careless clear-cut, mountains, West Virginia
Clear-cut, followed by farm and pasture,
mountains, North Carolina (maximum yield)
Construction site, Baltimore, Maryland
*Modified from Bormann et al., 1974.

The Aggrading Ecosystem

61

An analysis of particulate matter output and flow rates for the
aggrading forest at Hubbard Brook shows the importance of the
occasional storm peak in the removal of particulate matter (Bormann et

al., 1974). During a 50-month period, 77% of the total stream water was
discharged

at rates

between

0 and

30 liters/sec,

but

only

14%

of the

particulate matter was removed. At discharge rates of >85 liters/sec,
3.7% of the water was discharged, while 52% of the total particulate
matter was lost. Sixteen percent of the particulate matter was eroded by
one flow ranging from 310 to 340 liters/sec. This flow carried only 0.2% of
the total streamflow and comprised less than 1 hour’s time during the
entire 50-month period (Figure 2-8). Clearly, the annual variability in
particulate matter output from the aggrading forest is due primarily to the
occurrence of large storms.
The biological component of the aggrading ecosystem regulates
particulate matter erosion by its effect on both discharge rates and
erodibility. As already noted, transpiration during the growing season
tends to reduce the size of storm peaks. This is of special note since
erodibility shows seasonal variability and is greatest during the growing
season

(Bormann

et al., 1969, 1974).

10%

fe)

Particulate
Matter
Concentration,
mg/liter

IO”

lo!
10°
Id!
Flow, ft°/sec (28.3 liters /sec)

Hubbard
Figure 2-7. Composite curve for second-growth aggrading forests at
matter
Brook (Bormann et al., 1969) showing the relationship between particulate
rate.
flow
concentration in stream water and

62

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

.

Figure 2-8. (A) The weir at Watershed 4 showing a flow of 0.02 ft?/sec (0.6
liters/sec). Average annual flow of W4 is 0.32 ft?/sec (9.2 liters/sec).

The Aggrading Ecosystem

63

Figure 2-8. (B) Photograph taken 24 October 1959, when the weir on W4 was
under construction and during the highest flow recorded at Hubbard Brook during its
24-yr history. The peak discharge measured on Watershed 3, 1.2 times larger than
W4, was 68.3 ft?/sec (1934 liters/sec). According to a log-Pearson plot, the storm of
24 October 1959 has a recurrence interval of about once every 50 years. One storm
of this magnitude would probably remove an amount of particulate matter equivalent
to many years of removal at flow rates not marked by unusually high storm flow. The
scale in the foreground of both photos is about the same. (Photograph B courtesy of
R. S. Pierce, U.S. Forest Service.)

64

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Erodibility, a measure of the ease with which earth materials give way
(Leopold et al., 1964), is a function of both geologic substrate and
biomass. Whether or not the kinetic energy of moving water within the
ecosystem is strongly coupled to the process of erosion and transportation
of particulate matter or is dissipated in other ways is often determined by
the biotic condition of the ecosystem. That the biota and its organic debris
exert considerable control over this phenomenon has been shown experimentally and will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 3.
Biotic control of erodibility in the aggrading forest is achieved by:
(1) organic matter enhancement of infiltration and percolation, which
converts surface flow to subsurface flow (surface flow does the work of
particulate matter erosion); (2) the binding together of soil and organic
debris in drainage channels and along stream banks by roots; (3)
protection (interception) of mineral soil from direct action of falling
raindrops by canopy and forest floor layers; (4) organic-debris dams in
stream channels which tend to regulate streamflow and retain particulate
matter within the ecosystems; and (5) hardwood leaves, which form a
protective shield against erosion of exposed stream banks (Bormann et
al., 1969; Fisher, 1970).

Regulation of Streamflow Chemistry
An important characteristic of the aggrading hardwood forest ecosystem
is its ability to regulate the chemistry of drainage water. The chemistry of
water entering the ecosystem as rain or snow is altered in highly
predictable ways as it passes through the system and issues forth as
stream water.
The measurement of precipitation chemistry at Hubbard Brook represents the longest comprehensive record of precipitation chemistry in
the United States (Likens et al., 1977). Precipitation is acid, and sulfate
and hydrogen ions dominate (Table 2-5). The chemical composition of
precipitation is highly variable on a weekly basis, but, in general,
relatively lower concentrations occur with snowfall (Likens et al., 1977).
Several long-term trends, apparently related to air pollution, have
emerged from these studies. Nitrate concentrations have approximately
doubled since 1955. The input (concentration times amount of precipitation) of nitrate and hydrogen ions has increased by 2.3 and 1.4 times,
respectively, during the last decade (Likens et al., 1977).
What happens to the chemistry of precipitation as it passes through the
ecosystem? Because of the dense forest canopy, the heavy concentration
of organic matter in the forest floor, and the high infiltration capacity of
the soil, almost all precipitation entering Hubbard Brook watersheds
comes into intimate contact with the living and dead biomass and the
mineral soil of the ecosystem. During the growing season, first contact of
the incoming water (precipitation) is made with the forest canopy. The
chemistry of the resulting throughfall and stemflow is markedly changed,

The Aggrading Ecosystem

65

Table 2-5. Volume-Weighted Concentrations of Dissolved Substances in Precipitation and Stream Water from Aggrading Forest Ecosystems at
Hubbard Brook with Values as Means for the Period 1963-74?
Precipitation
(mg/liter)

Streamflow
(mg/liter)

Streamflow/Precipitation
Ratio

Ca?*
Mg’*

0.16
0.04

1.65
0.38

10.3
9.5

Ks
Na*

0.07
0.12

0.23
0.87

33.3)
WP

Substance

AL*

g

0.24

NH,*
H*

022
0.073

0.04
0.012

0.18
0.16

SO,”

2.9

6.3

22

NO;
Cialis

1.47
0.47

2.01
0.55

1.4
2.

PO?)
HCO;
Dissolved silica
Dissolved organic
carbon

0.008

0.002

~0.006
e

0.92
4.5

2.4

1.0

=

0.25
153
—
0.42

"From Likens et al., 1977.
Not determined,

trace quantities.

in part owing to cation-exchange reactions between precipitation and
foliage. Some ions like sulfate and potassium are greatly enriched in the
throughfall and stemflow, whereas others like hydrogen ion are depleted
(Eaton et al., 1973; Wood and Bormann, 1974; Likens et al., 1977).

Lack of soil frost during the winter (Hart et al., 1962) and the high
infiltration and percolation capacity of the soil mass guarantees that
during all seasons almost all water moving through the ecosystem to the
stream channel comes into intimate contact with the exchange surfaces
within the soil. The chemistry of water that follows this route is
remarkably altered; concentrations of some ions rise more than 10-fold,
whereas those of others drop more than 6-fold (Table 2-5). Increases in
concentration result in part from evapotranspiration losses which reduce
the amount of liquid water leaving the ecosystem. Theoretically, this
could increase concentrations by 1.6 times, but decreased concentrations
and the size of some increases (Table 2-5) show that factors in addition to
evapotranspiration are operational. In fact, various complex biogeochemical mechanisms are involved in determining the chemical composition of
water as it passes through the ecosystem. Some of these mechanisms will
be discussed below.
In spite of the numerous and marked differences in the chemistry of
water entering the ecosystem as precipitation and that leaving as stream-

66

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

flow, stream-water concentrations are highly regulated by the aggrading
forested ecosystem. Concentrations of the various chemicals in stream water
are either nearly constant or highly predictable (Johnson et al., 1969; Likens
et al., 1977). This is remarkable

since streamflow

varies by three or four

orders of magnitude during the year. The maintenance of this relatively
stable stream-water chemistry is related to the intimate contact of the water
with exchange surfaces as it travels toward the stream channel and to an
abundance of exchangeable ions in relation to ions lost in transient waters
(Likens et al., 1977). Factors controlling ultimate stream-water concentrations, however, are very complex and involve regulation of and interaction
with numerous aspects of both the hydrology and biogeochemistry of the
ecosystem.

There

is little doubt,

however,

that activities

or conditions

associated with living and dead biomass play a major role in regulating this
stable and predictable behavior of the aggrading ecosystem.

Predictability of Stream-Water Chemistry
Johnson et al. (1969) developed a dilution—concentration model for
Hubbard Brook which explained transient changes in the chemistry of
stream water by means of mixing processes (i.e., mixing of precipitation
with soil water). The rate of the mixing process is proportional to the
discharge of stream water from the watershed. The model showed three
patterns of behavior for chemicals moving through the ecosystem:
1. those that were diluted with high discharge—Na* and dissolved
silica;
2. those that were more concentrated at high discharge—H"*, Al**, and
NO, ; and

3. those whose

stream

concentrations

discharge—Mg*',

changed

Ca**,

Kt,

relatively little in relation to

SO,?,

and

Cl. During

the

growing season, concentrations of NO; and K* in stream water
were markedly reduced.
Before proceeding further, attention should be directed to the close
relationship that exists between annual gross output of dissolved
substances (kilograms per hectare) in stream water and the annual output
of stream water in area centimeters (Figure 2-9). This relationship
represents one of the most predictable aspects of the aggrading
ecosystem. At first glance it might appear to be at odds with the
dilution—concentration behavior of the various elements at different
discharge rates described above. However, changes in nutrient concentrations in stream water, although significant for some ions, are relatively
small (generally less than three times minimum values), while changes in
stream discharge range over four orders of magnitude. This, plus the fact
that the bulk of the streamflow (77% ) occurs at flow rates between 0 and
30 liters/sec (Bormann et al., 1974), provides the strong predictable
relationship between annual gross output of dissolved substances and
total annual streamflow.

The Aggrading Ecosystem

67

C2

20;

(kg/ha)
Output
Gross

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Annual

80

90

Streamflow

70

(cm)

100

110

120

130

10

150

Figure 2-9. Relationship between total annual streamflow and annual gross
output of calcium, sodium, magnesium, and potassium (in kilograms per hectare)
during 1963-74 for forested Watersheds 1-6 at the Hubbard Brook Experimental
Forest (Likens et al., 1977).

Nutrient Input-Output Budgets
Eleven years of data from six small watershed-ecosystems at Hubbard
Brook indicate that nutrient losses from the aggrading forested ecosystem
are relatively small (Table 2-6). Also, it may be observed that, for some
elements, meteorologic inputs are very important in offsetting geological
outputs. In fact, the input-output budgets suggest that absolute amounts
of hydrogen ions, phosphorus, and nitrogen are increasing within the
aggrading ecosystem at Hubbard Brook; 1.e., amounts in bulk precipitation exceed amounts exported in stream water. Although the average
data (Table 2-6) indicate that chloride is increasing within the ecosystem
in the long term, data for annual bulk precipitation are highly variable,
and thus inputs are not statistically greater than outputs (Likens et al.,

1977).
Input-output budgets take no account of gaseous exchanges for
elements like sulfur and nitrogen. It can be seen from Table 2-6 that bulk
precipitation does not account for all losses of sulfur in stream water.
Since sulfur is only a minor constituent of bedrock and till at Hubbard
Brook, it thus seems probable that net losses cannot be made up by
weathering within the ecosystem. In fact this is the case. Weathering
releases only about 0.8 kg of S/ha-yr (Likens et al., 1977). So to provide
the sulfur necessary for annual biomass (living and dead) accretion (Table

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
68

ajyejnowsed oiuebsoul “Wajshsooe

aly UIYJIM WJOJ DUO!

‘a0epuNns
juejd uo uooedu| puke ‘uondsosge snoaseb ‘uogexy UabogU “a') ‘Wwajshso7e ay] LIWIM AyAgoe jeajbojolg 0} anp ARed,
‘yews Ajeanejey p
‘quez AON,
“$/BsQUIL
Arepuosas 10 Asewud pasayyeamun JO pasodwoo Ajabie; sj sayew

3
10°0
5
10°0
a
€9'0
S70
ISO
rl0
LUO
19
yl
gQldhewn
gyepnonied

3
Z0'0
110
10°0>
=
10°0
10°;0>
10°0
S00
90°0
10
:

NoyIed

glen
aye

oP
OLI
6€
10°0
m0)
9
:
GL
61
Ie
Ler
LI
07

PoA[OSsiqd

gSOOURISQNS

79
na
s9
700
96°0
3
91
60
9°0
Ge
9
3

yng

p
a9
ac vl
,
>
3
;
5
p
;
:
9

JON

3
jnduy d1ds0[O109}

Sey)

uoneydiso1g
pue

[OSOIOY

JUSUWI[7

apluoyyD
iInj[ng
UsdOLIIN
snioydsoyd
uol usd01pAH
uol]
wInIPosg
uinIssejOg
winisoudeyy
uuntoye
WOSTTIS
winurlunyy

Ul PEINIDO BABY JO 1NDIO Jey) SjUuaWEa JO JNAJNO JaU aJNJASUOD JeyeW ae;noed DjUuebJO PUe SBdUeISQNS PeA/OSSIG,
‘LL6L “Je 18 SUBYIT JOY,

JON

ot
oi
£91—
Os
98°0—
790
6S
cal
Ge
Lit
Sec
re
ssO'T

d1URSIO

evZ-€96 1
pouag ay} Bung seed Jad aieyeay sod swesHoy ul SanjeA YW YOOJG PseqqnH ye Wa}sAsooy
pajseio4 BuipeiBBy piO-41A-GG e 10} s}UaLINN JO (SeSso7) IndjnO pue jnduj jenuuy ebeseAy “9-Z aIqeL

o1ues IOUT

gMoyuleays—jndynQ
d1do0joaH

The Aggrading Ecosystem

69

2-7) and net steam-water losses, an additional 6.1 kg/ha-yr is required
from some external source. We suggest that this source of sulfur is
meteorological input related to biological activity in the canopy of the
forest (see Figure 1-14); that is, sulfur is removed from the throughflowing
airstream by vegetation. Such sulfur is not effectively measured by bulk
precipitation collectors. Sulfur as SO, may be taken up directly from the
airstream by living vegetation (Olsen, 1956: Hoeft et al.. 1972), or SO;
and sulfur-rich aerosol particles may be accumulated on foliage surfaces
by dry deposition. Support for this latter conclusion is indicated by our
study of throughfall and stemflow chemistry within the aggrading forest
(Eaton et al., 1973). The amount of sulfur moving to the forest floor in
throughfall and stemflow during the growing season is several times
greater than that found in precipitation impinging on the forest canopy
and apparently cannot be accounted for by rapid cycling within the
ecosystem.
Nitrogen in bulk precipitation exceeds stream-water losses by 2.5 kg/hayt (Table 2-6). Some 16.7 kg of N/ha are stored each year in living and
dead

biomass

(Table

2-7). Thus, as was the case for sulfur, the nutrient

budget for nitrogen indicates that even after we account for input in bulk
precipitation, there is a net gain for nitrogen within the aggrading
ecosystem of 14.2 kg/ha-yr that must be provided from some source. The
most likely source is nitrogen fixation, since the inorganic weathering
substrate contains negligible quantities of this element. Therefore, we
assume that 14.2 kg/ha-yr is a minimum average estimate of nitrogen
Table 2-7. Average Annual Net Accretion of Nutrients in Biomass
Aggrading Forest Ecosystem 55 Years after Clear-Cutting*

of the

Nutrients in Biomass (kg/ha-yr)
Living

Dead

Dead Biomass in

Total Biomass

Nutrient

Biomass”

Wood

Forest Floor‘

Accretion

Calcium
Magnesium
Sodium
Potassium
Phosphorus
Sulfur
Nitrogen
Iron

8.1
0.7
0.15
5.8
PLS:
iI94
9.0
L572

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1.4
0.2
0.02
0.3
0.5
0.8
WH
hey

9.5
0.9
0.2
6.1
2.8
2.0
16.7
SLIP

*Total biomass accretion is the sum of net nutrient accumulation in three biomass
subcompartments: living biomass, dead wood, and forest floor.
Living biomass is taken as an average of two pentads, 1955-60 and 1960-65
(Whittaker et al., 1974); nutrient concentrations from Likens and Bormann (1970).

“Forest floor biomass from Covington (1976); nutrient concentrations
(1971), Gosz et al. (1976), and Melillo (1977).

from Dominski

70

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
»

fixation in this 55-yr-old aggrading ecosystem (Bormann et al., 1977). The
estimate is minimum

because denitrification, which would remove N from

the ecosystem in a gaseous form, would not be detected by our budget
measurements. The estimate is average because the input-output budgets
are averaged over 10 years (Likens et al., 1977) and because the biomass
accretion value is an average of two pentad periods, 1956-60 and
1961-65. In a more complete budget, nitrogen losses due to denitrification
would have to be added to losses in stream water, and hence estimated
nitrogen fixation could be larger than that predicted. We also have no
estimate of the input of nitrogenous gases or aerosols. If these are present
in significant amounts, the input due to nitrogen fixation would be
reduced accordingly.
Of the two types of nitrogen fixation, symbiotic and free living, the
latter is more likely since among the higher plants common in the
aggrading forest (Bormann et al., 1970; Siccama et al., 1970) none is
known to have symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Free-living nitrogen fixation in
mixed hardwood forests has been reported by Todd (1971), and this topic has
been studied at Hubbard Brook by J. Roskoski (1977). Results based on the
acetylene-reduction technique (Hardy et al., 1968) indicate that decaying
wood, lying on the surface of the ground, is an active site of free-living
nitrogen fixation by as yet unidentified microbes. Roskoski’s preliminary
estimates indicate that small amounts of N (~1 kg of N/yr) are added to the
ecosystem by fixation in woody litter within the ecosystem.
All other elements (Table 2-6) show net losses from the ecosystem.
Since the ecosystem is aggrading, or growing, and these elements have no
prominent gaseous phase, we can conclude that these net losses from the
intrasystem nutrient cycle must be made up by the weathering of primary
and secondary minerals in bedrock and till. In our budgetary scheme for
nutrient flux and cycling, bedrock and till undergoing weathering are
considered to be within the ecosystem’s boundaries.

NUTRIENT RESERVOIRS WITHIN
AGGRADING ECOSYSTEM

THE

Nutrients stored in reservoirs or sinks within the ecosystem provide
inertia and ameliorate change in functional characteristics of the
ecosystem. On the other hand, reservoir size or rate of filling may limit or
enhance the rate of ecosystem development. It is apparent that nutrient
losses from the aggrading ecosystem (gross output of dissolved substances
and organic particulate matter; Table 2-6), plus immobilization of
nutrients (internal sinks), must be balanced by nutrient additions (sources)

The Aggrading Ecosystem

71

if the ecosystem is to continue to grow and develop. As we have already
Shown in the previous discussion of nitrogen, the relationship (output+
sink
= sources),
s
provides a useful analytical tool for probing various
aspects of the biogeochemistry of the aggrading northern hardwood
ecosystem.

Our nutrient flux and cycling model (Figure 1-14) indicates that there
are three potential nutrient sinks within the aggrading ecosystem: (1) in
biomass, (2) in available nutrients, and (3) in secondary minerals forming
within the ecosystem. For any element, the sum of the net accretion of
nutrients in these compartments would equal the amount immobilized
within the ecosystem during some period of time (Table 2-7).
The aggrading ecosystem by our definition is accumulating biomass in
_ three subcompartments—living biomass, dead wood, and forest floor
(Figure 2-1); and we have estimates of nutrient accretion in each
subcompartment (Table 2-7).
We have no complete measure of exchangeable or available nutrients
for the entire soil profile at Hubbard Brook. However, Hoyle (1973)
indicates that, for soils similar to Hubbard Brook, a large proportion of
the available nutrients are located in the forest floor. Since our estimates
of elements in the forest floor includes atoms incorporated in the
molecular structure of biomass and exchangeable nutrients (Covington,
1976), a large part of any net change in available nutrients is already
incorporated in the nutrient data associated with the total biomass
accretion values in Table 2-7.
The net accumulation of elements in secondary minerals in the soil is
very difficult to quantify directly on a short-term basis. The deeper soils at
Hubbard

Brook

are filled with rocks and boulders of various sizes, and

the soil depth is highly variable (Figure 1-7). Such heterogeneity makes
quantitative sampling extremely difficult. However, a comparison of
elements removed from the ecosystem [net output of dissolved substances
and particulate organic matter (Table 2-6) plus that immobilized in
accumulating biomass (Table 2-7)] with their abundance in the weathering
substrate (Table 18 of Likens et al., 1977) provides some indication about

secondary mineral formation. Output of inorganic particulate matter is
not included because of its unweathered nature (Table 2-6). Evaluation of
the removal abundance ratio shows that aluminum has the lowest ratio at
Hubbard Brook, indicating that in proportion to its abundance in rock
and till it is the least removed. The order is Al<Si<Fe<K
<Mg<Na<Ca.
The low ratios for aluminum, iron, and silicon, coupled with the fact
that aluminum, iron, and silicon oxides are major secondary minerals in

podzolic soils at Hubbard Brook (Johnson et al., 1968), are suggestive
that secondary mineral formation is occurring and that mineral soil
profiles are still developing.

72

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

SOURCES OF NUTRIENTS
AGGRADING ECOSYSTEM

FOR

THE

Undisturbed watershed-ecosystems have two major sources of nutrients:
(1) meteorologic input of dissolved, particulate, and gaseous chemicals
from outside the ecosystem’s boundaries and (2) release by weathering
of nutrients from primary and secondary minerals stored within the
ecosystem’s boundaries (Figure 1-13). Biological activity within the ecosystem may affect the rate of both meteorologic input and weathering.
For example, the architecture of the forest canopy may determine the
rate of removal of airborne aerosols moving through the ecosystem, while
the release of nutrients by weathering is influenced by a variety of
intrasystem biotic and abiotic factors.

Weathering
When the various aspects of flux, cycling, and biomass accumulation for
the ecosystem are known with some precision, a budget of these
components may be used to estimate unknown parameters such as net
weathering release or cationic denudation (Likens et al., 1977). This is
directly analogous to what we did with the two atmophilic elements N and
S to calculate net meteorologic inputs of gases and aerosols. In that case it
was possible to use the budget method because the concentrations of
these two elements in the weathering substrate were negligible or very
small and the other components were known. Using the budget method
(Figure 1-14), we can estimate net weathering release for each element by
the relationship (meteorologic input
+ biomass immobilization
— streamwater output = weathering). Weathering for Ca calculated by the budget
method is a reasonable estimate of the total amounts actually released by
weathering, since calcium-rich minerals are thought to be the least stable
and calcium is not thought to be significantly involved in the formation of
secondary minerals at Hubbard Brook (Johnson et al., 1968; Likens et al.,

1977). Assuming that calcium is completely extracted from primary
minerals in the weathering process, we calculate that about 1500 kg/ha of
rock or till are weathered each year (Likens et al., 1977).
Net weathering release calculated by the budget method does not
distinguish between the processes of differential rates of release and
formation of secondary minerals. As we have already discussed,
aluminum, silicon, and iron give strong indications of being involved in
secondary mineral formation. Hence, the actual weathering rates for
these elements are probably higher than those estimated by difference.
In acid soils, phosphorus is thought to form a variety of insoluble compounds

through

reactions

with

soluble

and

hydrous

oxides

of Fe, Al,

and Mg (Brady, 1974); hence, the actual weathering rate of phosphorus is
likely to be higher than estimates of net release of phosphorus based on
the budget method. Potassium and Mg may be involved to a lesser extent

The Aggrading Ecosystem

73

in secondary mineral formation and, along with Na, may have a
differential rate of release from the weathering substrate at Hubbard
Brook (Johnson et al., 1968; Likens et al., 1977).

Relative Importance of Weathering and
Meteorologic Input
The relative importance of the various sources for biologically important
nutrients for the aggrading ecosystem are given in Table 2-8. Weathering
is the major source

of several elements—Fe,

Ca, K, Mg, Na, Al, and P.

Meteorologic

is the

source

secondary

input

source

CIRCULATION

most

important

of N and

S and

a

of Na, Mg, K, and Ca.

AND

RETENTION

OF NUTRIENTS

A fundamentally important characteristic of the aggrading forested
ecosystem is its ability to store and recycle nutrients. This frugal
husbandry of vital resources assures the constant growth and development of the ecosystem during this period. Losses are minimal, and
available and stored resources accumulate. This may be illustrated most
clearly by an examination of the nitrogen cycle.

The Nitrogen Cycle
The biogeochemistry of nitrogen requires special consideration, since this
element plays a key role in the metabolism of the ecosystem. The ecosystem accumulates nitrogen throughout the Aggradation Phase >15
through 170 years after clear-cutting (Figure 2-10). During the first third
of the period, the rate of net accumulation is high, ca. 20 kg/ha-yr, but
accumulation tapers off to about 5.0 kg/ha-yr during the last 30 years. The
change in rate is due to the coincidence of growth in the living biomass
and forest floor during Years 15 to 75 and the fact that accumulation in
living biomass alone sustains the increase in the standing crop after Year
75 and rate of living biomass accumulation begins to level off after Year
140. It is interesting to note that dead wood has little direct influence on
the ecosystem’s standing crop of nitrogen.
As we have already discussed, there are two possible sources of
nitrogen to sustain accumulation—the input of nitrogen in bulk precipitation and the fixation of gaseous nitrogen by microorganisms within the
ecosystem. We can speculate about the relative importance of these
sources throughout the period by using detailed biogeochemical data
from small watersheds at Hubbard Brook. The input. of nitrogen in bulk
precipitation has averaged 6.5 kg/ha-yr. This provides the upper limit of
nitrogen that might be accreted from precipitation; however, some
nitrogen is inevitably lost in drainage water, and if we subtract the 11-yr

74

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Table 2-8. Relative Importance of Various Sources of Nutrients for the
Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest*
- Nutrient Source (%)

Nutrient

Precipitation
Input

Net Gas or
Aerosol Input

Weathering
Release

Iron
Calcium
Potassium
Magnesium
Sodium

as?
9
11
15
47)

=
—
—
—

100
91
89
85
78

Nitrogen

31

69°

al

Sulfur

65

ane

4

'Data from Likens et al., 1977.
S Nearly zero.

°Nitrogen fixation.
Impaction and gaseous absorption.

3000

Seidl

,

Biomass

(Excluding

2000

Mineral
Soil)

<=

SS

o

Live

Biomass

1)

2
=

ne

1000

Forest

20

40

60
Age

80

Of Ecosystem

100
After

120

Floor

140

160

Clear-Cutting

Figure 2-10. Estimated accumulation of nitrogen during the Aggradation Phase
based on living and dead biomass projections multiplied by appropriate nitrogen
concentrations. The estimate of total nitrogen does not include nitrogen in the
mineral

soil.

The Aggrading Ecosystem

75

average stream-water loss, 4.0 kg/ha-yr, the net precipitation contribution
to nitrogen accumulation is about 2.5 kg/ha-yr (Table 2-6). If we subtract
this net contribution from the yearly net accumulation of nitrogen (Figure
2-10),

we

obtain

an

estimate

of the net accumulation

due

to nitrogen

fixation. This number varies from about 28 kg/ha-yr in Years 20 to 40 to
about 2 kg/ha-yr during Years 140 to 170.
However, there is a problem with this method of calculation since it
cannot

take

into

account

denitrification.

Thus,

it is conceivable

that

denitrification fluctuates greatly during the aggrading period, whereas
nitrogen fixation does not; this would cause the balance within the system
to be affected more by changes in denitrification than by changes in nitrogen fixation. Because dead wood is an important site of nitrogen fixation,
it is interesting to note that the standing crop of dead wood (Figure 2-1)
remains about the same from Year 50 to 170. Difficulties involved in
long-term evaluations of nutrient behavior will be discussed more fully in

Chapters 5 and 6.
Several important features of the nitrogen cycle emerge from the
overall pattern as seen in a 55-yr-old ecosystem at Hubbard Brook (Figure
2-11). These are: (1) 70% of the nitrogen added to the ecosystem is added
by nitrogen fixation, 30% is added in precipitation, and little, if any, is
added by weathering; (2) of the estimated 20.7 kg/ha entering the system,
about 80% is held or accreted within the ecosystem; (3) of the estimated
83.0 kg/ha of nitrogen compounds added to the inorganic nitrogen pool,
only 5% leaks out of the ecosystem; and (4) of the 119kg of nitrogen
estimated to be used in growth processes of the plants, 33% is withdrawn

from storage locations within plant tissues in the spring and utilized in
growth and a like amount is withdrawn from the leaves and stored in
more permanent tissues shortly before leaf senescence in the fall (Ryan,
1978).
The latter point is of particular significance since it suggests that a
good portion of the early spring growth is sustained by nitrogen (and
phosphorus) withdrawn from the nutrient pool within living plant tissue.
This internal reserve gives the plants some independence from soil
sources during the critical early-growth period (Ryan, 1978). The internal
resorption pool would be almost completely destroyed in clearcutting!
Nitrogen incorporated in organic compounds within the aggrading
ecosystem is ultimately decomposed in a number of steps to ammonium.
Ammonium ions may be strongly held on cation-exchange sites, fixed on
organic matter or clay, or taken up directly by plants. Ammonium, along
with some other nitrogenous compounds, may be used as a substrate for
the process of nitrification—the oxidation of nitrogen by a variety of
chemoautotrophic and heterotrophic microorganisms with the production
of nitrate and hydrogen ions (Table 2-9). Nitrate is very soluble and may
be easily leached from the ecosystem if it is not taken up by plants.

76

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

EROCH
DTcaUlCl) mamas |eee
Input

eee

TES

Forest Floor
Accretion
Dal,
Additions
to Soil
Organic
N-pool
77.4

Denitrification

Mineralization ion

69.7

83.6

|

es

7.4

Nx Ox

Additions
to Soil
Inorganic
N-pool

No

(?)

e—

Streamwater
Output

4.0

Uptake By
Green Plants

79.6

14.2
:
Resorption
Net NFixation

39.8

39.8 —
Crown Leaching
Root Exudates

Nz Gas

sl
Green plant
Growth
Processes

Jue

Accretion
Living Biomass
9.0

Above and Below
Ground Litter

Aggrading Ecosystem

Figure 2-11. Major nitrogen transfers into, out of, and within a 55-yr-old aggrading northern hardwood ecosystem. Numbers are kilograms of nitrogen per
hectare per year (Bormann et al., 1977).

Ammonium,

on the other hand, as a cation, is more tightly retained in the

soil profile.

A major question regarding nitrogen flow in the aggrading ecosystem is
the degree to which ammonium is nitrified to nitrate. The forest floor of
some podzol soils, particularly under conifers, may show little tendency to
nitrify (Romell and Heiberg, 1931; Corke, 1958), and it may be presumed
that ammonium is the major nitrogen ion utilized by the vegetation.

Table 2-9. Chemoautotrophic

Nitrification?

Step 1
NH,* ae 1/5 O.-NO.

+2H*

+ HO

66 Kcal

Stepr2
NaNO,

+ 1/5 O.—-NaNO;

“After Alexander (1961).

18 Keal

The Aggrading Ecosystem

77

Many other podzol and podzolic soils, particularly under northern
hardwood forests, have forest floors that have a strong tendency to nitrify
when a sample is removed and kept moist in the laboratory (Romell and
Heiberg,

1931). In these latter soils, however,

there is little information

on the amount of nitrification that occurs within the intact forest
ecosystem.
Soils under aggrading northern hardwoods at Hubbard Brook fit into
the latter category since samples brought into the laboratory rapidly nitrify
(J. Duggin, personal communication); Smith et al. (1968) have isolated
chemoautotrophic-nitrifying bacteria from these soils. Application of a
chemical inhibitor of autotrophic nitrification reduced the rate of nitrification in these laboratory samples by about 50%. This indicates that
nitrification is not simply the result of chemoautotrophic nitrification but
probably has a heterotrophic component as well (J. Duggin, personal
communication).
Levels of exchangeable ammonium and nitrate measured throughout
the year at Hubbard Brook in the soil and in soil placed in plastic bags
and replaced in the soil (the Solling Method) suggested that no more than
10 to 20% of the ammonium is nitrified to nitrate during the year
(Melillo, 1977). Dominski (1971) estimated that about 16% of the
ammonium was nitrified and that about 12-kg/ha of NO;3-N were produced
each year. Thus, despite the strong tendency of samples from the forest
floor at Hubbard Brook to undergo nitrification in the laboratory, it is
apparent that under field conditions only a small proportion of the
nitrogen cycling within the forest is converted to nitrate.
From this, we conclude that, although a strong potential for nitrification
exists, that potential is not realized in the intact aggrading ecosystem.
Some factor such as competition for ammonium ions between green
plants and nitrifying microorganisms, or some set of factors, partially
inhibits the process. Another possibility is allelopathic inhibition of
nitrifying organisms by the dominant vegetation of the ecosystem (Rice,
1974). Studies by Melillo (1977) indicate that root exudates may cause
some allelopathic inhibition of nitrification in the soil at Hubbard Brook.
The partial inhibition of nitrification in the intact aggrading ecosystem
has interesting energetic implications. Nitrification is an oxidative
exoergic process that liberates energy originally built into the nitrogen
atom when it was reduced. Since it is in a more oxidized state, the
utilization of a nitrate ion by a green plant requires a considerably greater
expenditure of the plant’s energy (to reduce the nitrogen) than utilization
of an ammonium ion, which is already in a reduced state. This suggests
that inhibiting the nitrification process might result in an increase in net
primary productivity. We can make a rough calculation of this as follows:
In Figure 2-11, we estimate that approximately 70-kg of nitrogen or
organic compounds are mineralized to ammonium each year. If all of this
were nitrified and taken up by green plants as nitrate, the plants would
have to expend at least 4.2 x 10° Kcal/ha to reduce the nitrogen to a

78

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

biochemically usable form. This amounts to about 1% of the net primary
production of the 55-yr-old aggrading ecosystem (Table 2-1).
Nitrogen relationships within the aggrading ecosystem are reflected in a
highly reproducible pattern in the stream water draining these systems.
Nitrate concentrations, which are always low, i.e., <6 mg/liter, fall to
their lowest levels in late May when vegetation growth begins (Figure 2-3)
and remain low until October when the vegetation becomes dormant.
Thereafter, concentrations gradually rise to a maximum in late winter and
early spring. This pattern is related to the heavy utilization of nitrogen by
the biological fraction of the ecosystem during its active season (Johnson
et al., 1969). The stream-water pattern provides a useful monitor of the
nitrogen cycle within the ecosystem, and, as we shall see, this pattern is
wholly disrupted by clear-cutting.
Thus, we conclude that within the aggrading ecosystem most nitrogen
compounds are decomposed to ammonium, which is directly taken up by
green plants. The process of nitrification, although it occurs, does not
reach its full potential because of the action of unknown factors or inhibiting substances within the aggrading ecosystem. Stream water draining the
aggrading ecosystem reflects these conditions and shows relatively small
losses of nitrate and ammonium from the ecosystem. On this basis, we
may consider the cycling of nitrogen within the aggrading system to be
tight. Specifically, only about 5% of the nitrogen added to the inorganic
pool (Figure 2-11) is lost in drainage water.

Summary
1. Our studies of the aggrading forested ecosystem show that the flow of
water, nutrients, and energy is highly regulated by biotic and abiotic
components of the ecosystem.
2. Stability of the aggrading ecosystem is characterized by:
a. modest but rather constant excess of primary production over
decomposition, which produces a predictable rate of accumulation of living and dead biomass;
b. close regulation of both the chemistry of drainage waters and
erodibility; and

c. an ability to exert considerable control over intrasystem aspects
of the hydrologic cycle, such as losses of water by evapotranspiration.

These processes, integrated within limits set by climate, geology,
topography, biota, and level of ecosystem development, determine the
size of nutrient reservoirs and produce nutrient cycles typified by
minimum outputs of dissolved substances and particulate matter and
by maximum resistance to erosion.

The Aggrading Ecosystem

79

3. The ability of the biotic fraction of the ecosystem to utilize external
energy sources to convert liquid water to vapor through transpiration
and interception results in the conservation of nutrients by its effect on
the volume of flow and on discharge rates.
a. The reduction of streamflow has the direct effect of holding
nutrients within the ecosystem because, in the aggrading eCOSystem, concentrations of dissolved substances in drainage water are
highly predictable and are only modestly affected by flow rate.
Hence,

the output

of dissolved

substances

is closely related

to

the amount of streamflow exiting from the ecosystem. Factors
regulating the concentrations of nutrients in drainage water are
only partially understood, but the following may be important:
quantity and quality of inputs, rates of weathering, micrometeorological conditions at the level of the forest floor which
regulate soil chemistry, and allelopathic control of soil microorganisms by living vegetation.
b. Particulate matter losses are a nonlinear direct function of
discharge rates. In the aggrading ecosystem, transpiration and
interception can damp discharge rates by lowering the quantity of
water stored within the system. Thus, a heavy rain when the
storage volume of the system is relatively empty will produce
relatively little flow and modest discharge rates so long as storage
capacity is unsatisfied. Transpiration tends to keep hydrologic
storage at a minimum during the growing season, and streamflow
during summer months is typically low even though precipitation
is evenly distributed throughout the year.
c. Particulate matter losses are a function not only of discharge rate
but also of erodibility or the capacity of the ecosystem to resist
erosion. Although geologic and other abiotic factors are important in determining the erodibility of an ecosystem, biota
and its inorganic debris exerts considerable control over this
phenomenon.
4. The effectiveness of all of these mechanisms in maintaining the
integrity of the aggrading ecosystem against external forces of

geological degradation is seen in the fact that the 55-yr-old forested
ecosystems at Hubbard Brook have average gross dissolved-substance
and particulate-matter losses of 13 and 2.5 t/km?-yr, respectively.
These losses constitute only a small fraction of the elements stored in
the various compartments of the ecosystem. This condition exists
despite the location of the Hubbard Brook ecosystem-watersheds on
relatively steep slopes subject to an average rainfall of 130 cm/yr.
5. As an example of nutrient cycling in the aggrading ecosystem, the
nitrogen cycle is discussed. Salient features are:
a. The system is accumulating nitrogen both from precipitation
input and nitrogen fixation.

80

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
b. The rate of accumulation changes with time and is not simply
related to biomass accumulation.
c. Nitrogen cycling is tight—only about 5% of the mineralized
nitrogen is lost as geologic output.
d. The soils under the northern hardwood ecosystem have a strong
potential to nitrify, but under the aggrading condition relatively
little nitrification occurs, and most nitrogen is cycled as
ammonium.

CHAPTER

3

Reorganization: Loss of
Biotic Regulation

The Reorganization Phase in the northern hardwood developmental
sequence is characterized by drastic changes in hydrologic, energetic,
ecological, and biogeochemical processes that in the Aggradation Phase
were fairly constant and predictable. Rates of net primary production,
transpiration, and nutrient uptake registered by plant growth during the
first growing season after cutting are far below levels in the uncut forest.
There are also rapid and marked increases in internal ecosystem
parameters

like decomposition,

nitrification, available

soil moisture,

and

soil temperature and export parameters like summertime streamflow,
nutrient concentration in stream water, and erosion. Cutting also imposes
immediate and significant shifts in stores of nutrients and organic matter
in the living (loss) and dead (gain) biomass compartments of the ecosystem.
The Reorganization Phase begins immediately after clear-cutting and
concludes when rates of internal ecosystem processes and ecosystem
exports such as water, particulate matter, and nutrients approach levels
characteristic of the aggrading forest ecosystem (Figure 1-10). Not all
processes return to former levels simultaneously, so the termination of
the Reorganization Phase is chosen as the point at which both living and
dead biomass are accumulating within the ecosystem. This occurs about
15 years after clear-cutting when the rate of decline of organic matter in the
forest floor (Figure 1-10) reaches a null point and the forest floor begins
to accumulate biomass.
During Reorganization, there is a loss of biotic regulation. Hydrologic
and biogeochemical parameters, which were highly regulated in the

82

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

aggrading ecosystem, are grossly altered and for a short time appear to
be ‘‘out of control.’ However, this apparent loss of control may be
considered part of a complex feedback mechanism that acts to return the
ecosystem to predisturbance levels of productivity and biogeochemistry.
The loss in biotic regulation results in a temporary increase in resource
availability, i.e., available water and nutrients, as well as increased radiant
energy at the forest floor level. The change in resource availability is
coupled with the activation of reproductive and growth strategies that
allow plant species to exploit the new conditions. Rapid growth results in
a return of biotic regulation over ecosystem processes to precutting levels.
We attempt to deal with these kaleidoscopic changes in the next three
chapters. In the remainder of this chapter, we shall consider ecosystem
responses in the absence of vegetative regrowth. This procedure allows us
to see more clearly the behavior of the heterotrophic components of the
ecosystem immediately after the destruction of vegetation that begins the
Reorganization Phase. Chapter 4 will be concerned with species strategies
and community dynamics during both the Reorganization and Aggradation Phases, and Chapter 5 will be concerned with the recovery of biotic
regulation that occurs as the various species’ strategies respond to new
conditions of resource availability created by clear-cutting.

A DEFORESTATION

EXPERIMENT

More than a decade ago we began an experiment within the Hubbard
Brook Experimental Forest to evaluate the responses and recovery of a
forested ecosystem to a disturbance such as clear-cutting. In cooperation
with the U.S. Forest Service, all of the trees on a small watershed of
15.6-ha (W2) were cut during the autumn of 1965 (Figure 1-11). No wood
products were harvested or removed, and no roads or skid trails were
built. All trees were

felled in place, and the slash was leveled to within

1.5-m of the ground (Figure 3-1). Thus disturbance of the forest floor was
minimized,

and

post-cutting

erosion

rates

could

be used

to assess

the

response to deforestation rather than the effect of mechanical damage to
the soil.
To separate the effects of nutrient uptake by regrowing vegetation from
the effects on nutrient release resulting from deforestation, herbicide
(Bromacil and 2,4,5-T) was applied during three growing seasons to keep
the watershed bare and suppress vegetative regrowth. This tended to
maximize the loss of nutrients from the ecosystem, which was useful since
we use nutrient output as an indirect measure of activities with the
system. At the inception of the experiment, we had no guide as to
expected results, and minor changes in nutrient output might have been
difficult to measure. Analogous to experiments in cell biology in
which
genetic blocks are placed on biochemical pathways and accumulated

products

are

studied

for clues

to cell biochemistry,

our

experiment

Reorganization: Loss of Biotic Regulation

83

Figure 3-1. Watershed 2 during the spring of 1966. All trees greater than 2cm
were cut and dropped in place during November and December of 1965.

(deforestation) placed blocks on two major ecosystem pathways, i.e.,
uptake of water and nutrients and litter production by green plants.
Hydrologic and chemical output was compared with an aggrading
ecosystem adjacent to W2 to discern differences in export behavior, to
look for clues to internal biogeochemical function, and to study recovery
mechanisms

(Likens

et al., 1970;

Pierce

et al., 1970;

Bormann

et al.,

1974). Prior to cutting, both watersheds supported second-growth
northern hardwood forests of the same age and history and had been
monitored for hydrology (9 yr), losses of dissolved substances (3 yr), and
particulate matter (1 yr).
After 3 years of deforestation, W2 was allowed to revegetate, beginning in
the summer

of 1969, and continues to do so. Revegetation studies by W.

A. Reiners of Dartmouth College and continuing biogeochemical studies
during this period allow a detailed study of the processes of ecosystem
recovery after experimentally prolonged deforestation.

Energy Flow
Deforestation and suppression of regrowth greatly modified the ecosystem’s capacity to regulate the flow of radiant energy. Major effects
resulted from the virtual elimination of a summertime reflective surface
(canopy) about 20-m above the soil and the elimination of transpiration.
Pierce et al. (1970) report that streamflow increased an average of
28.6-cm/yr after cutting and that the great bulk of increase was due to the

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

84

elimination of transpiration. Approximately 585 calories are required to
transpire 1-ml of water; hence, 1.67 x 10° Kceal/ha-yr of energy, previously
used to transpire water (Table 2-1), reached the vicinity of the forest floor in
the form of radiant energy. This, coupled with energy previously reflected,
resulted in a substantial heat load on the forest floor. These changes in
energy flow had the dual effect of increasing summertime soil temperature
while at the same time increasing soil moisture. The latter effect resulted
from the elimination of transpiration.

Hydrology
The elimination of transpiration had a pronounced effect on ecosystem
hydrology. Hydrologic output generally was influenced by variations in
precipitation, including particularly subnormal rainfall during the summer
of 1968; nevertheless, a strong seasonal pattern emerged (Hornbeck et al.,
1970). Summertime streamflow was increased dramatically by deforestation (Table 3-1), whereas winter runoff was affected very little except for
timing.
Monthly precipitation during the growing season averages 115mm
(Likens et al., 1977). Potential evapotranspiration by the forest usually
exceeds this amount, and soil water deficits progressively develop during
the growing season. Precipitation rarely is sufficient to offset these
deficits, and high streamflows are seldom recorded during the growing
season in the aggrading forest (Figure 3-2). In the deforested watershed,
soils remain relatively wet because of reduced evapotranspiration, and
little storage capacity is available. Differences in storage of available soil
water between forested and deforested watersheds can amount to
50-75-mm. Consequently, summer rain on the already wet soils of the
deforested watershed quickly becomes streamflow and, in some instances,
generates large streamflows. During one large midsummer storm (29-30
Table 3-1. Effect of Deforestation on Seasonal

Streamflow

Streamflow Increase (mm)*
Season
1 June—31

1966-67

1967-68

1968—69

832

248

164

4

15

72

336

263

236

October

1 November-31

May

Total?
“Increase

aS

compared

to

values

predicted

for the

vegetated

condition based on regression equations developed during the 8-yr
pretreatment period (from Pierce et al., 1970).
Totals for any year vary slightly from those given in the text which
were computed with separate regressions based on total flow for the

year.

Reorganization: Loss of Biotic Regulation

50

85

Precipitation

Streamflow
NM O

Of
Centimeters
Area
Water

10

Evapotranspiration

Loot

Nels,

I9S6l

(P-S)
1963

I965"

3IS67

Summer
Figure 3-2. Summer
hydrology,
1 June through 30 September.
(@—@)
Watershed 6, aggrading forest ecosystem; (A--—A) Watershed 2, deforested
during November and December of 1965 and maintained bare by herbicide
treatments.
Shaded
area
represents
period
when
Watershed
2 was
devegetated.

July 1969), precipitation of 137 mm generated an instantaneous peak flow
of 305-mm/day on the deforested watershed as compared to 100-mm/day
for the forested watershed (Hornbeck, 1973b).
During the dormant season, soil water storage

is about

the same

on

both watersheds; hence there is generally little difference in amount of
streamflow

or

in instantaneous

streamflow

peaks, except

as related

to

difference in snowmelt.
Predictions

of annual

streamflow

for W2,

had

it not been cut, were

made from streamflow regressions of W2 on an adjacent forested
watershed. These regressions were established prior to the cutting of W2.
Annual streamflow during the 3 years of devegetation increased by 40, 28,
and 26% (346, 273, and 240-mm, respectively) over the values predicted
if W2 had not been cut (Pierce et al., 1970). These increased yields of
water are very important to the biogeochemical relationships, since stream
water is the major vehicle for nutrient loss of dissolved substances and
particulate matter.
Hydrologic effects of devegetation are not limited to quantities of
water. Patterns of discharge and storm peaks also are affected. The

86

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

discharge of snowmelt during the spring was advanced by several days.
Peak discharges also were more common and more pronounced during
the summer in the deforested watershed owing to the wetness of the soil
and the rapidity with which precipitation became streamflow. These
responses are most important since storm peaks are exponentially
related to erosion and transport of particulate matter (Bormann et al.,
1974).
However, to emphasize the ever-mind-boggling complexity of natural
ecosystems, this pattern was reversed during the winter of 1971-72 when
the thaw period included rain. The stream channel draining the deforested watershed was deeply frozen owing to its greater exposure to
the sky, while streams draining forested watersheds were only lightly
frozen. During this particular winter thaw period, the stream in the
deforested watershed remained partially frozen, while the streams in the
forested watersheds completely thawed. The ensuing flood on thawed
streambeds produced massive outputs of particulate matter from forested
watersheds, but only modest output was recorded from the devegetated
watershed (Bormann et al., 1974).
Dissolved

Substance

Concentrations

in Stream

Water

The highly predictable relationship between streamflow and concentrations of dissolved substances that is characteristic of the aggrading forest
ecosystem (Johnson et al., 1969) was rapidly and markedly altered by
devegetation (Likens et al., 1970). With the onset of the first growing
season after cutting, stream-water concentrations of almost all ions rose
considerably above those in the forested ecosystem (Figure 3-3). This
occurred relatively quickly, i.e., within several weeks, and was coincident

with the flow of much greater quantities of water through the deforested
ecosystem. For the 3 water-years during which revegetation was suppressed by herbicides (1 June 1966 to 31 May 1969), average streamwater concentrations of ions from the devegetated system exceeded those
of the forested ecosystem by the following factors: NO; , x40; K*, x11;
Ca**, <5.2; AP*, x52: H*, *2.5> Me™, x3.92 Nat ei eC la.
dissolved silica, X1.4. Ammonium
concentrations increased,

absolute

amounts

Bicarbonate

the change

concentrations

between

decreased

the two

watersheds

4 and
but in

was small.

7-fold, and sulfate concentrations

declined by a factor of 1.5 owing to complicated interactions involving the
following factors: dilution from greater amounts of stream water leaving
the ecosystem, an inverse relationship to NO; concentrations, a potential
increase in anaerobic sulfate reduction (Likens et al., 1970), and a

possible reduction in atmospheric
owing to canopy removal.

input from absorption or impaction

For most ions, stream-water concentrations

reached a peak during the

second year after cutting and declined during the third year (Figure 3-3),
even though the ecosystem remained bare.

Reorganization: Loss of Biotic Regulation

6
4

87

Calcium

2
=

0

L@))

E&

3

op

ote

Smet

cee
2 Se
8 40

Nitrate

30
20

1963-64

[960566

1967568

Water -Year
Figure 3-3. Annual weighted average of dissolved ions in stream water: (@——®)
Watershed 6; (A---A) Watershed 2. Shaded area represents period when
Watershed 2 was devegetated.

Net Losses of Dissolved

Substances

The pattern of tight nutrient cycling and the highly predictable relationship between the annual output of dissolved substances and annual
streamflow (Figure 2-9) characteristic of the aggrading forest ecosystem
was markedly disrupted by deforestation. During the 3-yr period of
deforestation, total net losses of dissolved substances were approximately
eight times greater than those from the forested ecosystem (Table 3-2).
Increases in loss were as follows:

K*, X20; Ca**+, x8.6; Al**, <7.0; Mg’*,

x6.0; and Na*, X2.5. Based on a comparison of gross losses, N loss was
increased by a factor of approximately 160. We conclude from this that
the ecosystem responds to enforced devegetation by dumping substantial
quantities of nutrients into drainage water.

88

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Table 3-2. Annual Net Loss or Gain of
Dissolved Substances for an

Aggrading Forest (W6) and a
Deforested
Ecosystem (W2),
from June 1966 to June 19697

Net Loss or Gain (kg/ha)’
Element

W6

Ww2

Ca
Mg
K
Na
Al
NH,-N
NO;3-N
SO,-S
Cl
HCO;3-C
SiO>-S1
Total

—9.0
—2.6
1.5
—6.1
=3.0
+2.2
+2.3
Anal
+1.2
—0.4
1159)
—36.9

—77.7
—15.6
—30.3
=15.44
—21.1
+1.6
—114.1
= fs
Ale7/
=O:
—30.6
—307.8

2Stream-water output minus meteorological
input equals net change. W2 was deforested in
November-—December 1965.
> Weighted average.

Nutrient losses reached a peak in the second year even though
devegetation was continued for a third year. This phenomenon is more
closely governed by nutrient concentrations in the stream water or soil
solution than by amounts of water flowing through the soil. The range in
total annual streamflow from W2 during the 3 years was only 6% (Pierce
et al., 1970), while the range in concentration

of total dissolved substan-

ces was 28% (61.6-mg/liter in 1966-67, 78.7-mg/liter in 1967-68, and
63.5-mg/liter in 1968-69).
These data suggest a very important point. The decline in concentration
during the third year of the deforestation experiment (1968-69) apparently resulted from the progressive exhaustion of the supply of easily
decomposable substrate present in the ecosystem at the beginning of
devegetation. In other words, the amount and type of decomposable
substances apparently limited nutrient outputs after only 2 years.

Factors Governing Dissolved Substances
Devegetation resulted in a rapid rise in the concentration of dissolved
substances in the soil-solution-stream-water continuum and the export of
chemicals from the ecosystem. It is apparent that the elimination of

Reorganization: Loss of Biotic Regulation

89

nutrient uptake by plants at the outset of the devegetation experiment
played a major role in changing soil and stream-water chemistry.
Available nutrients generated by decomposition and mineralization
apparently accumulated in the soil and were flushed from the ecosystem.
Recently, Vitousek (1977) suggested that the increased loss of nitrate that
occurred in our devegetation experiment and that follows clear-cutting
could be wholly explained by the elimination of uptake by plants. We
think this is a much too simple explanation. Devegetation not only
eliminates nutrient uptake but results in a whole array of changes which
affect soil chemistry and stream-water losses from the ecosystem.
We now consider the role that these other factors play in altering the
basic relationships which control the output of dissolved substances after
devegetation.
Origin of Nutrients Flushed from the Ecosystem. Likens et al. (1970)
suggested that changes in weathering rates had a minimal impact on the
biogeochemical behavior of the ecosystem after cutting. Prior to cutting,
the Ca/Na ratio in the stream water of W2 was 1.6/1.0. For the 2-yr
period after cutting, the ratio climbed to 4.8/1.0. More significantly,

Si

es

Figure 3-4. A large rock on Watershed 2 shown during the second summer of
devegetation. The whitish area represents weathered rock exposed as the forest
floor declined in depth owing to both decomposition and compaction. During the
3-yr devegetation period the forest floor lost about 23% by weight and about
3-cm in depth (Dominski, 1971). Note pencil in center of photo for scale.

90

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

the

Ca/Na

ratio

for

‘‘excess’”?

ions,

or

the

amount

added

above

the

undisturbed condition, was 7.4/1.0. Thus, the net effect of devegetation
was to produce soluble calcium differentially within the ecosystem, mostly
from the forest floor (Figure 3-4). The forest floor is rich in calcium
relative to sodium (53/1; Gosz et al., 1976), in contrast to average bedrock

for Hubbard Brook (0.9/1.0 Ca/Na; Johnson et al., 1968), which suggests
that most of the ‘‘excess”’ ions produced are derived from decomposition
of organic materials rather than accelerated weathering. In fact, the
presence of high concentrations of ions in the soil solution, which are
also end-products of weathering, probably reduces weathering of some
minerals.
Decomposition and Mineralization. In the absence of nutrient uptake by
green plants, a sizable proportion of the end products of decomposition
and mineralization were flushed out of the ecosystem and thus provided
an indirect measure of these processes. For example, a net amount of
337-kg/ha of dissolved inorganic nitrogen was flushed out of W2 during
the 3-yr period, which suggests that at least that much nitrogen was
released by decomposition and mineralization.
Dominski (1971) sampled the soil in the devegetated watershed at

yearly intervals and found that organic matter losses after 3 years were
10,800 kg/ha from the forest floor (~23% of the total; Table 2-3; Figure
3-4) and 18,900 kg/ha from the soil body as a whole. Not only were
nutrients mineralized from these organic compounds, but nutrients held
on organic exchange surfaces were released when the surface was
decomposed. At the end of 3 years, cation-exchange capacity in the 0 to
15-cm layer had decreased from 172 to 137 kEq/ha, a reduction of about
20%. For the soil body as a whole, Dominski estimated a 3-yr net loss of
nitrogen of 472-kg/ha. All things considered, this figure compares remarkably well with the 337-kg/ha of dissolved inorganic nitrogen measured in

stream-water export.
We propose that the deforestation treatment at first markedly increased
the rate of decomposition over that expected in an uncut forest. Dominski
(1971) reported soil temperature differences as great as 8.5 and 3.0°C in
the 0 to 2.5-cm and 10 to 15-cm soil layers, respectively, between the
devegetated and forested ecosystems. Coupled with the higher temperatures during the growing season is a greater abundance of soil moisture
resulting from the elimination of transpiration, as mentioned previously.
These factors, together with the richer concentrations of dissolved
nutrients in the soil solution, suggest the potential for marked elevation in
the rate of decomposition.
However, comparative changes in soil decomposition rates between
devegetated and forested ecosystems are complicated to measure. The
decomposition substrate is composed of a vast variety of organic
materials, ranging from easily decomposable substances to substances
highly resistant to decomposition. At the beginning of the first growing

Reorganization: Loss of Biotic Regulation

91

season after cutting, decomposition substrates in the cut and forested
ecosystems were quite similar. Gradually, however, marked differences developed as the decomposition substrate was continually renewed by litterfall in the forested ecosystem, while the substrate in the devegetated system
progressively became enriched in substances more resistant to decomposition. Hence, a comparison of decomposition rates, as measured by carbon
loss, had less meaning during subsequent years as the substrate in the
devegetated system became relatively more resistant to decomposition. The
decomposition rate derived from Dominski’s loss of organic matter during
the first year for the soil body as a whole in the devegetated watershed
(12,000-kg/ha) is approximately double that estimated for the aggrading
forest (6500-kg/ha, corrected for growth of the forest floor; Gosz et al., 1976).
Organic matter losses for the last 2 years (Dominski, 1971) are well below the
estimate for decomposition in the undisturbed forest (Gosz et al., 1976).
However, if we use nitrogen losses as an indirect measure of decomposition,
a different picture emerges. Using either annual stream-water losses of
inorganic nitrogen or Dominski’s (1971) estimates of annual losses of
nitrogen from the soil profile in W2, maximum losses occur in the second
year. For example, stream-water losses during the first year after cutting
are about 1.4 times greater than the 70-kg of nitrogen estimated to be
mineralized annually in the aggrading forest (Figure 2-11; Bormann et al.,
1977); second-year losses are 2.0 times greater; and third-year losses are 1.4
times greater.
These data indicate that attention must be given both to decomposition, as measured by loss of carbon from the ecosystem, and to the
relationship of decomposition to the loss of other nutrients such as
nitrogen and phosphorus. Gosz et al. (1973) has pointed out that in
the cycle of decomposition at Hubbard Brook there are critical carbon/element and element/phosphorus ratios for many nutrients. These
ratios reflect nutrient demand by decomposers, and only after ratios are
reduced below the critical levels can all of the end products of
mineralization appear in drainage water. Data on losses of nutrients in
stream water (Likens et al., 1970) and from the soil (Dominski, 1971)
show that losses reached a peak during the second year of devegetation
and declined thereafter. It seems probable that supplies of easily
decomposable nutrients became limiting to this process after the second

year.
Effects of Devegetation on Nitrification. Destruction of vegetation rapidly
accelerates the process of nitrification. Within a few weeks of the onset of
the first growing season after cutting, nitrate concentrations in stream
water draining the deforested ecosystem rose far above any previously
reported for an aggrading forest (Likens et al., 1970). If we use 13-kg of
N/ha as the estimate of the total annual nitrification within the aggrading
forest (Dominski, 1971; Melillo, 1977) and the annual output of NO; in
stream water as the estimate of nitification in the deforested system, we

92

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

can estimate that the annual rate of nitrification was increased by about 7,
11, and 9 times during the 3 years after deforestation.
The process of nitrification not only produces the highly soluble anion
NO; but also produces two hydrogen ions for each nitrate anion. The
hydrogen ions can exchange for other cations held on the exchange
surfaces and bring about the solubilization of cations previously bound to
those exchange surfaces. Likens et al. (1970) reported that the changes
in stream-water chemistry after devegetation could no longer be fully
explained by the dilution—concentration model that worked so well in the
aggrading forest (Johnson et al., 1969). Rather, concentrations of Mg”*,
Ca2*, Al’*, Kt, and Na* were all highly positively correlated with the
concentration

of NO;

(Likens et al., 1969,

1970). These

data show the

quantitative importance of nitrification as a major controlling factor in
determining the quantity and quality of dissolved substances flushed from
the deforested watershed.

Effect of Transferring Living to Dead Biomass. A final consideration is the
short-term effect of clear-cutting, without product removal, on the living
to dead biomass ratio and on the export of nutrients. Large amounts of
nutrients are stored in the living biomass within the ecosystem. Based on
our analysis of our 55-yr-old aggrading forest, we estimate that, prior to
cutting, living biomass on W2 contained the following quantities of
nutrients (in kilograms per hectare): N, 532; Ca, 484; Mg, 49; P, 87;
K, 218; S, 59 (Likens et al., 1977, p. 101). One might think that these
nutrients were the major source of nutrients flushed from the ecosystem
during the devegetation period. Although there is no doubt that these
nutrients would play an important role in the subsequent recovery of the
deforested ecosystem, they apparently played only a minor role in the
behavior of dissolved substances during the 3-yr period.
Two lines of evidence support this conclusion: (1) Nutrient losses from
the ecosystem are adequately explained by diminishment of soil organic
matter and exchangeable nutrients (Dominski, 1971), and (2) nutrient
relationships during devegetation would most likely be affected by
addition of easily decomposable substrates resulting from cutting. Such
additions were small when compared to the nutrient reservoir in the soil
at the time of cutting. The easily decomposable tissues are leaves and fine
twigs and roots; branches, stems, and larger roots decay over longer
periods of time (Spaulding and Hansbrough, 1944). The forest on W2 was
cut after normal leaf fall, hence leaves were already part of the forest
floor. Whittaker et al. (1978) estimate 3.5, 0.3, and 1.0-kg/ha of N, P, and
K in the standing crop of current twigs. We have no direct estimate for
small roots, but if we

assume a value similar to that of twigs the total

amount is not great. Assuming all nutrients in this mass were quickly
mineralized during the first warm season after cutting, the effect on
nutrient behavior would be minor.
Wood and bark of branches, stems, and roots decay much more slowly.
Moreover, woody tissues have a relatively low nutrient content (Likens

Reorganization:

Loss of Biotic Regulation

93

and Bormann, 1970). Nutrients released from these tissues would
significant during the later part of the recovery period.

be

Integration of Processes. A hypothetical set of interactions affecting
dissolved substance concentrations during the devegetation period is
summarized in Figure 3-5. Although large quantities of living plant
biomass were shifted to dead biomass by cutting, only a relatively small
quantity was decomposed in the first 2 or 3 years after deforestation.
Activities of decomposers,

in terms of carbon release, were accelerated in

comparison with the forested system owing to more favorable conditions
of soil temperature and moisture and the greater concentration of
nutrients in the soil solution. As a result of the activities of decomposers,
quantities of anions and cations were released into the soil solution.
These ions come both from atoms incorporated in molecules making up
the biomass (mostly forest floor) and from exchangeable ions released by
Dead

Organic

Lic

ie

Soil
Exchangeable
Cations

b
Decomposer

|

Tissue

Cations

Blonis3

Organic
Matter

Decomposers

Uptake

Dissolved

-—————_>

Mineral

<«—

In <¢—— Anions, Cations

Soil Solution

2
i
Weathering
Release

Secondary

Inorganic

Substances

ie

Critical Element
Shenk

?

Formation

Dissolved

a

Substance

In Stream-water

Figure 3-5. Hypothetical set of interactions affecting concentrations of inorganic
dissolved substances in the soil solution and in stream water draining Watershed
2 during the 3-yr devegetation period. (@) Block placed on an ecosystem
pathway by the experimental design (a) transfer increased over that expected in
vegetated system for the entire 3-yr period; (6) movement of carbon to decomposers (at first greater than a vegetated system and then less). The critical
element shunt operates as follows: at first, when C/N or element/P ratios of
decaying organic matter are high, dissolved nutrients are taken up by microorganisms, as these ratios decrease nutrient export increases in relation to the
drop in nutrient demand by microorganisms. We propose that action of the shunt
may account for highest nutrient concentrations in drainage water during the
second year of devegetation.

94

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

decomposition of exchange surfaces. Ammonium cations, a large portion
of which would normally be taken up by green plants, were oxidized by
nitrifying microorganisms to nitrate, with the production of two hydrogen
ions. Some of these hydrogen ions are exchanged for basic cations on
exchange sites, resulting in the release of these basic cations to the soil
solution. Other hydrogen ions remained in the soil solution and
subsequently lowered the pH of stream water from 5.1 to 4.3 in 1967-68
(Likens et al., 1970).
The increase in nitrification is of particular interest because the
response time was rapid (i.e., within a few weeks of the onset of the
growing season as judged by stream-water concentrations, Likens et al.,
1970) and because its initial response was not dependent on an increased
rate of decomposition. As previously mentioned, ammonium normally
used by green plants was nitrified in the deforested ecosystem. Nitrification may have enhanced decomposition rates by producing H* ions, which
in turn exchanged for cations on exchange sites, enriching the nutrient
content of the soil solution and making potentially limiting cations
available to fungi and bacteria. If this were so, nitrification and
decomposition could positively reinforce each other over the short term.
This interaction would ultimately be limited by other components within
the system, such as quantities of exchangeable cations and the amount
and quality of decomposable substrate.
The quantity and quality of decomposable substrate exercises important
regulatory control over the biogeochemical behavior of the ecosystem.
The most easily decomposable substances in fresh litter (such as sugars,
starches, simple proteins, and crude proteins) are acted upon most rapidly
and vigorously. As these substances are diminished, more resistant
substances such as cellulose, lignins, fats, waxes, polysaccharides, and
polyuronides

from

dead

microbial

tissue,

or,

in general,

humic

com-

pounds, become the principle substrate for decomposers, and rates of
carbon release diminish (Brady, 1974). Most decomposition occurs in the
forest floor, but substantial.losses may occur at lower depths (Dominski,

1971).

Some dissolved substances are carried directly out of the ecosystem,
but probably some are immediately taken up by the decomposers and do
not appear in stream water draining the ecosystem. However, it seems
likely that, as the microbial demand decreases owing to a lowering of C/N
ratios and/or element/phosphorus ratios, dissolved nutrients that previously moved to decomposing organisms would be released in stream
water. We call this the “critical element ratio shunt.”’ During the first part
of the devegetation period the shunt moves elements toward decomposers, but during the later part of the period when critical element ratios are
more closely approached the shunt is opened, and additional dissolved
substances are lost in stream water draining the ecosystem. This could

explain higher dissolved
second year.

substance

losses in stream

water during the

Reorganization: Loss of Biotic Regulation

Erosion

95

of Particulate-Matter

Clear-cutting and enforced devegetation had a pronounced but delayed
effect on the normally low rate of particulate matter export characteristic of aggrading forest ecosystems (Bormann et al., 1974). Output of
particulate matter from the deforested ecosystem (W2) prior to 10
October 1967, which included two growing seasons after cutting, was
about three times that of the aggrading ecosystem. During the period 10
October 1967 to 13 August 1969, which included the last growing season
of the devegetated period plus the first 2 months of the regrowth period,
output from W2 was 16 times greater than W6, our forested reference
watershed (Figure 3-6).
These data illustrate a very important point: despite removal of all
living vegetation and suppression of regrowth for three growing seasons,
the capacity of the ecosystem to resist the force of erosion remained
comparatively high for more than 22 months. Thereafter, particulate
matter losses increased rapidly until new vegetation was firmly reestablished.
300

nN (e) oO

° °

FOREST

CUT

BIOTIC REGULATION
APPRECIABLY
WEAKENED
|
C=
aa

if

MATTER
PARTICULATE
TOTAL
period
collection
during
exported
kg/ha
-100
COLLECTION

500
PERIOD, days

before

1000
or after

1500
Jan.! ,1966

the
Figure 3-6. Sediments, organic and inorganic, collected periodically from
and
(O--©)
2
hed
Waters
em,
ponding basins of the devegetated ecosyst
the period 1
from a forested ecosystem, Watershed 6 (@—@®). Collections cover
1974).
al.,
et
n
Borman
(from
1969
August
13
to
June 1965

96

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Two factors contribute to this pattern of particulate-matter losses.
These are changes in hydrology and erodibility resulting from clearcutting and enforced devegetation. This is best understood by considering
the relationship of particulate-matter concentration to flow rate, as shown

in the composite curve for the forested ecosystem (Figure 2-7).
The form of the curve is a function of (1) the increasing capacity of
moving water to do the work of erosion and transportation as velocity
increases and (2) the erodibility of the ecosystem. Velocity (V), often
positively correlated with discharge, is highly correlated with sediment
discharge (Gilbert, 1914; Leopold et al., 1964). As an approximation,
Kittredge (1948) states that the erosive power of water is proportional to
V2.
Deforestation can thus alter the pattern of particulate-matter export in
two ways: (1) by changing hydrologic characteristics of the ecosystem
through increases in the velocity of storm peak streamflow and in the
amount of streamflow at higher velocities and (2) through increases in
erodibility of the ecosystem (Table 3-3).
Deforestation markedly increased erodibility, although the full impact
occurred only after a considerable lag period. This effect was easily seen,
despite the fact that in the forested ecosystem erodibility is not a
constant: it changes seasonally and during individual storms—and the
ecosystem may be more erodible on the rising limb of the hydrograph
than on the falling limb (Leopold et al., 1964; Striffler, 1964; Bormannetal.,

1969, 1974; Fisher, 1970).
During the first portion of the devegetation period, January 1966 to
October 1967, changes in hydrology accounted for an increase in
Table 3-3. Estimates of Increased Output of Particulate Matter due to
Changes in Hydrology and Erodibility*
1 June

1965

to

9 October

9 October

1967

to

1967

13 August

expected if
forest had not been cut
Increase due to

551

662

changes in hydrology

249

1235°

changes in erodibility‘

691

6937

Total amount measured
behind weir

149]

8834

1969

Amount

Increase due to

* Based on particulate matter collected from the ponding basin behind the

weir of W2, all data in kilograms per hectare (from Bormann et al., 1974).
~lnere was an exceptionally large storm peak during this period.
Slightly different than previously reported values (Bormann et al., 1969)

owing to correction of a transcription error.

Reorganization: Loss of Biotic Regulation

97

particulate-matter output by a factor of 0.5 over that expected if W2 had
remained forested, while changes in erodibility accounted for an increase
by a factor of 1.3. Between October 1967 and August 1969, which
includes part of the first year of revegetation, hydrologic changes
accounted for an increase of about 1.9 times, while changes in erodibility
contributed to an increase 10.4 times the amount expected if cutting had not
occurred (Figure 3-7).
These data indicate that mechanisms governing the erodibility of the
aggrading northern hardwood forest ecosystem continue to function after
deforestation at or near the level of the forested ecosystem for about 2 years,
including two growing seasons. The ability of these erosion-controlling
mechanisms to operate for an extended period when primary productivity
and nutrient uptake have been disrupted is an important component of
the stability of the northern hardwood forest ecosystem.
The delayed response of the ecosystem to erosion confirms the findings
of foresters (Hoover, 1944; Reinhart et al., 1963; Lull and Reinhart, 1967,
1972) that the removal of forest cover in well-developed eastern forests
has little effect on sediment yield as long as the forest floor is intact.

600

se 500

~—

Deforested

>

=

a

Ecosystem

~~,

/

/

400

at}
°

5 300
fob)

=
o 200
fe

/
aS

/

.
Aggrading
ia Ecosystem

7

100

1

O.|

1.O

10.0

Flow, ft°/sec (28.3 liters/sec)

Figure 3-7. The increase in erodibility of Watershed 2 in relation to Watershed 6
at the treatment period 9 October 1967 to 13 August 1969 (after Bormann et al.,
1974).

98

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Apparently, erodibility was controlled to a large extent by residual
dead organic matter in the ecosystem at the beginning of the deforestation period. About 2 years were required before this control was weakened
substantially by decomposition and mechanical factors. Loss of less than a
fourth of the organic matter in the forest floor is associated with a major
increase in ecosystem erodibility. What is not known, however, is the
amount and rate of decomposition of the mass of dead roots and rootlets
in the stream banks lining the stream channel and in the organic-debris
dams within the channel. It seems likely that decomposition of these
materials would have contributed substantially to the increased quantities
of particulate matter flushed from the ecosystem.

Overall Effects of Enforced
on Ecosystem Dynamics

Devegetation

Destruction of vegetation and suppression of regrowth essentially
eliminated functions of green plants, which are a normal part of the
forested ecosystem. Active and passive processes such as uptake of water
and nutrients, transpiration, canopy absorption and reflection of radiant
energy, primary production, competition with nitrifying microorganisms
for NH,*,

allelopathic

effects on nitrification, and annual

litter transfer

were essentially eliminated for 3 years by the enforced devegetation.
The net result of interactions triggered by deforestation and maintained
by herbicide application is pictured in Figure 3-8. The interactions are
complicated and involve major shifts from the highly predictable
conditions found in the undisturbed aggrading forest. The following
effects are of particular interest.
1. Storm peaks were accentuated, and annual streamflow was increased
by about 30%, mostly during the growing season. The control that
aggrading forests have over summer hydrology was essentially lost.
This occurred because the uptake of water and transpiration by
green plants was eliminated and interception was reduced (Pierce et
al., 1970).
2. Concentrations of most dissolved nutrients in stream water increased
severalfold. The highly predictable relationship between nutrient
concentrations and flow rate of streams draining aggrading ecosystems
are severely disrupted. Primary factors involved in this increase were
soil moisture and soil temperature conditions favorable to an increase
in the rate of decomposition and an array of factors favorable to a rapid
increase in the rate of nitrification. It seems likely that initially the
processes of decomposition and nitrification acted in a positivefeedback cycle, with each factor reinforcing the other. Concentrations
of dissolved substances in stream water rose rapidly during the first
growing season after cutting, but the highest concentrations were
recorded during the second growing season.
3. The export of dissolved substances in stream water increased rapidly

Reorganization: Loss of Biotic Regulation

Impact

99

of Deforestation

I966
- 1968
Hydrologic

Biogeochemical

Transpiration
Reduced

100

Forest

Vegetation

Cut,

Turnover

New Growth
Repressed with Herbicide

Percent

of Organic

Matter Accelerated,
Nitrification
Increased,
Perhaps

sunlight

| penetration

from

by Release
Inhibition

by Forest

Vegetation

Environmental

Evapotranspiration

Microclimate Warmer,
Soil Moister in
Summer, Stream

Reduced

Temperatures

70

Percent

| to 5°C

Hydrogen

ions

Exchangeable
cations

Increased

in Summer
anions

Eutrophication

Stream

Velocity

up,

Algal

Viscosity

Down

Blooms

Drainage

in

Stream

Concentration

in Summer
Erosion

and

Biotic

Regulation

o

Transport
chsho

of Watershed

up

up

Matter

up

cations

Times

Water

Reduced
Net

Output .of Particulate

ra times, Mostly

4.1

in Stream

SJ]

Stream Flow

of

Dissolved
Inorganic Substances

~4

Times

in Summer

Output

of

Dissolved

Inorganic

Substances

up

146

Times, pH of Stream
Water

To Downstream

Down

from 51 to 4.3

Ecosystems

Figure 3-8. The impact of deforestation
on the hydrology,
microclimate,
biogeochemistry, and the erosion and transport of particulate matter during the
first 2 water-years after cutting (Likens and Bormann, 1972a).

after deforestation, and during the 3-yr period the total net losses
were about eight times those of a forested ecosystem. The highly
developed capacity of the undisturbed forest to hold nutrients within
the ecosystem and to recycle them was severely diminished. This
response resulted from the interaction between Items 1 and 2 above.
4. The ‘“‘excess”’ nutrients exported from the devegetated ecosystem
were principally withdrawn from those incorporated in soil organic
matter and held on exchange surfaces. The upper layer of the soil,
i.e.,

the

forest

floor,

was

the

source

of most

of the

dissolved

substances. This is in contrast to the aggrading forest, where the
forest floor accumulates biomass and nutrients.
5. Toward the end of the devegetation period, erodibility of the
ecosystem as measured by losses of particulate matter increased
about 10 times over that of the aggrading ecosystem. The effectiveness of running water to remove both organic and inorganic
particulate matter was thereby increased. The weakening of biotic
regulation of erosion was related to the suppression of growth and

100

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

to organic decomposition processes proceeding in the absence of
annual litter input. However, biotic regulation was relatively unimpaired during the first two growing seasons after cutting; thereafter,
it increased exponentially.

RELATIONSHIP OF THE DEFORESTATION
EXPERIMENT TO COMMERCIAL CLEAR-CUTTING
enforcedand
the clear-cutting
from
resulting
conclusions
Are
revegetation
where
clear-cuts
to
devegetation experiment applicable
occurs quickly? We think they are, and it is probable that the same
pattern of changes shown in Figures 3-5 and 3-8 occurs in commercially
clear-cut northern hardwood forests, even though regrowth obscures
some of the responses seen in the devegetated ecosystem. We base this
conclusion on several lines of reasoning.
Commercial clear-cutting initially disrupts, to an extent equivalent to
that seen in W2, active and passive processes of green plants. These
processes are fundamental to the web of interactions shown in Figures 3-5
and 3-8. Since time is required for primary production to return to
previous levels, we expect the first year after commercial cutting to be
most similar to that seen in W2; i.e., green plant production will be
relatively low and decomposition will be high. Thereafter, we would
expect the response of the two systems to diverge as production increases
in one while the other remains devegetated.
We would expect the hydrologic response of the commercially clear-cut
ecosystem to be very similar to that of the devegetated system during the
first year, since increased streamflow in humid forest ecosystems is closely
related to the areal extent of cutting (Hibbert, 1967).
We examined the stream-water chemistry of six commercially clear-cut
northern hardwood forests scattered throughout New Hampshire but
occurring under conditions similar to those at Hubbard Brook. We found
trends in stream-water chemistry similar to those found in W2 for a 2-yr
period after cutting (Pierce et al., 1972). These findings (Table 5-2)
showed (1) a general increase in concentrations of dissolved substances
when compared to a nearby stream draining a forested watershed, (2) a
marked increase in nitrate output, and (3) a tendency for maximum
concentrations in stream water to occur during either the first or second
year after cutting.
Export of dissolved substances from W2 exceeds that of the commercially clear-cut ecosystems. On the other hand, losses due to removal of
wood products did not occur in W2 but were substantial in commercially-cut
stands. In fact, total losses of calcium and nitrogen from the commercial
clear-cut at Gale River equaled or exceeded those from W2 (Table 3-4). This
is of importance over the long term, when nutrients locked in slash once
again become available. When that happens, W2 could have a significant
advantage over a commercially clear-cut stand.

Reorganization:

Table 3-4.

Loss of Biotic Regulation

101

Comparative Losses of Dissolved Calcium and Nitrogen in Stream
Water during the First 2 Years after Clear-Cutting and Losses Incurred
by the Removal of Wood Products?
Hubbard Brook
Experimental Clear-Cut?

First year
Second year
Removed in wood products
Total removed

Gale River
Commercial Clear-Cut

Calcium

Nitrogen

Calcium

Nitrogen

VS)
90
0
165

96
140
0
236

41°
48°
221
310

38°
Sif
144
Uy

#Values are in kilograms per hectare.

>From Likens et al., 1970.
“From Pierce et al., 1972.

Studies of the forest floor after commercial clear-cutting show a
progressive net decrease in both weight and depth for about 10 to 20 years
after cutting, despite growth (Morey, 1942; Trimble and Lull, 1956; Hart,

1961; Covington, 1976). This parallels the initial behavior of W2 and
indicates a period of time after cutting when decomposition in the forest
floor exceeds litter input in both ecosystems.
We would expect the erosion of particulate matter from any undisturbed surfaces in the commercially cut ecosystem to parallel that in W2
during the first year. Thereafter, losses of particulate matter would be
lower owing to the restoration of biotic regulation of erodibility.
However, overall, erosion of the commercially cut ecosystem would tend
to rise above that of W2 because of mechanical disruption of surfaces by
road building and harvesting techniques.
Thus, the clear-cutting and enforced-devegetation experiment provides
a good qualitative model (Figures 3-5 and 3-8) of the interactions
triggered by destruction of the dominant vegetation of the northern
hardwood ecosystem. The quantitative aspects of the models, when
applied to a commercial clear-cut, would vary in relation to the rapidity
with which active and passive plant processes were restored after cutting.
Although the model emphasizes loss of biotic regulation typical of the
agerading ecosystem after destruction of vegetation, the biogeochemical
responses shown in Figures 3-5 and 3-8 are part of another kind of biotic
regulation that leads to the rapid recovery of the disturbed ecosystem.
This type of regulation will be dealt with in Chapter 5.

Summary
1. An experiment was designed to examine the effects of vegetation
destruction on a variety of biotic and abiotic processes within the
ecosystem.

102

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

2. Destruction of the vegetation and prevention of regrowth had the
following results:
a. Solar energy flow was markedly changed because of removal of
the reflective surface of the canopy and the elimination of the use
of energy in transpiration. Changes in energy flow had the dual
effect of increasing summertime soil temperatures while increasing soil moisture. Lack of transpirational drawdown caused
increased moisture in the soil.
b. Vegetative control over summertime hydrology was markedly
diminished. This resulted in increased export of stream water and
increased storm-peak flow rates.
c. The highly predictable relationships between nutrient concentrations in stream water and flow rate, typical of the aggrading
ecosystem, are rapidly lost after vegetative destruction. This
results in increased
nutrient concentrations and markedly
increased losses of nutrients from the ecosystem.
d. Increases in the rates of decomposition and nitrification play an
important role in the nutrient relationships of the disturbed
ecosystem.
e. Most nutrients lost from the ecosystem originate in the forest
floor and are released by decomposition-nitrification interactions.
For a time these processes may have a_positive-feedback
relationship.
f. Maximum concentrations and losses of nutrients occurred in the
second year after devegetation. This may result because high C/N
or element/P ratios in dead organic matter lead to increased
utilization of dissolved nutrients by microorganisms during the
first year. As ratios are lowered, dissolved nutrient concentrations
in stream water increase.
g. The process of nitrification, which is partially inhibited in the
aggrading ecosystem, is accelerated by about an order of
magnitude in the devegetated system.
h. Clear-cutting and enforced devegetation have the pronounced but
delayed effect of increasing the very low rate of particulate matter
export characteristic of aggrading forests. Increases in export are
due primarily to increases in erodibility rather than increases in
storm peaks resulting from deforestation.
3. Two models are presented showing the interactions that affect
dissolved substance concentrations in the soil of the devegetated
ecosystem and the impact of deforestation on the hydrology, microenvironment, biogeochemistry, erosion, and transport of particulate
matter in the ecosystem.
4. Evidence is presented showing that models developed for the
ecosystem that was clear-cut and held bare are applicable to
commercially clear-cut forests.
5. It is proposed that biogeochemical changes resulting from destruction
of the canopy contribute to the rapid recovery of the ecosystem.

CHAPTER

4

Development of Vegetation
After Clear-Cutting:
Species Strategies and
Plant Community Dynamics

The focus of this chapter is the regrowth of vegetation during the
Reorganization and Aggradation Phases. Our emphasis will be on plant
community dynamics and species strategies, but it must not be forgotten that
ecosystem development involves an array of organisms—plants, animals,
and microorganisms. Parasites, predators, symbionts, and decomposers may
speed or direct changes in plant populations, or they themselves may decline
or disappear as a result of changes in plant-community dynamics.
Integrating our knowledge of these relationships represents a major
challenge for future ecosystem studies.

WHAT

IS SECONDARY

SUCCESSION?

Secondary succession has often been thought of as a fairly orderly
process of development that follows the abandonment of cultivated fields.
Relays of higher plants, many of which were not present in the cultivated
field, follow each other; a sequence of revegetation stages occurs, and,
ultimately, ‘“‘climax’”’ vegetation is established (Dansereau, 1957). This
pattern is not true for secondary succession after clear-cutting of northern
hardwoods (when the procedure is one of careful cutting, product
removal, little soil damage, and immediate revegetation). Rather, the
pattern after clear-cutting more closely approaches that proposed by
Egler (1954) for abandoned pastures, where the initial floristic composition
at the time of abandonment accounts for 95% of later development.
Although the relative importance of individual species will change as their
life strategies unfold and as shifting stages of dominance occur in the

104

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

ecosystem (Harper and Ogden, 1970), the great bulk of the species that
will participate in the changes that follow clear-cutting are present, in
active

or

dormant

form,

in the

intact

forest.

These

individuals

are

released by cutting and begin to grow more rapidly while still other species
enter the site within a few years after cutting. Not only are all of these species
present shortly after cutting but so too are individuals that will compose the
majority of dominant trees for more than a century if there is no serious
exogenous disturbance.
The divergence in patterns of secondary succession between formerly
cultivated fields and cutover forest is not unexpected, given the nature of
the perturbing forces. When a forest is converted to arable land, not only
is the original vegetation diminished, but the site is subjected to the
continuing perturbations of plowing, cultivation, pesticides, and fertilizers. The net effect is a progressive reduction in the pool of species present
in the original

ecosystem.

Thus,

in the southeastern

United

States, for

example, one does not find significant numbers of oaks, hickories, pines,
or dozens of other forest species, in cultivated fields. These species
gradually reenter the site after cultivation ceases and a variety of other
conditions are met, such as good seed years and appropriate environments for seed dissemination and establishment; they may then reenter
the ecosystem in a fairly predictable sequence (Oosting, 1956).
Clear-cutting of northern hardwoods, on the other hand, represents a
single severe perturbation followed by growth of species already present
in the ecosystem or that enter it shortly after cutting. Ecosystem
development is marked by a sequence of dominant trees similar to that
observed in some old-field developmental sequences. However, for a
century or more, dominants are largely drawn from the pool of
individuals already established at the time of cutting. These dominants fit
into the developmental continuum according to their specific strategies.
Eventually, new individuals (but not necessarily new species) enter the
ecosystem and make their way into the dominant canopy, but this mode
of canopy replacement becomes important only after a considerable
length of time.

REPRODUCTIVE AND GROWTH STRATEGIES
RESPONSIVE TO PERTURBATIONS THAT
OPEN THE FOREST CANOPY
At the beginning of our hypothetical developmental sequence (the limits
of which have been discussed in Chapter 1), the northern hardwood forest
contains a wide array of higher plant species. At various points along the
developmental continuum, activities of some species are accelerated,
while others are decelerated, suppressed, or eliminated in relation to the
degree

to which

continuum

their

niche

specifications

are

met.

Succession,

or the

of change in vegetation composition and dominance, is thus

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

105

the result of constantly changing conditions of selection acting on a large
and varied pool of species strategies.
The selection-strategy interaction involves not only changing selection
forces but many life strategies, each with a wide range of niche
dimensions. To make some sense of this complexity, we first approach
this interaction from a restricted point of view by looking at the capacity
of species to fill space in the dominant (upper) layer of the ecosystem
when openings in that layer are created by some kind of nonpersistent
disturbance ranging from a single treefall to clear-cutting. We set forth a
variety of reproductive and growth strategies by which species of the
northern hardwood forest may act to fill holes created in the canopy by
various disturbances (Table 4-1).
These strategies are of two general kinds: outgrowth, in which existing
individuals (Trimble and Seegrist, 1973) or clones expand laterally to fill
in newly created space, and upgrowth, in which individuals or clones grow
upward to form a new upper or locally dominant canopy.
Upgrowth may be from individuals established in the intact forest prior
to disturbance (advance regeneration). This would include stump and root

Table 4-1. Growth and Seedling Strategies that Function to Fill in the Dominant
Layer in Disturbed Areas of Northern Hardwood Ecosystems
I. Outgrowth: Mostly lateral or horizontal expansion of established individuals
into space temporarily freed from intense competition
A. Clonal expansion of herbs and shrubs, e.g., hay-scented fern, hobblebush,
raspberry
B. Encroachment into an opening by crowns and roots of surrounding trees
II. Upgrowth: Height growth that forms a rising overstory canopy beginning at or
near ground level
A. Advance regeneration: Stems growing on the site
1. Stump and root sprouts, e.g., beech, striped maple, mountain maple
2. Seedlings and saplings, e.g., beech, sugar maple, ash, yellow birch
B. New individuals: Stems not previously growing on the site
1. Stump and root sprouts from injured individuals, e.g., red maple, aspen
2. New germinants
a. Stored or buried seeds accumulated on the site, e.g., pin cherry,
raspberry, elderberry
b. Current seed crop
1. Heavy-seeded species, which may produce abundant seedlings if a
large crop of seed was produced just prior to disturbance or if
there are nearby seed sources; e.g., beech, sugar maple, ash
2. Light-seeded or fugitive species (Marks, 1974), which may produce
abundant seedling populations from seed produced on the site
prior to disturbance or from seed introduced into the site from
considerable distance and are typified by abundant and frequent
production of light, highly mobile, wind-transported seed; e.g.,
aspen, birch

106

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
Se

»

sprouts and growth of established seedlings or saplings having various
levels of tolerance to shade (Table 4-2). It is important to note that a
variety of nuances exist within the ‘‘advance regeneration’ strategy.
Shade-tolerant species such as beech, sugar maple, and red spruce are
often able to maintain, in fairly deep shade, large populations of seedlings
whose ages range over several decades (Forcier, 1973). Other less tolerant
species like white ash and striped maple have somewhat less aggressive
advance-regeneration strategies. Usually, their seedlings are found in
somewhat better lighted locations in smaller numbers, and the lifespan of
seedlings that are not released by disturbance is much shorter than their
more tolerant colleagues. At the lowest end of the spectrum are species
like yellow birch, whose seedlings germinate and become established
within the closed forest but whose longevity is generally less than 1 year
(Forcier, 1973).

Upgrowth after disturbance also may result from new individuals or
stems not actively growing in the undisturbed site. This may come from
dormant buds, their growth stimulated by injury to parent plants, or from
germination and establishment of seedlings. Germination of buried seeds
is one of the most important revegetation mechanisms in the northern
hardwood ecosystem, and this unique adaptive strategy will be considered
in more detail in the next section.
Upgrowth may result from growth of seedlings of the current seed crop
Table 4-2. Shade-Tolerance

Ratings of Northern Hardwood Trees?

Tolerant (able to survive in deep shade):
beech
sugar maple
red spruce
hemlock
balsam fir
Intolerant (generally unable to survive very long in deep shade):
white birch

pin cherry
Intermediate:
yellow birch
mountain maple
“Tolerance

ratings,

trembling aspen
bigtooth aspen

gray birch

red maple
white ash

striped maple

although

vague

in describing

species to specific environmental conditions,

the response

of a

are useful and in a sense

represent a consensus of many workers’ perceptions of a species’
ability to
grow under a variety of conditions. As a consequence, tolerance
ratings
represent a good starting point for discussing the relationship
of a species
to environmental factors. Most frequently, tolerance is expressed
on a
scale and interpreted as the ability of a species to survive and
grow in their
own shade and that of associated species. Baker (1949) points
out the lack
of precision of tolerance scales but defends their usefulness.
He and Horn
(1971) also recognize that the tolerance rating of a species
may change

under different overstories or with different site conditions.
Nevertheless,

the concept has definite utility in discussing secondary
succession in
northern hardwood ecosystems. In this regard, we follow
workers of the

ico

Service (Leak, Solomon, and Filip, 1969; Gilbert and Jensen,

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

107

produced on or off the site. Salisbury (1942) in his superb treatise The
Reproductive Capacity of Plants pointed out that species with light, highly
mobile seeds often invade highly disturbed situations while species with
heavier seeds, often animal disseminated, usually enter the ecosystem at a
later stage of development. In clear-cut areas, upgrowth by light-seeded
species such as aspen and white birch (which are transported to the site by
wind) may play an important role in revegetation, depending upon the
degree of soil disturbance, nearness of seed sources, and other stochastic

factors. Upgrowth by heavy-seeded species transported to the clear-cut
site after disturbance is usually less important, but in the long run it is
movement of heavy seeds by wind, mammals, or birds that is responsible
for maintaining the geographic distribution of the many heavy-seeded
species which make%up a sizable proportion of the flora of the northern
hardwood ecosystem.
It is important to note that few, if any, species are dependent on a
single reproductive strategy; most species employ several strategies,
with the importance of each shifting in relation to the nature of the
disturbance and other circumstances. An analysis of the most vigorous
trees of each species in a 6-yr-old stand grown up after the clear-cutting of
a 60-yr-old northern hardwood forest gave an interesting insight into the
relative importance of advance regeneration and new germinants in
providing future dominants of the site. We established 50 sample points
within the stand and harvested the largest individual of each species
encountered within a 3-m radius of each point. Generally, intolerant
species were the tallest, followed by species of intermediate tolerance,
and tolerant species were shortest. We measured the age of each
individual to determine whether it was already established on the forest
floor at the time of cutting or was a new germinant (Table 4-3). Rather
Table 4-3. Percentage of the Largest Saplings, by Species, that Came from
Advance Regeneration and New Germinants in the Sixth Growing
Season after Clear-Cutting of a 60-Yr-Old Northern Hardwood Forest*
Advance
Regeneration (%)

New Individuals (%)

Total no.

Species
Beech
Mountain maple
Sugar maple
Striped maple
White ash
Yellow birch
Pin cherry
Trembling aspen

Percentage for Each
Species

of Trees

Sprouts

Seedlings

Sprouts

New
Germinants

Advance
Regeneration

New
Individuals

49
21
50
50
49
50
50
15

3
0
4
1
0
0
0
0

39
14
17
19
11
4
0
0

W
0
8
1
3
1
0
0

0
7
74)
29
35
45
50
15

86
67
42
40
22
4
0
0

14
33
58
60
78
92
100
100

aBased on 50 circular plots 6-m in diameter; the largest individual of each species was harvested in
each plot; data are limited to species presented on 15 or more plots.

108

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
~

surprisingly, for six of the eight species the majority of the largest trees
were

new

germinants.

Based

on these data, relative dependence

on the

advance-regeneration strategy was beech > mountain maple > sugar
maple and striped maple > ash and yellow birch. Pin cherry probably
came from buried seed, and aspen from seeds blown onto the site (Figure
4-1).

THE

BURIED-SEED

STRATEGY

The buried-seed strategy is of particular significance in revegetation after
clear-cutting. In fact, behavioral patterns of species using this strategy
suggest that it may have evolved specifically in response to the highly
specialized conditions that follow serious disturbance of a previously
intact ecosystem. In terms of system dynamics, the strategy is not simply
exploitation of an injured ecosystem but is also part of an elaborate
feedback mechanism that acts rapidly to limit temporarily accelerated
nutrient export and to return the system to a condition of greater
stability. The buried-seed strategy involves: (1) storage of large quantities
of dormant seeds in the soil of the intact forest, even though vegetative
individuals may be wholly absent; (2) triggering of seed germination by an
environmental signal(s) associated with disturbance of the canopy; (3)
rapid height growth associated with or dependent upon temporary
nutrient

enrichment

of the

soil,

which

results

from

the

accelerated

heterotrophism that accompanies disturbance (Chapter 3); (4) the
relatively short period of time before abundant seed production occurs;
and (5) a usually short lifespan of the individuals.
The occurrence of buried seeds and their germination after disturbance
has been known for a long time (Marks, 1974). Recently, Bicknell (Table
4-4) and Marquis (1975) have estimated the number of buried seeds in
northern hardwood forests of various ages. Literally millions of viable
seeds per hectare are buried in the soil under many northern hardwood
forests. It is important to note, however, that not all buried seeds are
long-lived. Seeds of some species, such as white ash (Clark, 1962; Leak,

1963) and yellow and white birch, have a very limited longevity, and, in
fact, these species seem to rely on two strategies: buried seeds and/or
direct seeding just before or after disturbance. On the other hand, the
viability of seeds of species like raspberry, pin cherry, and perhaps
elderberry extends into many decades and perhaps to more than a
century (Olmsted and Curtis, 1947; Marks, 1974; Whitney, 1978).
Marks (1974) has addressed the question of how enormous numbers of
heavy seeds, such as those of pin cherry, come to reside in soil even
though mature trees are no longer present. He proposes two cycles of
pin cherry dissemination: a low-density cycle that leads to widespread
dissemination of the species and a high-density cycle that leads to massive
occurrence of individuals on local sites (Figure 4-2). In today’s forest, pin

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

eo 4

oc
i

CAPA

=

as

109

4

ie?

¥

PY

2 Fe. Waa

Figure 4-1. A 5-yr-old stand of pin cherry in a small cleared area of the Hubbard
Brook Experimental Forest. The stand originated from germination of buried
seeds after the 50-yr-old forest was cut. Density is about 10 stems/m*, and trees
are about 4-m tall.

110

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
»

Table 4-4. Viable Buried Seeds in Northern Hardwood Stands of Various Ages?
Number

Estimated Longevity
of Dormant Seeds

of Seeds (millions/ha)

Age of Stand in Years

Species

(yr)

5)

1S)

20)

305

62605 =100

Red maple
Yellow or white birch
Erigeron sp.

3-15
3-15
<5

a
0.6
93a

—
0.6
0u

—
iL?
—

0.1
2.4
—

0.2
IES
=

--0.8
—_—

Pin cherry

>15

0.2

--

0.2

—

02

0.1

Raspberry or blackberry
Elderberry spp.
Goldenrod spp.
Violet spp.
Grasses spp.

>15
>15
<3
S15
>15

0.1
iheil
—
—
_-

4.9
FZ
0.2
1.0
O30
0.3
a
0.3
—

eS
—
—
0.1
0.4

2.6
0.2
—
—
0.1

3)55)
0.8
—
—
—

Sedges spp.

>15

33.4

Olen Ou

—

Ose

“Determined by germination of seeds contained in twenty 10 x 10-cm blocks cut out of
the forest floor. Germination per block was very variable, ranging from zero to several

orders of magnitude greater than the mean (S. Bicknell, unpublished data).
> Adapted from Harrington (1972).

cherry is common on cutover and burned sites. It has a lifespan of about
30 years in the Northeast, but during this time it can produce 15 to 20 million
fruits per hectare in well-stocked stands. Many birds are attracted to these
sites, where they consume the fruits, digest the pericarps, and excrete the
pits containing the seeds (Thompson and Willson, 1978). The ability of
birds to disseminate pin cherry seeds seems great (Marks, 1974). McAtee
(1910) lists 39 species, Olmsted and Curtis (1947) 33 species, and Martin et al.
(1951) 47 species of birds that feed on Prunus. In this way pin cherry seeds are

5

.

ane density
ace

ye

=>

Consumption

> By Birds

in Cherry

Stands

Dispersal Of
Few Seeds,
Mostly In
Disturbed Sites

In Situ
Deposition

Of Seed <______

Low-density
Pin Cherry
Stands

Figure 4-2. Representation of high- and low-density pin cherry cycles
(modified
from Marks, 1974).

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

111

moved to other disturbed sites frequented by the foraging birds. This
mechanism serves to introduce pin cherry into newly disturbed sites not
recently occupied by the species and thus contributes to the buried-seed
pool. With the next cycle of disturbance, scattered individuals of pin cherry
occur and produce large numbers of seeds, many of which become buried in
the soil and remain dormant. Another cycle of disturbance may then lead to
a pin cherry stand of high density and still-greater numbers of buried seeds.
Marks’ hypothesis probably applies to other buried-seed species, such as
raspberry and elderberry.
In many second-growth northern hardwood forests, where pin cherry
trees are absent or are a very minor component, hundreds of thousands of
dormant pin cherry seeds may be found in a hectare of soil (Table
4-4; Olmsted

and Curtis, 1947; Marks,

1974). The size of the seed pool

suggests that most dormant seeds are produced in the site early in the
revegetation sequence rather than being transported to the site in small
increments by animals.
The mechanism(s) by which germination of buried seeds is synchronized with disturbance of the ecosystem represents one of the paramount
control

features

in

ecosystem

dynamics;

in

a

sense,

it initiates

a

homeostatic response held in reserve for just such an occasion. Disturbance (cutting, burning, or windthrow) triggers the germination of large
quantities of buried seeds. Simply moving a volume of forest floor to the
greenhouse will promote germination of many buried seeds. However,
the triggering mechanisms underlying germination in response to disturbance are far from clear.
Marks (1974) has reported a preliminary study of pin cherry germination. Apparently, the endocarp or stony shell surrounding the pin cherry
seed inhibits germination to some extent, because its removal from
recently collected, stratified seeds, combined with appropriate temperature and moisture conditions, results in an average germination of about
45%. However, since the majority of seeds do not respond to this
treatment, an additional control mechanism must be present in the seed
itself. Marks (1974) proposes a two-step mechanism by which dormancy
is ended and germination occurs. The first step involves aging of the
endocarp, which breaks down any inhibitors and/or makes it permeable
to water and oxygen. The second step involves an environmental sensing
mechanism that responds to changes in microclimate, soil or water
chemistry, or other factors. This response is even more complicated, for
we have found that in the experimentally devegetated ecosystem buried
pin cherry seeds continued to germinate for at least four growing seasons.
This indicates considerable variation in the capacity of the seed
population to respond to altered conditions. Wendel (1972) reported a
similar germination pattern for black cherry (Prunus serotina) seeds. This
response enhances the survival of the species, in that it does not permit
the entire seed population to germinate at one time in an all-or-none

effort.

112

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

A forest fertilization experiment in eastern Pennsylvania suggests that
changes in soil chemistry and/or removal of allelopathic substances in
cutover areas may trigger pin cherry germination. A series of plots were
established in a second-growth black cherry-sugar maple-red maple forest
and treated with the following levels of fertilizer: (1) no fertilizer, (2)
300-Ib of urea N per acre (1-lb/acre X 1.12 = 1-kg/ha), (3) 300 Ib of urea N
and 200-lb of P:O; per acre, and (4) 300 lb of urea N, 200-lb of P,Os;, and

100-lb of K,O per acre (L. R. Auchmoody, personal communication).
Nitrogen was applied in two equal applications, at the beginning and in
the middle of the growing season. All treatments, with the exception of
the control, resulted in the death of the established seedlings of black
cherry, sugar maple, and red maple during the first growing season. The
following spring, an average of about 1.4x 10° pin cherry seedlings/ha
appeared on the fertilized plots, while none occurred on the control plots.
Auchmoody estimated that there were no pin cherry trees in this forest
for at least 40 years prior to fertilization; hence, germination probably came
from seeds at least 40 years old.
Since the canopy was not disturbed, changes in soil temperature and
moisture or throughfall chemistry cannot be implicated as the cause of
germination. Auchmoody points out that the response was about the
same for all fertilized plots, which suggests that increased nitrogen in the
soil was the key factor, since it was the element common to all
treatments. Various workers (Steinbauer and Grigsby, 1957; Anderson,
1968; Roberts, 1969; Popay and Roberts, 1970) have proposed that nitrate
is a major regulator of seed germination. However, the death of young
seedlings after fertilization indicates that the initial application of
fertilizer may have reduced the number of functional roots in the upper
soil levels, perhaps temporarily removing allelopathic inhibition of pin
cherry germination. It is interesting to note that clear-cutting results in
both a markedly elevated concentration of NO,-N in the soil solution and

a marked diminution of activity by rootlets of the trees that previously
occupied the site. Elevated levels of dissolved substances, such as nitrate
or various cations, or elimination of allelopathic root exudates inhibiting

seed

germination

“external

diffusion

could

conceivably

hormones,”

play the role of ‘“‘ectocrines,”

which

exert

a

correlative

action

or
on

ecosystem function via the external medium (Odum, 1971).
An interesting variation on the buried-seed strategy relates to the
stature of species. Examination of openings created by treefall frequently
reveals raspberry plants in fairly small openings, but pin cherry seedlings
are mostly limited to larger openings. Both species occur abundantly in
larger openings, including clear-cuts. The extent to which pin cherry
germination commonly occurs in small openings is not well known, but
frequent examination of such sites has revealed few pin cherry seedlings,
while raspberry seedlings are reasonably common.
Whether or not there exists some discriminating mechanism in these
two species which relates germination to the size of the hole in the

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

113

canopy, the response of each species seems to favor its own survival.
Raspberry is a shade-intolerant perennial shrub of small size, usually
<1.5m in height, and its minimum fruiting age is 2 years. Because of
its restricted size and early sexual reproduction, raspberry seems to be
well adapted to successful sexual reproduction under small canopy
openings, where favorable light conditions may exist for only a few years
before the opening is closed by outgrowth of surrounding trees and
upgrowth of advance-regeneration adapted to intermediate light conditions. Pin cherry, on the other hand, is a shade-intolerant perennial tree

that usually grows to a height of several meters and requires about 4 years
of growth before fruiting. Rarely are light conditions in small openings
sufficient for this type of growth.

FLORISTIC RESPONSE TO REMOVAL OF THE
FOREST CANOPY BY CLEAR-CUTTING
After clear-cutting, most of the strategies described in Table 4-1 become
active. The species range from tolerants through intermediates to
intolerants (those species that do well only under fairly open conditions).
The relative importance of different strategies or species will vary with
individual sites, since the response of an ecosystem to clear-cutting is
conditioned by a large number of factors, such as time since last cutting,
species composition and structure of the ecosystem prior to cutting,
nature of cutting, nearness of seed sources, occurrence of good seed
years, availability of suitable seedbeds, and microclimate during the
recovery period.
To gain information on the early revegetation process, we studied three
clear-cut sites during the second growing season after cutting. Sixty 1-m*
plots were distributed equally in the three areas, and all species recorded
were assigned to a shade-tolerance class (Table 4-5). We found that
revegetation involved a broad spectrum of species, but that localized plots
might be dominated by one or two species. There was an average of 28
species per site, and a total of 42 species were recorded. This number would
have been higher if species off the plots had been recorded. In another study
we laid out 120 1-m’ plots in the center of a 25-m-wide clear-cut strip, and

in a stratified-random fashion we harvested one-fifth of these plots before
cutting and 1, 2, 3, and 5 years after cutting (S. Bicknell, F. H. Bormann, and
P. Marks, unpublished data). Harvesting revealed 20, 29, 26, 26, and 33

species at the respective time intervals, and for the whole period a total of 42
species was recorded.
Species richness, or the number of species per square meter, in the
+ SEM). In a more
60-yr-old forest prior to the cut was 5.0+0.3 (mean
extensive study of a 55-yr-old forest, Siccama et al. (1970) reported a
species richness of 5.5+0.3. Species richness rose about 60% the first year

114

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Table 4-5. Tolerance Classes and Percentage of Total Cover of Species from
Three Northern Hardwood Stands During the Second Growing Season
after Clear-Cutting*
Percentage of Total
Cover

Lifeform

Tolerance

Class?

Species

Trees

Intolerant

Betula papyrifera (white birch)
Populus tremuloides (trembling aspen)
Prunus pensylvanica (pin cherry)

x
1
29

Intermediate

Acer pensylvanicum (striped maple)
A. rubrum (red maple)
A. spicatum (mountain maple)
Betula alleghaniensis (yellow birch)
Fraxinus americana (ash)
Abies balsamea (balsam fir)
Acer saccharum (sugar maple)
Fagus grandifolia (beech)
Rosa sp.
Rubus idaeus (raspberry)
Rubus sp.
Sambucus spp. (elderberry)
Lonicera canadensis
Viburnum alnifolium
Anaphalis margaritacea
Hieracium sp.
Lactuca sp.
Aster acuminatus
Dennstaedtia punctilobula
Prenanthes sp.

1

Tolerant

Shrubs

Intolerant

Intermediate
Tolerant
Herbs

Intolerant

Intermediate

Tolerant

Unknown

Arisaema

ld

sp.

Clintonia borealis
Dryopteris spinulosa
Lycopodium complanatum
L. lucidulum
Maianthemum canadense
Medeola virginiana
Oxalis montana
Streptopus roseus
Trientalis borealis
Trillium erectum
Uvularia sessilifolia
Viola incognita
V. rotundifolia
Carex sp.
4 spp.

Ke
Nem~e~
KKH
HK
DANK
OC
DK
NK
KN
WK
K
KDR

me
OO
OO
MM

“Data are based on twenty 1-m? plots s ystematically distributed
in each stand. All sampled
vegetation was <2.5-m tall (P. Murphy, personal communication).

See Table 4-2. Tolerance classes for shrubs and herbs are based
on Siccama etal. (1970)
and personal observations.
"x= <0.5%.

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

3

115

_

3

O

5
coal

G
@

a

—f—-

o

Species/m®
No. By 1970
Richness,
Species

1971

1972
1973
1974
1975
Calendar Year
Figure 4-3. Species richness based on individuals rooted in 1-m* plots in a
60-yr-old northern hardwood forest in 1970 and in subsequent years after
clear-cutting. Means for each year are based on 19 to 22 randomly distributed
plots. The range shown is the standard error of the mean (S. Bicknell, F. H.
Bormann, and P. Marks, unpublished data).

after the cut and leveled off to a slightly higher value by Year 2 (Figure
4-3).
In both studies the flora was a thorough mixture of tolerance classes.
Tolerant and intermediate species relatively abundant in the uncut forest
were most common but were thoroughly mixed with intolerant species
(buried-seed species and adventive species) that had been unimportant
previously (Table 4-5).

DIFFERENTIATION OF THE VEGETATION
ESTABLISHED IMMEDIATELY AFTER
CLEAR-CUTTING
The tangled vegetation that follows within a year or two of clear-cutting,
generally <2-m high but rich in species and in numbers of individuals,
may be considered as a single undifferentiated stratum. The process of
differentiation begins very rapidly. Some individuals grow faster, some
can survive in the shade of others, and an overstory, understory, and herb

layer develop fairly rapidly.
During the first 1 or 2 years after clear-cutting, dominance is often shared
by woodland herbaceous species (e.g., Aster acuminatus, Dennstaedtia
punctilobula, and Uvularia sessilifolia) whose clones may expand rapidly,
herbaceous adventives such as Epilobium, and a tangle of woody
vegetation composed of sprouts, shrubs, and seedlings and saplings of
trees from all tolerance classes (Wilson and Jensen,

1954; Marquis, 1965;

Horsley and Abbott, 1970). The trees that grow up, after clear-cutting can
be considered even-aged (Gilbert and Jensen, 1958; Marquis, 1967), since
the new seedlings and sprouts and the release of established individuals

116

N

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

£ 2000

(A)

SS
m

el
$2)

5 1500F

_

=

5|3
uo

|

E@
oO

<

1000

2)

Ww

1o)

Z 500

mM

oO
&

>

IG)

°

sc =

&

<—

Beech

Pin Cherry

2 97 aah*

6

Sugar

7S Maple
2=
WEN
£>
Ps
gemnante
ss
ea
Le
iiadass
fo)

Raspberry
x

je

j

+»y
/

oy

<

QS

Vig

fale

Yellow

¢

Ae
70

7

/

SSN

Birch —.

:

74

uo)

ee

ae

aS

Year
Figure 4-4. (A) Mean living biomass accumulation after clear-cutting in grams
per square meter (range is the standard error of the mean); data for 1970
represent biomass in the herbaceous layer of the uncut forest, while subsequent
data represent all biomass on the 1-m? plots. (B) Percentage of living biomass
found in various species at different times after clear-cutting; not all species are
shown (S. Bicknell, F. H. Bormann, and P. Marks, unpublished data).

date to within a few years of each other. This is a fact of paramount
importance, since clear-cutting imposes a more or less even-aged condition
on the site, and within a few years the site is occupied by populations of
idividual plants that have the potential of dominating the area for more
than a century without recruitment of new seedlings.
Differentiation during the first 5 years after clear-cutting is relatively
rapid, and dominance,

based on biomass accumulation, may pass rapidly

from one group of species to another. This pattern was seen clearly in the
plots harvested before cutting and at intervals afterward (see above).

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

117

After cutting, the density of individuals rose rapidly, peaked in about the
second

year,

and

then

declined.

Accumulation

of living biomass

rose

exponentially until sampling was terminated in the fifth year (Figure
4-4A). However, the proportions of living biomass in various species
shifted rapidly (Figure 4-4B). Prior to the cut, advance regeneration of
beech and sugar maple dominated the layer. During the first and second
year after cutting, advance regeneration of sugar maple was the major
component of the living biomass, the third year raspberry was predominant, and by the fifth year pin cherry was clearly the most important
species.
Relative height growth is one of the major differentiating factors, and
differences among tolerance classes appear quickly. This factor was
already evident in the 2-yr-old stands discussed above. Fast-growing
shade-intolerant tree species, although having a density similar to that of the
tolerant and intermediate classes, comprised the majority of the tallest
individuals (Table 4-6).
Differentiation of northern hardwood stands subsequent to disturbance
has been intensively studied by forest scientists in the Hubbard Brook
region (e.g., Jensen, 1943; Wilson and Jensen, 1954; Marquis, 1965), and
the following pattern emerges. Often, within a few years after clearcutting, dominance shifts to fast-growing tree species. These include
shade-intolerant species, such as pin cherry, trembling aspen, bigtooth
aspen, and white birch, and species of intermediate tolerance, such as ash,
red maple, and striped maple. These individuals tend to grow taller than
the general mass of the vegetation, and this results in stratification of the
forest canopy into an overstory and understory. Species such as sugar
maple, beech, red spruce, and yellow birch are frequently represented in
large numbers but occur mostly as codominants or lower-crown classes.
Continued differentiation is in many respects an age-dependent phenomenon, with dominance progressively shifting from shorter-lived, fastergrowing, less-tolerant species to longer-lived, initially slower-growing,
more-tolerant species (Jensen, 1943; Marquis, 1967).
Table 4-6. Relationship of Tolerance Class, Density, and Stem Height for Trees ina
2-Yr-Old Northern Hardwood Forest?
Density

(No. of Stems/m’)

Tolerance Class
Intolerant
Intermediate
Tolerant

Stem Height

Seedlings

Sprouts

<50-cm
(%)

>50-cm
(%)

52
12.6
YS)

0.3
0.7
2.4

38
39
DS

59
26
15

*Data based on twenty 1-m? plots in three sites (P. Murphy, personal communication).

118

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Pin cherry will die about 30 years, and aspen between 40 and 60 years after
cutting. The death and fall of pin cherry and aspen or smaller individuals
of white birch, red maple, and ash create relatively little disturbance at
the level of the forest floor, and the space created in the canopy is usually
filled by encroachment of dominants and codominants from lower-crown
classes of intermediate and tolerant species. These individuals are of
approximately the same age as those they replace. The process of canopy
closure by surrounding trees is well known for even-aged temperate
forests in Europe (Jones, 1945). White birch may remain for about 80 years
after clear-cutting, and red maple and ash may survive more than 100 years
before they die out (Marquis, 1967). Many of these trees may be replaced
by lower-crown classes of shade-tolerant trees of about the same age.
Some trees, however, because of their larger size, may create larger
openings when they fall. These openings may be filled by seedlings or
saplings from advance regeneration on the forest floor that became
established well after clear-cutting. The production of gaps and their
closure by growth from the forest floor represents the beginning of a
process that will become more prevalent with time and by which the
stand ultimately will become truly uneven-aged.
Given no exogenous disturbance, after about 60 years of the Aggradation
Phase we would expect the ecosystem to exhibit these characteristics: (1)
The overstory and understory are more or less continuous, i.e., there are
relatively few gaps, and are dominated largely by even-aged individuals
dating from the time of cutting. (2) As a result of the natural thinning
process, the over- and understories have become increasingly dominated
by tolerant and intermediate species that have the potential to remain
alive for long periods. Shorter-lived intolerant species essentially have
been eliminated as active growing components, and intermediate species
have become reduced in importance. (3) Openings in the forest caused by
the death and fall of individual trees are generally of small to modest size
(e.g., 50 to 150-m?’) and are filled primarily by upgrowth from the forest
floor of advance regeneration of tolerant, along with some intermediate
species. This process, discussed by Forcier (1973), contributes to a further

increase in the importance of tolerant species. (4) The density of
dominant trees declines, but their diameter at breast height, crown
diameter, and biomass increase as the survivors become more massive.
The subsequent fall of these larger trees tends to create larger openings
that favor higher proportions of intermediate and shade-intolerant species
in the new canopy which fills the opening.

GROWTH STRATEGIES UNDERLYING
CANOPY DIFFERENTIATION

INITIAL

Before resuming consideration of the phytosociological development of
the ecosystem, we shall pause to examine some of the growth strategies
that allow species to occupy the different stages of ecosystem develop-

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

119

ment that follow clear-cutting. If no exogenous disturbance occurs, the
shifts in dominance among tolerance classes after clear-cutting often
follow the generalized

pattern shown

in Figure 4-5 (Marks,

1974; Aber,

1976).
The rewards of dominance are great, since dominance implies a
proportionately larger control over biogeochemical and_ hydrologic
pathways of the ecosystem, a larger share of available nutrients and
water, and, through canopy position, a major share of the radiant energy
of the site. Why should any group surrender dominance once it is
achieved? The answer resides in the fact that continued growth is itself
constantly altering the conditions of selection that exist within the
ecosystem, and no one higher plant species or group of species has solved
the problem of coping with the entire selection spectrum.
Although there are infinite variations on the life-strategy theme, it is
useful to consider the generalized curves of Figure 4-5 as reflecting two
opposing strategies: an exploitive strategy best adapted to conditions
immediately after clear-cutting and a conservative strategy better adapted
to conditions in the mid-Aggradation Phase, about 70 to 100 years after
clear-cutting. No one species is wholly exploitive or conservative. All
share, to varying degrees, aspects of both strategies. Among tree species,
pin cherry may be considered as most closely approaching a purely
exploitive strategy, whereas beech might be considered a thoroughly
conservative species. Similar patterns of plant adaptation or species
strategies have been implicated or proposed in a number of other studies

(Grime, 1974; Harper and White, 1974). Harper and White’s (1974)
concept of shade-intolerant, colonizing (r-type) species, for instance, is
closely related to the exploitive growth strategy. By way of contrast,
shade-tolerant species possessing fewer and larger seeds and a long
juvenile period (Harper and White, 1974) could be considered representative of the conservative strategy.

Dominance
—~>

O

20

40
60
80
Years After Clear-Cufting

100

120

Figure 4-5. A hypothetical sequence showing trends in dominance
different shade-tolerance classes of trees after clear-cutting.

among

120

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

In relation to ecosystem development, the exploitive strategy may be
thought of as “getting while the getting is good.” By a combination of
reproductive, developmental, and physiological growth attributes, the
exploitive species are often able to attain local dominance rapidly on the
cutover site, which is temporarily enriched with available nutrients, water,
and radiant energy. This idea will be developed more fully in subsequent
sections of Chapter 4 and in Chapter 5. Rapid attainment of dominance is
often coupled with rapid sexual reproduction and a next generation of
progeny able to exploit other temporarily enriched situations as they

arise.
The exploitive strategy carries costs as well as benefits. Costs involve
the relative inability to compete successfully under conditions of stress,
for example, in shade or where there is strong competition for available
water and nutrients. Often, species favoring the exploitive strategy are
relatively short-lived, and, even though they attain temporary dominance
with all of the rewards that entails, they ultimately surrender the site to
longer-lived more-competitive species.
Cutover ecosystems with high rates of NPP (Chapter 5) dominated by
species such as pin cherry and raspberry tend to be characterized by
accelerated losses of water and nutrients. This, coupled with poorly
developed root systems (low root/shoot ratios, Table 4-7), suggests that
species employing the exploitive strategy may be less efficient in the use
of water and nutrients than those using the conservative strategy.
The conservative strategy proposed here is one in which physiological
and developmental aspects of growth are not geared to a perturbed
and rapidly changing situation but rather to a relatively constant and
predictable environment, such as the one that typifies the mid-aggrading
forest discussed in Chapter 2. In this strategy we might think that nutrient
uptake is closely coupled to the fairly constant patterns of decomposition
and mineralization that presumably exist in the aggrading forest,
particularly after the forest floor has achieved equilibrium (Figure 2-1).
Conservative species would be strongly competitive at the low end of the
range of availability of water and nutrients and would tend to use these
resources fully. The conservative strategy also involves the capacity to use
radiant energy efficiently, particularly at low intensities. Dominance of
the ecosystem by species employing the conservative strategy might
contribute to the low nutrient and stream-water export that typifies
mid-aggrading ecosystems.
The conservative strategy also has its costs. Apparently, a strategy that

couples a species’ growth to fairly constant and predictable mineralization
and a wide range of light conditions limits its capacity to respond quickly
to the conditions of site enrichment that follow clear-cutting. This
limitation may be most apparent in seedlings of tolerant species
genetically equipped to survive the highly competitive conditions of
the forest floor under a closed canopy. Several workers (Grime, 1965;
Parsons, 1968) have proposed the idea that selection for slow growth

121
Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

UONAGOXE GUO AY
‘JBUOISSBDONS a}e]/ Se SayIssejO SyJeEP~ YOIUM ‘YOM MO|JBA S]
se awes
Auea sjenba juesajojul “a') ‘uOKeoyisse/o jeuoissa9ons ,sysep

‘WIS #SuBeW ae sanleA,

‘snjejs pajoadsns ajeoipul sjayIesg ,
“/EUO/SSBIINS 9}E/ sjenba jJuesajo} puke ;BuO/SSEDONS
au] Ayjenuassa ase sassejd a9uesajO} aSeUl ,

[ayeurws9}9q]]

“Z-p PIG2L

gsoeds

yorig OU
psoeds jurso[oqu]

YysVv
gjdew poy
soisods 9} eIpsWi19}Uy]
Alroyo Ul
uodse suljquicl[
uodse yj00)31g
yoriq Ae

saiseds juesajOL,
yorig MOT[OA

ajdew iedng

yoo [Wo
Yyoo0q

(GZ61) sysep Woy paidepy,

‘sassejo aouesajo} 0} Bulpsoo0e pabueuy ,

O€

9] 8UIWIO}JOpUT

a}CUIWII}I9Od

09

ayeUlWI9}9q
9} BUILD} PUT

$8
Of

er<

Of
Or

9} CUTUIO}9pU]
9} CUIWIO}9puUT
,[oeurWo}9puy |
9] CUIWII9}9pUuy

Or-S7Z

SOK

09<
0S-Or

OOL
09
09
09

9} BUIWIOJOpUyT

SV
OV-SC

_—

ON
SOK

OOL<
OOL<
OOI-OL
—

CLL

ada],

ON

—
a
SOR
sox
sok
--

ey

YIMOIS %06<
0} skeq

=
ON

sO’ +610
ZO’ +910
—
—

SOX

(UID)
yisuay]

=
60° + 9¢'0

=

AqjAydo1939H

91 +Le0

,onel
jOOYS/JOOY

UJOYLON 40 sBulj\des jo soynsuajeseyo oeusboydiow;

Jopea] JO YIMOID UOIsUd}Xy
,S9l0edS POOMPJEH

122

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

rates is a frequent adaptation to limiting levels of resource availability.
Seedlings of eastern hemlock, perhaps the most shade-tolerant of northern hardwood species, have been cited as having low metabolic and
growth rates even under favorable experimental conditions (Grime, 1965).
In clear-cuts, species programmed for the conservative growth strategy
fall behind those using the more responsive exploitive strategy and soon
suffer the problems associated with a subdominant position. However,
because of their tolerance of stressful situations and their potential to live
a long time, individual trees can survive and eventually dominate. Their
reproductive strategies are such that they can selectively reinforce their
populations in the overstory when modest openings are created by the
death of other trees. By virtue of these attributes, species employing a
conservative growth strategy eventually come to dominate the cutover
site, barring exogenous disturbance.
After clear-cutting of a northern hardwood ecosystem, species employing the exploitive strategy are able to respond more rapidly than

vs

A

@ Pin Cherr eas a

Cumulative
Height,
m

Sy7ae)

Cut
Forest
——

RNa

[See

IeS:
Calendar

1974
Year

1975

IS76

Figure 4-6. Mean cumulative height growth of the largest individual of each tree
species found on each of fifty 30-m? plots in a 6-yr-old clear-cut. The 60-yr-old
forest was cut in the fall of 1970. Height in 1970 represents advance regeneration
before cutting. (1) Pin cherry; (2) trembling aspen: (3) striped maple; (4) yellow
birch; (5) sugar maple (mountain maple and ash followed about the same
pattern); (6) beech. Data are the means of 15 to 50 individuals. The range shown
for pin cherry is the standard error of the mean.

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

123

conservative species occupying the same site. An example of this is shown
in the 6 years of growth after a clear-cut at Hubbard Brook (Figure 4-6).
Height growth of pin cherry has clearly outstripped that of other species
on the same plots. In general, height growth responses are related to
tolerance class, with intolerant species. highest, intermediate species in the
middle, and tolerant species lowest. It is interesting to note that beech
and sugar maple, among the most conservative species, were the least
responsive, even though both had average heights equal to or greater
than most other species at the end of the first growing season after
cutting.

John Aber, in a recent (1976) unpublished review of the characteristics
of early- and late-successional northern hardwood species, has pointed

out that not only do early (exploitive) species have faster growth rates but
their growth rate is age related, with highest rates early in an individual’s
lifespan. This is shown by the annual rate of height growth for pin cherry
in the 6-yr-old cutover site (Figure 4-7). Pin cherry in the third and fourth
years shows growth rates averaging about 1.3-m/yr, but this falls to
about 0.95-m/yr in Years 5 and 6. One interpretation is that the early
burst of height growth allows the species to gain local dominance quickly,
partially shade its competitors, and get a proportionately higher share of
local site resources. Thereafter, rapid height growth is of less strategic
value, since the species has temporarily gained a better competitive
position and other species must live under conditions it creates. The
leveling off after 1973 of annual growth rates of the other species might
reflect the somewhat inferior position of these species within the canopy.
In an analysis of annual growth rates over a 90-yr span, Aber has shown
that white birch (early successional) achieved 79% of its total growth
before Year 20, while sugar maple achieved only 47% of its growth
during the same period.
Our data suggest that the soil solution in the clear-cut site is enriched
with nutrients shortly after cutting, and the question arises as to the
responsiveness of species to this temporary condition. No direct answer is
possible, but indirect evidence suggests that at least three species are
capable of responding to this condition with greatly accelerated growth
rates.

Safford and Filip (1974) fertilized (4500-kg of limestone and 1200-kg of
commercial 15-10-10 NPK fertilizer per hectare) plots after clear-cutting
of a northern hardwood forest and 4 years later found an increase in standing
crop of live biomass from 7-t/ha on control plots to 24-t/ha on fertilized
plots. Leaf biomass increased from 980 to 1780-kg/ha. Almost all of this
increase was due to vigorous pin cherry growth. Pin cherry biomass
increased from 41% of the total on control plots to 89% on fertilized
plots. These results suggest that at least part of pin cherry behavior on
cutover sites is exploitation of the temporary nutrient enrichment

discussed in Chapter 3.
Tamm (1974) demonstrated

a similar

result

with

raspberry

(Rubus

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

124

140

120

‘

100

@ 1e)

o)

Cuf
Forest
——

Increment,
Height
cm

nN oO

20

|970

1\97\|

i972

1973

Calendar

1974

1975

1976

Year

Figure 4-7. Mean annual height increment of the largest individuals on fifty
30-m? plots in a 6-yr-old clear-cut. The 60-yr-old forest was cut in the fall of 1970,
and height in 1970 does not represent mean annual growth but rather the sum of
the height due to advance regeneration divided by the total number of individuals
found on all plots. (1) Pin cherry; (2) trembling aspen; (3) striped maple; (4)
yellow birch; (5) sugar maple; (6) beech. Data represents the means of 15 to 50
individuals. The range shown for pin cherry is the standard error of the mean.

idaeus) in Sweden. Combinations of nitrogen fertilizer (NH,NOs), ranging
from 0 to 180-kg N/ha-yr, and phosphorus (Superphosphate 26/30),
ranging from 0 to 40-kg P/ha-yr, were applied in 24 treatments to
plots located in a spruce plantation established on podzol soil in 1957.
Fertilizers were applied over a series of years between 1967 and 1973.
Aboveground dry-weight production of raspberry in 1973 was up to two
orders of magnitude greater on the more heavily fertilized plots. On
control plots, raspberry was absent or a minor vegetational element
constituting about 1% of the annual aboveground dry-weight production.

In contrast, raspberry constituted up to 8% of the annual production on
fertilized plots, even though fertilization promoted stand closure, which
probably diminished the amount of light reaching the forest floor.
Increases in raspberry were associated with a 5- to 20-fold increase in

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

125

available nitrogen in the soil, including some NO;-N, which was virtually
absent on the control plots.
Ash is usually considered an intermediate species with regard to light
tolerance, but on 3- to 5-yr-old clear-cuts we have observed instances of

unusual height growth sometimes equaling that of pin cherry. In this
regard, it is interesting to note that Mitchell and Chandler (1939), in a
pioneering study of nitrogen nutrition among hardwood species, found
white ash to be among the most nitrogen-demanding species. Based on a
reanalysis of Mitchell and Chandler’s data, Aber suggests that the growth
of ash is very responsive to nitrogen availability. This behavioral pattern
suggests that the very rapid early growth observed for ash on some
cutover sites may be an exploitive response to the rapid increase in

nitrogen availability (nitrate) after cutting.

MORPHOGENESIS

AND

GROWTH

STRATEGY

Marks (1975) has developed an important hypothesis linking morphogenesis and successional behavior of northeastern trees. Basically, he has
shown that early-successional trees have a growth regime well adapted to
the exploitive strategy while late-successional species do not.
Even in well-lighted environments, shade-tolerant late-successional
species achieve relatively modest amounts of height growth and generally
complete height growth early in the growing season (Table 4-7).
Early-successional species achieve more height growth by extending their
period of growth over longer periods of time, often ceasing growth only 2
to 4 weeks before the first autumn frosts.
Shoot morphogenesis is one of the bases for these contrasting patterns
of growth. There are two general ways in which terminal shoots are
formed in temperate woody angiosperms. In determinate growth the
shoot is fully preformed in the winter, with embryonic leaves and leaf
primordia, and extension growth during the following season is usually
limited to a fixed number of leaves determined when the bud was formed
in the previous growing season. In indeterminate growth, the winter bud
carries a few leaves, and these expand as the bud opens and extension
growth begins in the spring. The shoot apex, however, remains active
and continues to initiate new leaves and internodes during the growing
season.
Apparently the indeterminate growth pattern is closely associated with
heterophylly, in which leaves formed in the winter bud are morphologically distinct from those formed during the current growing season
(Critchfield, 1960). Extension or height growth is thus fairly well fixed
during the previous growing season in species with determinate growth,
while species with indeterminate growth have the capacity to produce
new leaves and internodes as long as the environment during the current
growing season is favorable.

126

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Marks’

data indicate that early-successional, or shade-intolerant, trees

in the northeastern region utilize the indeterminate growth pattern, while
shade-tolerant late-successional trees generally exhibit the determinate
pattern (Table 4-6).
Two other aspects of shoot morphology not considered by Marks relate
to branching and the apical dominance of the terminal bud over axillary
buds formed the same year. Whitney (1976) reports that twigs of
late-successional species (such as beech and sugar maple) tend to
bifurcate, producing a dorsiventrally flattened, two-ranked branching
pattern that minimizes leaf overlap more than that of early-successional
species. In contrast, early-successional species (such as aspen) bifurcate
less, producing erect long shoots bearing numerous short branches. In
effect, leaves are displayed in a columnar volume characterized by much
overlap but considerable side lighting. In contrast to Whitney’s
findings, we have observed instances in which the terminal bud of pin
cherry did not inhibit the extension of lateral buds formed during the
same year—the generally recognized case. This phenomenon, which may
be a response to especially enriched situations, leads to secondary and
even tertiary branch formation during the same year. This may contribute
to the high leaf-area indices reported by Marks (1974) for young pin
cherry stands.
.
Marks (1975) reported preliminary data on root/shoot ratios of early- and
late-successional species. Ratios for saplings of trembling aspen and pin
cherry were substantially below those for saplings of sugar maple and
beech (Table 4-7). Marks noted that root systems of pin cherry and aspen
growing on cutover sites were shallow (generally less than 35-cm deep),
much branched (often with major lateral roots within 2 to 4-cm of the
surface), and easily pulled from the soil by a single person (trees as tall as
7-m!). He suggests that this rooting habit is especially geared toward
temporary occupancy of the site, with energy preferentially invested in

aboveground structure while roots are relatively weak and concentrated
in the forest floor.
Finally, an interesting aspect of the indeterminate growth pattern
relates to nutrient resorbtion from leaves just before leaf fall (Ryan,
1978). In determinate species, concentrations of nitrogen and phosphorus
within the leaves begin to decrease about a month prior to leaf drop.
These nutrients are withdrawn into perennial portions of the tree and
stored during the dormant season. During the next growing season
resorbed nutrients may account for as much as 40% of the total annual
growth requirements for both nitrogen and phosphorus. In the indeterminate species pin cherry a somewhat different pattern of nutrient
resorption prevails. Although a general resorption of nutrients occurs
prior to leaf drop, the phenomenon apparently goes on throughout much
of the growing season. As extension growth occurs and new leaves are
produced by the meristem, some of the leaves formed earlier senesce. A
rough estimate suggests that about 10% of all leaves formed senesce

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

127

prior to the maximum period of senescence. Apparently, nutrients are
withdrawn and transported to growing points. Thus, resorption may result
in a proportion of the resorbed nutrients being used at least twice in the
same growing season in the support of new growth.
Indeterminate growth lies at the base of the exploitive strategy. Shoot
growth and leaf formation extend well into the growing season and
depend to a considerable degree on current photosynthesis; specifically,
photosynthate from the first-formed leaves supports the continued mitotic
activity of the shoot apex and the expansion of new shoots and leaves
during the growing season (Kozlowski and Keller, 1966; Marks, 1975).
Thus, extension growth in indeterminate species is largely determined by
conditions of the current growing season. This allows the species to
capitalize on any temporary enrichment of the site that may exist. But
indeterminate extension growth is not only a means of capitalizing on
temporary site abundance; it also may be an effective mechanism for
directing crown development toward areas where light is most abundant
(J. Aber, unpublished). The leaves of intolerant species are thought to be
light saturated only at higher light intensities; hence, twigs in higher-light
environments would tend to extend more. Indeterminate growth fueled
by favorable conditions of light, water, and nutrients can lead to the rapid
height growth and early dominance discussed previously.
Determinate growth would seem to be a basic component of the
conservative growth strategy. Not only are the numbers of leaves
determined in the previous growing season, but most extension growth
draws on carbohydrates stored in previous seasons (Kozlowski and Keller,

1966; Marks, 1975). This pattern of growth has advantages in highly
competitive situations that are apparent. Extension growth and leaf
expansion occur very rapidly in the early growing season, largely using
stored energy. This permits species to exploit the temporarily favorable
environment at the beginning of the growing season. Generally speaking,
available water supplies have been fully recharged during the spring
snowmelt period, and, owing to continued decomposition and mineraliza-

tion during late autumn, winter, and the early spring months, seasonal
nutrient availability also may be at a maximum (Muller and Bormann,
1976). Melillo (1977) has followed the seasonal course of mineralization
using forest-floor soil samples placed in polyethylene bags and returned to
the soil profile. His data show maximum mineralization in the early part
of the growing season, i.e., June. The determinate growth pattern allows
species to draw quickly on this seasonal enrichment. Thereafter, productivity in closed forests is largely a function of the seasonal weather
pattern, which determines light, temperature, and soil moisture regimes
and probably influences rates of decomposition. The determinate growth
pattern would seem to be well adapted to situations of intense
competition, in which the range of variables controlling growth is
relatively modest (at least in comparison to disturbed situations) and a
premium is put on rapid early growth. Apparently, most photosynthate is

128

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

used to support radial and root growth or to refurbish supplies of stored
energy rather than being invested in extension growth. The determinate
growth pattern, coupled with a photosynthetic apparatus able to use a
wide range of light intensities and a relatively larger investment of energy
in root growth (Table 4-7), would seem to be well adapted to closed forest
situations typified by intense competition for light, water, and nutrients.
Aspects of the exploitive and conservative growth strategies discussed
above are summarized in Table 4-8.

Table 4-8. Aspects of Exploitive and Conservative Growth Strategies as Found
Among Tree Species of the Northern Hardwood Ecosystem?
Growth Strategy
Aspect

Exploitive

Conservative

Longevity
Extension Growth
Morphologic type
Time of occurrence
during growing season
Height Growth
Annual rate
Period of greatest
growth
Heterophylly
Bifurcation ratio
Crown Characteristics
Width
Depth
Root Growth
Root/shoot ratio
Depth of rooting
Photosynthetic lightsaturation of individual leaves
Absorbtion of water and
nutrients at lower
range of availability
Reproductive strategy
Time to first fruiting
Advance regeneration
Seed weight
Buried-seed strategy
Fugitive-seed strategy

Short

Long

Indeterminate

Determinate

Throughout

Early

Fast

Slower

Early years
Yes

Later
No

High

Low

Narrower

Wider
Deeper

“Many

items

are

Shallower

Higher
Deeper

At higher intensities

At lower intensities

Less effective

More

Shorter
No
Very light to heavy
Yes
NYiES

Longer
ies
Relatively heavy
Not well developed
No

Lower

expressed

unpublished data; Whitney,

Shallower

in relative

terms.

After Marks,

1976; and personal observations.

effective

1975; Aber,

1976,

and

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

ENDOGENOUS

129

DISTURBANCE

In our discussion of ecosystem development we have deliberately omitted
any mention of the effects of exogenous disturbances like cutting, hurricanes, fire, or ice storms. These stochastic events are not uncommon

and,

in fact, are major determinants of landscape pattern. However, our
goal in the first six chapters is to theorize on how animate and inanimate
components interact to produce ecosystem development in the absence of
outside (exogenous) disturbances.
Up to this point we have made little mention of endogenous
disturbance, but there is at least one source of disturbance that is inherent
in the forest ecosystem and which cannot be ignored or even theoretically
set aside. That force is treefall. When a tree falls, it creates a local
disturbance the size and intensity of which is related to the size of the
individual. The potential to create disturbance in this way varies markedly
among. species since only those species capable of achieving relatively
large size and weight are capable of creating a large local disturbance.
Many shade-intolerant species such as pin cherry, trembling aspen,
bigtooth aspen, gray birch, and white birch are genetically incapable of
achieving the size necessary to create large openings when they fall. On
the other hand, a number of intermediate and shade-tolerant species have
this capacity (Figure 4-8).
We have computed the average aboveground fresh weight for the three
species that often dominate mid- to late-aggrading forests (Figure 4-9).
Two trends are evident from these data. As a tree increases in size,
its fresh weight increases exponentially, and the proportion of weight
localized in the crown seems to increase linearly. A tree in the 75- to
100-cm class weighs from 8 to 12-t (fresh weight), and about 40% of the
weight is concentrated in the branches. This represents a large amount of
potential (mechanical) energy concentrated at one point in the ecosystem,
and the high proportion of weight in the crown would amplify the tree’s
capacity to do damage when it falls over.
To gain an appreciation of the amount of damage a large tree can
cause when it falls, we looked at a number of recently fallen trees in
well-developed forests. Three are reported here. In the Beinecke Forest
in Williamstown, Massachusetts, Henry Art called to our attention a
140-cm-dbh red oak, about 30 m tall, that had fallen 3 years previously. This
tree not only vacated its own space in the canopy, but in the process of
falling broke the top out of a 36-cm-dbh sugar maple and uprooted two
sugar maples 30 and 15-cm in dbh. This created a hole greater than 300-m?
in the upper canopy and a well-lighted area of about 150-m? on the forest
floor. Seedlings and saplings of all tolerance classes were vigorously
growing in the opening. At Smith’s Woods in Trumansburg, New York,
Peter Marks led us to an opening in a well-developed forest where a
100-cm-dbh

beech, about 28-m

ing it knocked

tall, was uprooted;

in the process of fall-

over a 10- and 40-cm-dbh sugar maple and a 40-cm-dbh

130

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Figure 4-8. Three white ash trees blown over in a wind storm. The fall illustrates
the “domino effect’—the first tree crashed into the second and the second into
the third. In this way, the fall of a large individual tree can create a canopy
opening much larger than the space formerly occupied by its own crown. The fall
shown here created a hole in the overstory canopy about 35-m long and 5-15-m
wide. Upturned roots were up to 1.8-m aboveground, and pits were made as
deep as 1-m.

basswood. An opening of about 300 m* was made in the upper canopy,
and seedlings and saplings of all tolerance levels were found growing in
the vacated space on the forest floor. At Campton, New Hampshire, we
observed a 75-cm-dbh white pine that had snapped at about 3m above
the ground. As it fell, the pine stripped most of the limbs from a
40-cm-dbh sugar maple, snapped an 18-cm-dbh sugar maple and a
15-cm-dbh beech, and uprooted a 38-cm-dbh beech. The tangle of
branches of the fallen trees flattened most of the saplings in a substantial
area. It was estimated that this fall opened an area in the upper canopy
of approximately 500-m*. This opening was observed early in the first
summer after the tree fell over, and vegetative response to the disturbance
was not yet clear.
It is clear that treefall is a major and unavoidable source of endogenous
disturbance since “what goes up must come down.” The amount of
disturbance is related to the biomass of the falling individual(s), and
openings created in the canopy may range from a few to hundreds of
square meters. In its maximum expression individual treefall may involve:
(1) creation of a throw mound(s) which produces a new microtopography
as well as a variety of new seedbeds (Hutnik, 1952) and (2) substantial

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

Branches

131

As

Percent Of Total ~~~

~

a

Total Tree
Weight

weight,
Fresh
t

Branch
of
wt.
percent
total
a
as

(@)

20

40
Dbh,

60

80

cm

Figure 4-9. Estimated total fresh weight aboveground and branch weight (percentage of total weight) as a function of dbh. Data are an average of total weight
for yellow birch, sugar maple, and beech. Estimates were made using regression
equations for stem, branch, leaf, and twig dry weight (Whittaker et al., 1974) and
fresh moisture contents (USDA Publ. No. 72).

openings in the upper canopy, e.g., 300 to 500-m’, comprising space
vacated by the falling tree plus that resulting from snapping off,
uprooting, or limb-stripping of individuals in its path of fall.
Thus, treefall may have a marked effect on the biogeochemistry of local

points within the ecosystem. Treefall implies a local reduction in net
primary productivity, an increase in dead wood, and an accumulation in
the soil of water and nutrients previously used by the fallen trees. It also
implies increased decomposition and mineralization due to increased
water and nutrients and warmer soil. In other words, the location
becomes an enriched site within the ecosystem. Of course, the degree of

enrichment is related to the amount of disturbance caused by the fall, and
this is related to tree size. It seems probable that there is a continuum of
biogeochemical, hydrologic, and radiant energy responses at the forest
floor, ranging from those similar to a closed aggrading forest (Chapter 2)
when a small tree falls to those approaching a recently clear-cut forest
(Chapter 3), when a patch of large trees fall.

INTERACTIONS BETWEEN REPRODUCTIVE
STRATEGIES AND DEGREE OF
CANOPY DISTURBANCE
Based on our own observations and extensive patch and clear-cutting
experiments by scientists of the U.S. Forest Service, we suggest that for
northern hardwood forests, the importance of the various reproductive

132

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

strategies outlined in Table 4-1 is differentially related to the size of holes
created in the canopy. We express these relationships in a rough way in
Figure 4-10, which shows the response of tree species in disturbed areas,
ranging from areas a few square meters in size to clear-cuts. In the next
section, we shall present a generalized pattern of secondary succession
that relates canopy differentiation to the creation of larger and larger
holes and to a shift in the relative importance of the various reproductive
strategies. These processes culminate in the formation of an all-aged
forest, the end point of the developmental process.
Figure 4-10 is intended to illustrate, in a general way, responses of
different reproductive and growth strategies to a gradient of canopy
disturbances. Four categories of growth by which the dominant canopy
may be reestablished are proposed. These are:

Group One
Canopy Closure

~<<Group Two

Group

Three

——=——"Gewp
Among
Be
To
Potential
Estimated
Opening
The
Dominating
Individuals
Disturbance
After
Years
Five
About

10

100
Area

(m®*) Of Canopy

Four

1000
Opened

10000

By Disturbance

Figure 4-10. A schematic presentation showing the relative capacity of various
tree species to achieve dominance within about 5 years in newly created
disturbed areas of various sizes in second-growth northern hardwood forests.
Tolerant and some intermediate individuals that do not gain immediate dominance may remain as lower crown classes and later gain a dominant position
when an earlier dominant dies out. Groups 2, 3, and 4 represent advance
regeneration, seedlings or saplings, and/or new seedlings that grow upward from
the herb-shrub strata, while Group 1 represents canopy closure by lateral or
upward growth by surrounding trees. Group 2 is composed of shade-tolerant
species and includes beech, sugar maple, hemlock,

red spruce, and balsam fir.
Group 3, the intermediate species, contains red maple, striped maple, mountain
maple, yellow birch, and ash. Group 4, the shade-intolerant species, includes pin
cherry, white birch, gray birch, bigtooth aspen, and trembling aspen. The scheme
is based on observations of growth in various-sized openings (50 to about
500-m*) caused by the death and fall of various-sized trees and literature reports
on forest cuts ranging from 400 to 10,000-m*. Estimates are based on personal
observations and data from Jensen, 1943; Hutnik, 1952; Wilson and Jensen,
1954; Gilbert and Jensen, 1958; Leak and Wilson, 1958; Blum and Filip, 1962;
Marquis, 1965; Horsley and Abbott, 1970; and Bjorkbom, 1972.

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

1. Canopy

closure by surrounding

trees. These

may

be dominant

133

or

codominant individuals of shade-tolerant, intermediate, or intolerant

trees or lower-canopy classes of tolerant or intermediate species.
These individuals fill the gap by growth from the side or from below
and may completely fill small openings in the canopy (ca. 50-m?).
2. Upgrowth by shade-tolerant species. This category includes growth by
new seedlings and advance regeneration up to several decades in age
that can respond to openings from about 50-m? to those the size of
clear-cuts and grow upward to fill the space created in the canopy.
3. Upgrowth by intermediate species. This includes growth by new
seedlings and advance regeneration generally less than ten years
old. Species in this category require somewhat larger openings
than species in category 2 to achieve dominance, but, like those in
category 2, they can respond to the whole range of larger openings.
4. Upgrowth by seedlings and sprouts of shade-intolerant species.
Individuals of this category are usually not found under the closed
canopy of the northern hardwood
forest but in well-lighted
openings. Tree species in this category require larger openings than
those of category 3. Generally, openings >400-m? are required
before these species contribute to the subsequent dominance of the
opening. However, raspberry, a thoroughly shade-intolerant shrub,
is often found in relatively smaller openings. Species in category 4
respond with increasing vigor as the size of the opening increases.
Large openings often involve considerable soil disturbance, which
contributes to the establishment of shade-intolerant species of the
fugitive type (Table 4-1).

COMPOSITION OF THE DOMINANT LAYER
DURING ECOSYSTEM DEVELOPMENT
AFTER CLEAR-CUTTING
During the first several decades after cutting, as the canopy closes, canopy
differentiation resulting from competition (Figure 4-10) among established
even-aged trees is the most important mechanism determining the
structure of the dominant layer of the ecosystem. Endogenous disturbances are relatively unimportant, since dying trees are only of modest
size, and vacated space is filled by individuals whose origin dates to the

time of cutting. This natural thinning process results in increasing
dominance of the overstory and understory by even-aged shade-tolerant
and intermediate species which have the potential to remain alive for a
long period of time. Shorter-lived intolerant and intermediate species are
eliminated or greatly reduced in importance in the canopy. Because of the
continuous canopy and modest endogenous disturbances, intolerant and
intermediate herbaceous and shrub species are eliminated or markedly
reduced as components of the active living biomass. They may persist,

134

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

however, as dormant living biomass, e.g., dormant seeds or vegetative
structures.
For the first century, the general trend of differentiation, acting on
the pool of individuals established immediately after clear-cutting, is as
follows:
1. development of a largely even-aged overstory increasingly dominated by long-lived shade-tolerant and intermediate species;
2. decrease in diversity of higher plants, with all layers of the
ecosystem increasingly dominated by shade-tolerant species;
3. decrease in the density of dominants, coupled with an increase in
average

biomass;

4. continued biomass accumulation by the ecosystem (Figure 2-1).
However, as tree size increases larger endogenous disturbances result.
These holes in the canopy are at first modest in size, perhaps 50 to 200 m’,
as trees of intermediate size topple, and tend to be filled principally by
upgrowth of shade-tolerant species (category 2; Figure 4-10) that had
become established on the forest floor during the initial period of canopy
differentiation. This process, discussed by Forcier (1973), contributes to
a further increase in the importance of tolerant species in the midaggrading ecosystem.
With time, some of the dominant trees begin to achieve really massive
sizes, up to >8 t aboveground fresh weight (Figure 4-9). The subsequent
fall of these trees creates larger openings, in the range of 300 to 500 m?.
These openings favor not only subsequent dominance by advanceregeneration of shade-tolerant species but also upgrowth by intermediate
species and, occasionally, upgrowth of shade-intolerant species (Figure
4-10). Local environmental enrichment is greater, and consequently
selection is somewhat more favorable to species employing the exploitive
Strategy.

Data on stand development (see page 115) suggest that, given full stocking
by a diversity of species after clear-cutting and no exogenous disturbance,
subsequent differentiation of the vegetation will first occur by natural
thinning, with development of an even-aged overstory increasingly
composed of long-lived shade-tolerant and intermediate species as
thinning proceeds. With time, however, the magnitude of endogenous
disturbance increases with increasing tree size, and this promotes the
gradual development of an all-aged overstory as younger individuals from
the forest floor grow into the canopy. At first, upgrowth of new stems is
largely by shade-tolerant species and contributes to the increasing importance of these species in the ecosystem. Eventually, as trees age and
grow larger, the potential for endogenous disturbance grows, to the point
at which upgrowth by intermediate species is not uncommon, and even
shade-intolerant trees have the opportunity of growing into the canopy
from the forest floor.
Shade-intolerant species are usually considered early-successional
species. However, our data suggest that even without exogenous

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

135

disturbance (e.g., cutting, fire, and windthrow) the ecosystem contains a
potential for endogenous disturbance sufficient to maintain intermediate
species as well as intolerant species as part of the old, uneven-aged forest.
Given the weight and disturbance potential of large trees, there seems to
be no way to exclude intolerant species from the old-aged northern
hardwood ecosystem undisturbed by exogenous forces. Situations where
intolerant species are wholly absent are probably middle-aged developmental sequences with a temporary absence of intolerant species rather
than so-called ‘‘climax’’ stands.

SPECIES

RICHNESS

An interesting trend in species richness (the number of species per square
meter of land surface) seems evident during our hypothetical successional
sequence. Species richness apparently would be at a maximum 2 or 3 years
after clear-cutting (Figure 4-3), when the vegetation forms a relatively
undifferentiated layer and contains a variety of life-forms and tolerance
classes (Table 4-5). If we considered species richness by separate layers,
(i.e., overstory, understory, and shrub and herb) with respect to time, we
would expect species richness of upper layers to decrease with time
because, with the development of stratification, various life-forms would
be restricted to particular layers. However, once the upper canopy closes
and the process of differentiation begins (see page 115), there would be a
trend toward the elimination of intolerant and some intermediate
species in all layers. It seems likely that species richness would reach a
low point somewhere in the mid-Aggradation Phase, when the canopy is
fairly continuous and dominated by tolerant and intermediate species
producing heavy shade. Lower layers might be augmented by a few
tolerant species, but, in general, herb cover would be modest and
dominated by relatively few species (Siccama et al., 1970). Beyond that
point, we would expect species richness to increase as the endogenous
disturbance created by the fall of large trees becomes a progressively
more important factor. We would not expect species richness in the older
aggrading forest to equal that found shortly after a clear-cut, because
richness is at a maximum in the most disturbed areas, and these constitute

only a relatively limited part of the old aggrading forest, while they make
up the entire area of a recent clear-cut.
Sprugel (1976), working with high-elevation fir forests of the northeastern United States has reported approximately the same pattern. Species
richness and equitability (the Shannon—Wiener H’) reach a high peak
immediately after disturbance, decline steeply to a low point as vigorous
young forest develops, and once again increase to a middle value as the
forest matures and opens.
It is interesting to note that in both of these examples maximum
diversity

is associated

with

maximum

disturbance,

increased

resource

136

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

availability, and minimum ecosystem stability (judged by ecosystem
control over exports of water and nutrients). Conversely, minimum
diversity is associated with those periods of time in which ecosystem
control over exports is maximal, i.e., the mid-Aggradation Phase.

Summary
1. The northern hardwood ecosystem contains species with a wide array
of growth and reproductive strategies.
activates
reproductive
strategies.
The
vegetation
2 Clear-cutting
immediately after cutting is often a mixture of advance regeneration
and new individuals that have arisen by sprouting or germination of
seeds already present plus those transported to the site.
a. The buried-seed strategy is particularly significant in revegetation
in the Hubbard Brook region. This strategy involves:
i. large quantities of dormant seed in the soil;
ii. germination triggered by environmental signals associated
with disturbance;
ili. rapid height growth;
iv. relatively rapid sexual reproduction with reestablishment of
the dormant seed pool.
3. Clear-cutting results in populations of trees of different species but of
about the same age. For a fairly long period, the forest is dominated by
relays of even-aged trees as the ecosystem develops.
a. Dominance of trees in the overstory changes with time as a result
of different growth strategies of the tree species established
immediately after clear-cutting.
b. Dominance shifts from shorter-lived, faster-growing, less-tolerant
species, which utilize an exploitive growth strategy, to longerlived, slower-growing, tolerant species, which utilize a conservative but more-competitive growth strategy.
c. Components of exploitive and conservative strategies are discussed.
4. Individuals starting growth at the time of clear-cutting have the
potential of dominating the site for more than a century, but as the
Aggradation Phase proceeds endogenous disturbance caused by treefall becomes an important factor in determining dominance in the
overstory.

a. At first, endogenous disturbance favors reinforcement of shadetolerant species in the overstory. However, as tree size increases
and local disturbance resulting from treefall becomes larger,
intermediate and even some intolerant species become more
abundant in the overstory.

Development of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting

137

b. Ecosystem development without exogenous disturbance leads to a
forest composition that contains the whole range of northern
hardwood

species,

including

the

so-called

early-successional

species.
5. Shortly after clear-cutting, when the ecosystem is least stable in terms
of its control of hydrologic, biogeochemical, and radiant energy flux,
species richness is apparently at a maximum. In contrast, during the
mid-Aggradation Phase (about 80 years after cutting), when the ecosystem has most control over flux rates, species richness is comparatively
low.

CHAPTER

5

Reorganization: Recovery
of Biotic Regulation

The aggrading northern hardwood ecosystem has a considerable capacity
to exercise control over hydrology and biogeochemistry and to regulate
the flow and use of solar energy (Chapter 2). When this control is at its
maximum, the ecosystem is most stable, with highly predictable and low
net losses of nutrients and a fairly constant annual evapotranspiration
rate. Regulation is rooted in internal ecosystem processes such as
transpiration, nutrient uptake, decomposition,

mineralization, and nitrifi-

cation. Clear-cutting results in marked changes in internal ecosystem
processes and a distinct loss of biotic regulation over energy flow,
biogeochemistry, and hydrology (Chapter 3).
We now examine the recovery of biotic regulation as the various
species respond, through growth and reproductive strategies, to the new
conditions of resource availability created by clear-cutting.
Loss of regulation is reflected in markedly increased exports of water
and nutrients from the ecosystem and some increase in soil erosion,
depending on the degree of disturbance. On the other hand, recovery of
the ecosystem may be stimulated by temporary enrichment of the site
with available soil moisture during the summer, increased radiant energy
at the ground level, and a marked increase in the concentrations of
dissolved nutrients in the soil solution (Figure 5-1). In a sense, the
ecosystem has an abundance of solar energy, is fertilized with nutrients
drawn out of the nutrient capital of the system and is irrigated.
In the remainder of this chapter, we shall consider how the autotrophic
biota respond to these conditions of site enrichment and how the
ecosystem recovers biotic regulation over export patterns. In the course

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

Clear

Cutting
~

bed

139

a

Se
~

Transpiration

Radiant

Energy

Markedly

Flow

Reduced

increased

To Soll

™ Potential

Nutrient

Allelopathic

Uptake

Controls

Markedly

By Growing
Vegetation

Diminished

Relaxed

I

summer
treamu

iti
Decomposition,

Velocity

Increased

Warmer

And

Mineralization,

Moister

Soil

Nitrification
Increased

Ht

Biotic Regulation

Reanvene

Modest Increase
in Erosion

Substances

Markedly

increased

in Soll Solution

Unchanged

Increased
Streamflow

Dissolved

Export

Accelerated DissolvedNutrient Loss

Figure 5-1. Hydrologic and biogeochemical responses of the northern hardwood
ecosystem during the first two seasons after cutting. Erosion response assumes
little damage to the soil during the harvesting process. Items in double-lined boxes
represent marked increases in resource availability within the ecosystem.

of this discussion, we shall attempt to illustrate the array of mechanisms
by which the short- and long-term stability of the ecosystem is maintained, the cost of such maintenance, and to present a generalized view of
ecosystem homeostasis.

PRIMARY

PRODUCTIVITY

Initial Response
Conditions created by clear-cutting activate the entire array of reproductive and growth strategies discussed in Chapter 4, and the clear-cut site is
soon covered with vegetation. However, these general observations leave
several basic questions unanswered. How rapidly does primary production recover? How does production compare to that prior to disturbance?
How closely is production coupled to the heterotrophic processes discussed in Chapter 3? How quickly does the ecosystem reestablish maximum biotic regulation over energy flow, biogeochemistry, and hydrology?
Studies in the vicinity of Hubbard Brook (Figure 5-2) indicate that,
after a lag of about 1 year, recovery of net primary productivity (NPP) on
clear-cut sites is rapid. Within 2 years after cutting, NPP averages about
38% of a 55-yr-old forest. Leaf area index (LAI) is about 3.0 for 2-yr-old
sites dominated by raspberry (Whitney, 1978), as compared to a value of

140

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

about 6.0 for the older forest (Whittaker et al., 1974). At 4 years, NPP and
LAI are about equal to values for a 55-yr-old forest (Figure 5-2; Marks,
1974). Between Years 4 and 6, NPP may rise substantially above that of
the intact forest, but whether it does so appears to be influenced by the
relative importance of exploitive species in the revegetation process. All
of the points above the regression line in Figure 5-2 represent data from
plots almost wholly dominated by exploitive species (raspberry or pin
cherry).
The rapid average rate of NPP increase, 232 g/m?-yr (Figure 5-2),

1200

Average For
55-Yr-Old Forest

800

600

g/m*
NPP,
Ground
Above
-yr 400

200

O

|

2
Years After

3

a

S

6

Clear—Cufting

Figure 5-2. The relationship of aboveground net primary productivity to time after
clear-cutting. Data are from the following sources: (@) Marks (1974); (©) Whitney
(1978); (+) S. Bicknell, F. H. Bormann, and P. Marks (unpublished data); (A) P.
Murphy (unpublished); (x) D. Ryan (unpublished). Murphy’s data are for aboveground current growth and hence are a low estimate of aboveground NPP. All data
are from plots where the forest floor had not been massively disturbed in the
harvesting process. Safford and Filip (1974) suggest much lower rates of NPP on
4-yr-old plots that were scarified after cutting with a crawler tractor and a rock rake.
It seems likely on clear-cut sites with much surface disturbance that average rates
of NPP recovery would be lower than those presented here.

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

141

during the first 6 years indicates a strong autotrophic growth response to
the increase in resource availability resulting from the clear-cut. For the
ecosystem as a whole, during the course of development, it seems
probable that there are few sustained rates of NPP increase that remotely
approach that of the first few years after clear-cutting. The rapid rate of
NPP increase and the relatively high absolute rates of primary production
within 3 or 4 years after cutting suggest a fairly rapid response of autotrophs
to increased resources resulting from heterotrophic processes (Chapter 3).

Longer-Term

Response

We have relatively few data on the productive behavior of the northern
hardwood ecosystem after the initial burst of growth that follows clearcutting. Obviously, NPP cannot increase indefinitely, nor does a single
asymptote stretching over 170 years seem likely. According to our best
understanding, the ecosystem undergoes a variety of biotic and abiotic
changes during this long period, and it seems likely that these changes are
reflected in primary production. There are some data to support this
contention. Marks (1974) reports aboveground NPP of 1076 g/m?-yr for a
14-yr-old pin cherry stand, while values of 957 and 792 g/m?-yr were
measured for a 40-—45- and 45-—50-yr-old stand dominated by sugar
maple, beech, and yellow birch (Table 1-1). These data suggest that net
primary productivity during the Reorganization Phase peaks and then
declines.
Studies by Covington and Aber (1979) suggest a pattern for primary
productivity during the Reorganization and Aggradation Phases of
northern hardwoods. They studied leaf production in stands of different
ages that arose naturally after clear-cutting and which exist within the
limits set forth in Chapter 1. To these data they added appropriate
leaf-production values from other studies. Leaf production is not a good
index of changes in NPP during succession because of the changing
proportions of NPP invested in photosynthetic and respiratory tissues as

development proceeds (Whittaker and Woodwell, 1967). Leaf production,
however, may be considered as a rough index of gross primary production
(GPP). The curve generated by Covington and Aber (Figure 5-3) thus
provides an index of changes in GPP through time. Although the fit of the
curve is largely speculative, there is an underlying logic to it.
The curve suggests a rapid rise in GPP during the earliest years after
clear-cutting. This conforms with the NPP measurements discussed above
and can be accounted for by the high levels of resource availability
resulting from the cutting.
There is some question as to how to draw the curve beyond Year 6.
Should it gradually rise to a maximum at about Year 60, or dip and then
rise, as Aber and Covington have drawn it? Use of data from different
stands could be misleading; one stand may be simply more productive or

142

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

t/ha
.Biomass,
Leaf

O

10

20

5 OR

4 Onn

Age

In Years

One®

200

Figure 5-3. Leaf biomass (®) fora secondary developmental sequence in northern
hardwoods. Age is years after clear-cutting. Data are means and 95% confidence
intervals. Additional data are from (h) Hart et al., 1962; (g) Gosz et al., 1972; (m)
Marks, 1974; and (w) Whittaker et al., 1974 (Covington and Aber, 1978).

variance may be such that a dip appears because data points are lacking.
However, several lines of reasoning suggest that the dip and subsequent
rise to Year 60 may be justified.
The proposed dip in production could result from the interaction of
many factors. First, reduction in the amount of easily decomposable
organic substrate in the forest floor could diminish nutrient availability
(Chapter 3). The decline in depth of the forest floor means. less
mineralization and also less storage space for water and available
nutrients. Second, the rapid development of high rates of GPP shortly
after cutting implies increasing competition for water and nutrients, which
might differentially affect productivity of exploitive species since they are
probably less able to compete for water and nutrients at low ranges of
availability. Third, Covington and Aber point out that the transfer of
productivity from one species to another may not be smooth, and a
temporary drop in production may result. For example, toward the end of
the Reorganization Phase, as pin cherry begins to die out, the uptake of
available resources may be diminished, and for a time the other species
may not take up the slack.
Explanation of the relatively rapid rise after the decrease in production
is even more problematical. Yet the proposed rise in GPP to about Year
50 (Figure 5-3) appears reasonable, since other measurements indicate
that the ecosystem is simultaneously undergoing a rapid accumulation of
net biomass in three of its four compartments: living organisms, forest

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

143

floor, and dead wood (Figure 2-1). There are several factors that could
contribute to a rising GPP. A shift in predominance from species utilizing
the exploitive growth strategy to those utilizing a conservative growth
strategy could lead to greater production through more efficient use of
site resources. Secondly, initial growth seems to be primarily supported
by nutrients drawn largely from the forest floor and the upper few
centimeters of the mineral soil by shallow-rooted species. Gradual
occupancy of the site by deeper-rooted species would allow utilization of
nutrient and water resources deeper in the mineral soil. Although cation
exchange per unit weight of soil in the B-horizons of White Mountain
soils is low in comparison to that of the forest floor, the total amounts are

substantial owing to greater thickness and bulk density. Similarly, more
than 90% of the soil’s water-holding capacity is found in the mineral soil

(Hoyle, 1973).
The paucity of data on productivity beyond about Year 55 makes
speculation difficult. However, in an old aggrading forest, dominated by
large old trees, there would be a high ratio of respiratory to photosynthetic tissue (Whittaker and Woodwell, 1967), and this could lead to
relatively low net primary productivity, since GPP minus green plant
respiration equals NPP.

RECOVERY OF BIOTIC
ECOSYSTEM EXPORT

REGULATION

OVER

How quickly does the revegetating ecosystem establish biotic regulation
over export patterns? We have sought answers to this question in several
ways: by following the recovery of the deforested watershed (W2) at
Hubbard Brook, by comparing stream-water chemistry from revegetating,
commercially clear-cut forests and adjacent aggrading forests, and by
drawing on information from the literature.

Recovery After Enforced Devegetation
The sequence of revegetation of the deforested watershed (W2) at
Hubbard Brook is shown in Figure 5-4. Once revegetation was allowed to
occur, the rate of recovery of net primary productivity was initially much
lower (Reiners et al., 1979) than in areas where natural revegetation
immediately followed clear-cutting (Figure 5-5). On W2 there was a 2-yr
period of very low growth, as compared to a single year of low growth on
the commercially cut watersheds. NPP increased more or less linearly
after the second year of recovery on W2, but the rate of increase from
Year 2 to Year 5 was about 27% lower than that of immediate-growth
systems. By Year 5, average aboveground NPP on immediate-growth
systems had risen to over 1000 g/m’, while on W2 it was about 45% lower.

144

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

(A)

Figure 5-4. The revegetation of Watershed 2. (A) June 1968, the beginning of the
last of three growing seasons when the watershed was kept bare by herbicide
treatment. (B) June 1970, the beginning of the second growing season of
revegetation.

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

145

the third growing season of
Figure 5-4. (cont.) (C) September 1971, the end of
photographs illustrates the
of
ce
sequen
This
1972.
of
revegetation. (D) Late May
despite 3 consecutive years
considerable capacity of the ecosystem to revegetate
Forest Service.
of enforced barrenness. Photos courtesy of the U.S.

1446

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

800

S {e)(e}

g/m?)
(Dry
Matter
NPP
200

O

|

2
Years

3
Of

4

5

Regrowth

Figure 5-5. Aboveground regrowth (NPP) after (@—®) clear-cutting and enforced
devegetation (W2, Reiners et al., 1979) and (O---©) clear-cutting followed
immediately by natural revegetation (from Figure 5-2).

These fundamental differences in productive behavior plus 3 years of
enforced devegetation suggest that biogeochemical data for the recovery
period from W2 may not precisely portray the reestablishment of biotic
regulation in commercially clear-cut systems that are allowed to revegetate immediately. Nevertheless, hydrologic and biogeochemical data
from W2 are the most complete in existence, and they do reveal insights
into basic patterns of ecosystem recovery.
Annual streamflow on W2 increased between 24 and 35-cm during the
devegetation period. These values represent 26 to 41% greater streamflow than would have occurred if the forest had been left uncut (Chapter
3; Figure 5-6). Variation in streamflow during this period was due to
differences in amount and timing of precipitation (Hornbeck, 1975).
Almost all of these increases occurred during the growing season and
were coincident with the elimination of transpiration by cutting. Streamflow decreased markedly during the first 4 years of revegetation (Figure
5-6). Although much of that decrease was probably due to increases in
transpiration related to revegetation, some proportion was apparently
related to chance variations in amount of precipitation, since streamflow
rose again during the last 3 water-years reported here, 1974-75 to 1976-77.
Thus after 7 years, despite moderately high levels of primary productivity,
the export of liquid water remained significantly higher than that
expected from a 60-yr-old aggrading forest (J. Hornbeck, personal
communication).

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

Calibration—|

Treatment

[|

147

Regrowth |

Deviation
From
Streamflow,
Estimated
cm
1°2'°3'4'5'S'7' 8°90 112131415 161718
Water Years
Figure 5-6. Deviations from regression of annual streamflow for Watershed 2 on
annual streamflow for adjacent uncut reference Watershed 3. Period A represents
precutting calibration period; Period B is the enforced devegetation period, and
Period C is the regrowth period. Water-years are from 1 June to 31 May and begin
1 June 1958 (from Hornbeck, 1975, and J. Hornbeck, personal communication).

Concentrations of dissolved substances (Table 5-1) and their export
from W2 (Figure 5-7) decreased markedly during the first 3 years of the
recovery period. The explanation for this decrease is not entirely clear,
but nutrient uptake by vegetation was not solely responsible. The decline
in annual concentrations of nitrate, potassium, and calcium in stream
water began during the third year of devegetation in the absence of any
vegetation. Earlier (Chapter 3) we suggested this might be due to the
exhaustion of easily decomposable substrates. A modest decline in nutrient concentrations in stream water was recorded during the first year
of revegetation, followed by a sharp decline in the second and third
year. Primary production during the second year was relatively low, yet
the decreases in stream-water concentrations were among the sharpest
recorded (Table 5-1). Several interpretations are possible, for example:
(1) exhaustion of decomposable substrate may have continued to be a
major factor; (2) relatively small amounts of vegetation growing along
drainage channels may have had a major effect in determining streamwater chemistry; (3) nitrification may have been inhibited by living plants.
By the third year of the regrowth period (Table 5-1), nitrate concen-

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

148

Table 5-1. Annual Weighed Concentrations of Nitrate, Calcium, and Potassium lons in Stream Water from
Reference Watershed 6 (W6) and the Experimentally Devegetated Watershed 2 (W2)?
Nitrate

Calcium

Potassium

W6

W2

W6

W2

W6

W2

ee

ee

ho

Ors

O23

03

1.0
1964-1965
0.9
1965-1966
Devegetated period
0.7
1966-1967
ish
1967-1968
|e
1968-1969
Regrowth period
32
1969-1970
24
1970-1971
1971-1972
DB
1972-1973
1.8
1973-1974
Dos}
1974-1975
2.4
1975-1976
2D

1.3
0.9

1.0
1.4

1.4
1.8

OY
0.2

0.2
0.2

38.4
Spee
0

1,3)
ih}
eS

6.5
7.6
6.0

0.2
0.3
0.3

1.9
3.0
2.9

BS
18.8
DA
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1

1.6
15
1.4
1.4
1.4
fe
1.3

6.2
4.0
Deg
1.8
1 7/
ey
1.6

0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2

2.8
1.6

Year

Precutting period

1963-1964

0.7
0.5
0.5
0.4
0.4

#Values are in milligrams per liter.
No data.

trations were indistinguishable from those of an approximately 60-yr-old
agerading system, and beyond that time they were lower. Calcium
concentrations after the third year of regrowth were about the same as
those found in the 60-yr-old forest, but potassium concentrations
remained relatively high.
Erosion and transportation of particulate matter were very responsive
to revegetation (Figure 5-7). Toward the end of the devegetation period
and during the first year of vegetation regrowth, the export of particulate
matter was increasing exponentially. This trend was reversed during the
second and third year of recovery; erosion decreased sharply, coincident
with a relatively small amount of vegetation growth. With such small
amounts of primary production (Figure 5-4), regulation of particulate
export obviously did not come from reestablishment of the forest floor
through litterfall. Observations suggest that a concentration of plant
growth in and around stream banks might have been responsible for the
stabilization of stream banks and reestablishment of organic-debris dams.
Stream banks, by virtue of direct exposure to streamflow, are more subject
to the erosive force of flowing water than any other single area of the
ecosystem.

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

60 yr old
Aggrading
Forest

149

ReCcOVe

Calcium

02-0--—- -O2Potassium

Export

SS

[O==O—=0~

—@=——

Net

Annual

1963-64

1966-67

1969-70

(972-15

1975-10

Figure 5-7. Export patterns of dissolved substances (calcium, potassium and
nitrate) and particulate matter in stream water from (O--©O) the experimentally
clear-cut watershed (W2) and (@—®) the forested reference watershed (W6)
(modified from Likens et al., 1978).

Information from W2 contributed in the following ways to our
understanding of the recovery of biotic regulation of export patterns in
clear-cut ecosystems:
1. The massive loss of nutrients from W2 resulted in part from the
delay in coupling primary productivity and the hydrologic and
nutrient enrichment that occurred immediately after disturbance.
Not only did enforced devegetation prevent growth and reproductive strategies from taking effect immediately, but it reduced the
effectiveness of these strategies once regrowth took place. The
relatively sluggish growth once revegetation began was probably
due, in part, to the loss of nutrients during the period of enforced
devegetation.

150

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

These points emphasize the importance of effective and early
coupling of forest floor decomposition and nutrient uptake by new
vegetation. Any harvesting practice that tends to uncouple decomposition and nutrient uptake by disrupting the forest floor may
contribute to unnecessary nutrient export and a reduction in the rate
of recovery of primary productivity.
2. Despite 3 years of enforced devegetation and substantial loss of
nutrients from the ecosystem, there were, coincident with revegetation, rapid initial declines in the concentrations of dissolved
substances in stream water and the export of liquid water, dissolved

substances, and particulate matter. Steep initial declines were
associated with relatively small increases in vegetation growth,
suggesting the possibility that living plants, particularly along
drainage channels, have a great effect in establishing early regulation
over export.
3. After 7 years of recovery, even though net primary productivity had
risen to substantial levels (Figure 5-4), streamflow and the net export
of calcium and potassium were still greater than precutting levels
(Figures 5-6, 5-7). Nitrogen, on the other hand, after the fourth year
of the regrowth period, showed a net gain (i.e., meteorologic input
minus gross export gave a positive value), indicating that losses
of dissolved nitrogen are rapidly brought under control by the
revegetating system and that a net accumulation of nitrogen may
have begun. Caution is advised here because we don’t know the net
balance for gaseous nitrogenous substances. These results indicate
that each species of dissolved ion had a different recovery pattern
(Likens et al., 1978).

Recovery With Immediate

Revegetation

Extensive data from throughout the eastern deciduous forest suggest that
the export of particulate matter after clear-cutting is minimal if the site
is rapidly revegetated and not excessively erosion-prone and if road construction and cutting are carried out in a careful manner (Patric, 1976b,
1977). Our findings for the northern hardwood forest are in accord
with these data. In Chapter 2 we elaborated on a number of biotic
mechanisms,

relating

to both

living

and

dead

biomass,

that

exercise

regulation over the erodibility of the aggrading forest. Our experimental
study of the devegetated ecosystem (W2) demonstrates that mechanisms
controlling erodibility of the ecosystem can function at high levels for 2
years in the absence of any green plant growth as long as the forest floor is
not excessively disturbed (Chapter 3). The recovery of the devegetated
ecosystem indicates that relatively small amounts of vegetation regrowth
can rapidly reduce export of particulate-matter. All of these factors taken
together indicate that, with acceptable harvesting practices, biotic regulation of particulate-matter export after clear-cutting is only moderately
diminished and recovers rapidly with reestablishment of vegetation.

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

151

Apparently partial biotic regulation of streamflow via transpiration
begins rapidly with regrowth, but establishment of full regulation may
take several decades. For example, the recovery of a clear-cut forest in
North Carolina indicated a rapid initial decline in streamflow, but after
23 years streamflow was still singificantly greater than that expected if the
watershed had not been cut (Figure 5-8). Similar data from West Virginia
indicated that more than 10 years were required for streamflow to return
to precutting levels (Lull and Reinhart, 1967). These data indicate that
decline in streamflow is not a simple function of recovery of NPP. Other
factors such as height and dispersion of the canopy (Douglass, 1967),
percentage of canopy in evergreens (Swank and Douglass, 1974),
percentage of soil occupied by roots (Lull and Reinhart, 1967), and
changes in the water-holding capacity of the forest floor also may be
determinants. In clear-cut northern hardwood ecosystems, it seems likely
that recovery of full biotic regulation of streamflow takes 10 to 20 years, or
to about the end of the proposed Reorganization Phase.
To determine the effect of immediate revegetation on stream-water
chemistry, we made a comparative study of water from nine small
commercially clear-cut watersheds and from nearby uncut stands (Pierce
et al., 1972;

three

stands

are

not

included

here

because

one

had

an

inadequate reference watershed, another was dominated by spruce and
fir, and the third had a record of inadequate length). Stream-water

Calibration
Period

|~__—_+| |«—

Regrowth

=

40
30

20

Streamflow
Deviation,
cm

O
Water -Years
Figure 5-8. The decline in streamflow associated with the regrowth of a clear-cut
forest at Coweeta, North Carolina. Decline in streamflow is calculated as deviation
from expected streamflow. The zero line represents expected streamflow if the
forest had not been cut. There is a 3-yr calibration period prior to cutting and a
23-yr period of regrowth (after Hibbert, 1967).

152

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

concentrations from the uncut stands were very similar to those reported

for aggrading forests at Hubbard Brook (Chapter 2, Likens et al., 1977).
Although biotic regulation over stream-water chemistry was substantially weakened, it was not changed to the extent shown in W2 (the
devegetated system, Table 5-2). For the six commercially clear-cut
watersheds, annual concentrations (unweighted for volume) of nitratenitrogen, potassium, and calcium averaged for the first 2 years after cutting

showed increases by factors of 12, 2, and 3, respectively (Table 5-2). This
compares with increases by factors of 41, 11, and 5 for the devegetated
watershed (W2) when compared to the average of all uncut watersheds at
Hubbard Brook (Likens et al., 1970).
In contrast to the devegetated system at Hubbard Brook, only one
commercially clear-cut watershed showed stream-water concentrations to
be highest in the second year after cutting. Three commercially clear-cut
watersheds had highest concentrations in the first year, and the pattern
was not clear for the remaining two. In only two of the six watersheds did
nitrate concentrations fall to precutting levels within 3 years after regrowth
began, as happened on W2. Trends in the other four watersheds
suggested that such a reduction would take 4 or 5 years after cutting.
Calcium concentrations in two watersheds and potassium concentrations
in five watersheds remained above reference levels throughout the
measurement period of 4 years.
We draw two important conclusions from these results. Immediate
revegetation reduces the magnitude of increases in concentrations of
dissolved substances in drainage water, but it does not prevent significant
increases from occurring. This indicates that coupling between mineralization processes (accelerated by clear-cutting) and nutrient uptake by
regrowing vegetation is far from perfect and that other nutrient sinks
within the ecosystem are incapable of retaining all nutrients not taken up
by vegetation.

Table 5-2. Ratio of Stream-Water Concentrations of Commercially ClearCut Forests to that of Reference Streams Draining nearby
Uncut Forests in the White Mountains of New Hampshire?
Clear-cut/Uncut
Years

After

Ratio

No. of Sites

Cutting

Sampled

Nitrate

Calcium

Potassium

1
2
3
4

4
6
6
2

14.0+5.0
OMEOrS
OFS ==alk6
Iel=eakO

2.4+0.1
Aoi] 3504
1.6+0.3
1.4+0.4

8 0E=0Y7
2.6013
Paes (ES
DS 25s

"Values

expressed

as

averages (Pierce et al.,
unpublished data).

means+SEM.
1972,

and

Ratios

are

based

on

unweighted

R. Pierce,

W.

Martin,

and

A. Federer,

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

153

We conclude that reestablishment of biotic regulation over export of
nutrients from commercially cut forests is similar to that shown for the
experimentally devegetated system. Nutrient export in stream water is a
function of concentration and amount of streamflow. In the northern
hardwood system, regulation of stream-water concentrations is established fairly rapidly for nitrate (1 to 5 years) and more slowly for cations (5 to
10 years) and regulation of streamflow occurs still more slowly (10 to 20
years). Considering concentration and streamflow together, it is apparent
that biotic regulation (over large increases in nutrient export) is achieved
fairly rapidly, i.e., within 3 to 5 years after cutting, but that one or two
decades is required before precutting levels of export are reestablished.
Substantial quantities of nutrients are lost from the clear-cut ecosystem
before full control is reestablished.

COUPLING OF MINERALIZATION
STORAGE PROCESSES

AND

A major consideration in the analysis of ecosystem dynamics after
disturbance is the efficiency with which the ecosystem is able to store
nutrients. Storage may consistof the transfer of nutrients to new
vegetation or to other sinks within the ecosystem. For example, following
clear-cutting in a Douglas fir forest, a very different kind of ecosystem,
little export of nutrients was reported, but major transfers from upper to
lower horizons are thought to occur (Cole and Gessel, 1965; Gessel et al.,
1973):
Covington (1976) has pointed out that during the Reorganization Phase
more nitrogen is released from the forest floor than can be accounted
for by a net accumulation in living biomass plus that lost as dissolved
substances in stream water.
To gain a more detailed insight into mineralization—storage processes in
northern

hardwoods,

we

estimated

nutrient losses from the forest floor,

nutrient gains by regrowing vegetation, and net nutrient export of
dissolved substances in stream water for an average stand over a 4-yr
period after commercial clear-cutting (Figures 5-9, 5-10, and 5-11). These
average data were obtained by compositing data collected in different
stands at different times and thus should be considered as a first
approximation. More precise data are needed, and a simultaneous study
of all of these parameters should be conducted in a single stand over the
same time period. Nevertheless, the present analysis suggests several
interesting and to some degree startling conclusions.
1. In immediately revegetating clear-cut ecosystems, the growth
response of new vegetation is not sufficient to prevent significant
losses of dissolved substances. However, within a few years after
cutting, annual increases of nutrients stored in biomass were
approximately equal to or greater than annual decreases in stream-

154

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Nitrogen
from

100

3 60
2 40

0

Fi

OF

Unaccounted Loss Yo
“Wj from Forest Floor

Ui

gfota(NS ae
e yfSi.

20

Forest

o?

e NG

fj
7

“a0?

Wa
|
Years

YP

LY;

Yj

IA,

a

Yi

YH

2
%)
after clear-cutting

4-

Figure 5-9. An estimated nitrogen budget for a commercially clear-cut forest. Net
dissolved losses in stream water, storage in living biomass, and total losses from
the forest floor are shown for 4 years after cutting. Forest floor data are for an
average site and are estimated using nutrient concentrations and an equation for
predicting changes in forest floor depth (Covington, 1976). Accumulation in living
biomass is estimated from Marks (1974) and Likens and Bormann (1970), and the
estimate is probably high. Stream-export data are calculated with the stream-water
concentrations and estimated streamflow (Table 5-2) for six commercially clear-cut
watersheds in the White Mountains. Unaccounted loss from the forest floor
represents the difference between total loss (TL) from the forest floor and biomass
storage (BS) plus net stream-water losses (NSL) i.e., [TL— (BS+ NSL)].

water output of nutrients (Figures 5-9, 5-10, and 5-11). It would
appear that with time after disturbance a direct relationship
develops between nutrient storage in living biomass and streamwater chemistry. However, this relationship may not be simple or
direct; for example, regrowing vegetation may take up NH,’ directly
and hence limit the process of nitrification, which in turn affects
cation exchange, and so forth (Chapter 3).
2. A large amount of nitrogen, presumably lost from the forest floor
after clear-cutting, is not accounted for by stream-water loss or plant
uptake and storage (Figure 5-9). If our estimate of the rate of
nitrogen loss from the forest floor is correct, about 60% of the

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation
60

155

Calcium

50

Bas (e)

Potassium
ol©
Flux,
kg/ha

20

|

2

3
Years

4
After

|

2

3

4

Clear—Cutting

Figure 5-10. Estimated average biomass storage and net stream-water loss of
potassium and calcium for a 4-yr period after commercial clear-cutting. See Figure
5-9 for methods of calculation.

predicted loss is unaccounted for by vegetation uptake and/or loss in
drainage water. Covington (1976) suggests, for the Reorganization
Phase as a whole, that some of the ‘“‘missing”’ nitrogen may be tied
up in decomposing logs left over from the clear-cutting. However,
decomposing logs would be an unimportant “‘sink’’ during the first
4 years after cutting.
Nitrogen loss from the forest floor may be accounted for by
translocation to deeper mineral horizons or volatilization by chemical or biological denitrification processes. The latter pathway would
increase the already significant losses of nitrogen (i.e., dissolved
nitrogen) from the ecosystem by a factor of five. It is interesting to
note that Dominski (1971) also estimated nitrogen loss from the
entire soil profile of W2 after 3 years of devegetation to be about 35%
greater than stream-water losses. He suggested volatilization as an
explanation, but his data were inconclusive.
These results indicate that there is much we do not know about
the nitrogen cycle in forest ecosystems. The evaluation of denitrification under field conditions represents a major research challenge.
It also should be borne in mind that a finding of significant
denitrification would automatically entail still-greater amounts of

156

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Calcium

a)
®

60

7

Kom,

PEXKKKS
CESSES
SERKKKKD

SOD
SOR

QAO
KRY
EK
<
Oe=
RK
RRR
RKKKKH
KKRHO
eeacacaratarenenececectetctchehchgteete
RRKNKKHew SNS
IRI IHD
ROKK
Rees
OOS:
ERREK Loss from OC
SRS
xem Mineral Soil Xess

pesoseatarsiacsooreescennnnnenseeens
S

50

40

a
£
Ss
Se 30
=e

=5
LL

20

.

oo

HHO IRR KK
ROL
RROD
SSR
HIS
RRR K KKK
eenetacataronerereracacanonenteteeee i

Potassium

S KKH8
SOK
IRR
KKK KKK
ROKK RK RK KR KORN
SGN
OLS
RYS
QR
RES
<oo

REEN
e0 FERRER
PFLER
EEESNRO
SSOVK
DEKKER
yp
RHE
KK
BAKKER
X
SB?
SKKRKY
BECKER
Oe
OO Ge KEKE RBRVS

Oo

“
ww}

&£

rane
ESO
KROQ

HORNS
KERNeS
Boe KORE
SH
a
es 96 FTOM Forecy Bloon © We
a
seeeceenee
from
Loss
Ke"
sy
Seer Mineral Soil Pacenncecone
Yj

eestennesstareeetennceceereeseeeet
EON
oo

MY

777Total Loss from
Forest

e

|

2

2
|
4
Years After Clear—Cufting

Floor
3

7

4

Figure 5-11. Flux of calcium and potassium in the ecosystem during the 4 years
after commercial clear-cutting. Cations stored in biomass plus those flushed from
the ecosystem cannot be wholly accounted for by losses from the forest floor. It is
assumed the difference comes from the mineral soil. See Figure 5-9 for methods of
calculation.

biological nitrogen fixation during the Aggradation Phase, to make
up the additional losses.
3. Estimated losses of calcium and potassium from the forest floor
cannot account for that taken up and stored in living biomass plus
that lost in stream water (Figures 5-10 and 5-11). This suggests
that cations are being withdrawn from the mineral soil as well as
from the forest floor. Most of the calcium and potassium lost from
the forest floor may be taken up by the shallow-rooted vegetation
that typifies early revegetation (Table 4-7), while most of the dissolved ions exported from the ecosystem may be drawn from the
deeper mineral soil. This is not an unreasonable

assumption, since

water filtering through the lower horizons is probably enriched in
hydrogen ions resulting from the accelerated nitrification that
follows

clear-cutting,

while

lower

changeable cations (Hoyle, 1973).

horizons

contain

adequate

ex-

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

157

This discussion on nitrogen and cations allows us to comment on the
behavior of the mineral-soil compartment during ecosystem development.
In Chapter 1, we assumed that the organic content of the mineral soil
remained unchanged during the development of the ecosystem after
clear-cutting. We made that assumption because of our inability to
measure changes accurately. The small amount of direct data we have
(Dominski, 1971) suggests that the mineral soil loses organic matter and
nitrogen immediately after clear-cutting, while the large amount of
unaccounted-for nitrogen loss (Figure 5-9) suggests the possibility that the
mineral soil may accumulate some nitrogen from the forest floor. These
conflicting data reinforce our original decision to consider organic matter
in the mineral soil as relatively unchanging. New research must be done
to bridge this important gap in our knowledge.
The calcium and potassium data (Figure 5-11), on the other hand, seem
more definitive; these data suggest it is unlikely that there was a net
increase in exchangeable cations in the lower mineral soil after cutting of
northern hardwoods such as that reported when Douglas fir was clear-cut
(Cole and Gessel, 1965). Rather, the whole profile under northern hardwoods seems to lose exchangeable cations.

REPLACEMENT

OF LOST

NUTRIENT

CAPITAL

As discussed above, restoration of biotic regulation over hydrology and
export of nutrients is not synchronous. Apparently, full biotic regulation
over export is achieved 10 to 20 years after clear-cutting, roughly coincident
with the end of the Reorganization Phase in our model of ecosystem
development (Figure 1-7). Thereafter, the ecosystem acquires available
nutrients from various meteorological inputs (including nitrogen fixation)
and from weathering, as discussed in Chapter 2.

ECOSYSTEM

REGULATION

The Aggradation Phase
Biogeochemistry. Our evidence indicates that various processes in the
aggrading ecosystem are closely regulated. The most direct evidence
comes from biogeochemical data. Of all the phases in the developmental
sequence, the Aggradation Phase has the greatest degree of biogeochemical predictability and constancy. Despite highly variable precipitation chemistry (Chapter 2), concentrations of most dissolved substances in
stream water have narrowly defined limits and are predictably related to
flow rates or seasonal factors (Chapter 2). We find that the aggrading
ecosystem is characterized by a relatively small range in amount of water
vapor produced by evapotranspiration, despite a two-fold range in amount

158

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

of precipitation

(Figure 2-6), a small range in net export of dissolved

substances, and highly controlled erosion with low export of eroded material

(Chapter 2). We take constancy of export and biogeochemical predictability
as evidence of a highly regulated system. The regulation of concentrations of
dissolved substances is not determined simply by physical factors but results
from the interactions between tightly coupled biotic and abiotic subsystems
(Figure 3-5).
Total Biomass Accumulation. A striking feature of the Aggradation Phase
of ecosystem development is the strong tendency to accumulate biomass;
i.e., total biomass accumulation (living plus dead) occurs when gross
primary productivity exceeds ecosystem respiration. The rate and amount
of biomass accumulation is determined by the initial conditions of the site
and the interactions between the biota and the external environment.
Regulation of the rate of biomass accumulation might be thought of
as resulting from factors both external and internal to the ecosystem.
External factors like solar energy, amount of precipitation, nutrient input,
and temperature set theoretical limits on rate of biomass accumulation.
If we consider external variables as constant, we might observe some
maximum

rate

of biomass

accumulation.

In nature,

however,

internal

factors such as changing species composition, competitive relationships,
and insect defoliations cause the actual trend of biomass accumulation
to depart significantly from any such theoretical maximum rate (Figure
ei):
Changes in rate of biomass accumulation, whether it is due to a series

Biomass
Accumulation
——=
Time —~>
Figure 5-12. Hypothetical trends of biomass accumulation. (A) Trend of maximum
potential biomass accumulation during the Aggradation Phase under constant and
ideal growing conditions; the curve shows the decline in net biomass storage
toward the end of the phase. (B) Trends in biomass accumulation as affected by
the following departures from ideal conditions: (a) a series of good growing years,
(b) drought periods, (c) a period of subnormal temperatures, and (d) an outbreak of
defoliating insects.

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

159

of good or poor growing years, variable internal factors, or the inherent
decrease with time in the storage of living and/or dead biomass within the
ecosystem, must be reflected in the biogeochemistry of the ecosystem.
Thus, even though our concept of ecosystem development suggests a
highly predictable and fairly constant. biogeochemistry during the Aggradation Phase, some variation is to be expected.
The Relationship between Productivity and Resource Availability. One of
the factors that most affects the biogeochemical predictability and constancy of the Aggradation Phase is the generally close connection between
primary productivity, resource availability, and nutrient regeneration.
Thus, although major trends in GPP vary with time (Chapter 5) variations
about the trend line itself tend to be relatively small. Aspects of this
relationship are self-regulating; for example, competition among trees
may contribute to the cybernetic regulation of primary productivity in a
way analogous to that described for phytophagous insects by Mattson
and Addy (1975). For example, strong competitors (intra- or interspecific)
affect the physiological status of nearby but less competitive individuals,
whose primary productivity is temporarily reduced. Demands of less
competitive individuals on resource availability are relaxed; their resistance to predators and parasites is weakened and eventually they die. For
a time, litterfall is increased, space in the canopy is surrendered, and
resources previously used go unused. Canopy openings also may result
in increased decomposition and nutrient regeneration. All of these responses contribute to increased availability of light, water, and nutrients

to the surviving trees surrounding the opening. The stronger competitors
respond with increased productivity, which is once again followed by
increased competition, and the cycle is repeated.
If the sum of local increases in resource availability within the
ecosystem was relatively great, while corresponding increases in productivity were relatively slow, one would expect increases in concentrations
of nutrients in stream water, together with increased streamflow. That
large oscillations in these biogeochemical parameters do not occur during
the Aggradation Phase is probably related to the even-agedness of the
agegrading forest. During the early part of the Aggradation Phase,
competition between the largely even-aged trees results in death of many
individuals, but gaps in the canopy are relatively small since trees are of
small or modest size (Chapter 4). These small gaps probably have little
affect on increasing decomposition rates and are rather rapidly closed
by ingrowth of surrounding individuals. Thus, the feedback relationship
(primary productivity resource availability) does not swing through
wide oscillations, and the more or less continuous canopy leads to close
regulation of energy flow, hydrology, and biogeochemistry. Toward the
end of the Aggradation Phase, competition and other factors that cause
the death of trees result in larger gaps in the canopy, since the
predominantly even-aged trees are now of larger size. These large gaps

160

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
\

may foster locally increased decomposition and nitrification and marked
local changes in productivity causing the equilibrium between productivity and resource availability for the ecosystem as a whole to exhibit
. in turn may result in slightly increased
This
somewhat wider oscillations.
oscillations in the export of nutrients and water. The effect of declining
biomass storage on biogeochemistry will be discussed in Chapter 6.

The Reorganization Phase
The Aggradation Phase, with its fairly constant curve of biomass
accumulation and its highly predictable biogeochemistry represents a
system under strong regulation. In a sense it also represents a period of
relative quiescence in our model of ecosystem development, a period with
relatively littlke endogenous disturbance. In contrast, the Reorganization
Phase begins with a major exogenous perturbation—clear-cutting. Clearcutting sets in motion a series of unusually severe stresses whose
initial effect is to reduce markedly the capacity of the ecosystem to
regulate the flow of both radiant and mechanical energy, water, and
nutrients

in

ways

that

diminish

destructive

effects.

In

a

sense,

the

disturbance opens the system to those potentially degrading forces that
are ever-present in its environment: rain, running water, wind, heat, and
gravity. The longer these forces operate in an uncontrolled way, the more
the ecosystem is degraded and the longer the time necessary for the
ecosystem to recover to predisturbance conditions, if indeed recovery is
possible.
For many humid terrestrial ecosystems, particularly those on slopes
or with readily erodible substrates, erosion of particulate matter after
disturbance presents great potential danger (Stone, 1973; Bormann

et al.,

1974). The physical removal of organic and inorganic materials not only
results in loss of exchangeable cations attached to exchange surfaces but
in the removal of the surfaces themselves. These losses in nutrient capital
and exchange capacity in turn affect the productive capacity of the
ecosystem and its ability to regain predisturbance levels of regulation over
the flow of energy, water, and nutrients. In instances of severe erosion,
an ecosystem might require a very long time to attain previous
levels of production. Not only would productive capacity be sharply
reduced from predisturbance levels, but redevelopment would involve the
slow formation of new humic and clay surfaces and the sequestration of
substantial amounts of nutrient capital. Unless checked by biological activities, accelerated

erosion

might continue

until the ecosystem

achieved

a

new relationship with the physical forces impinging on it; and this would
occur at a much lower level of productivity and with far less ecosystem
regulation of the physical environment (Figure 6-10).

A Hypothesis of Homeostasis. We propose that the severe stress initiated by clear-cutting not only accelerates the activity of some of the

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

161

mechanisms responsible for biotic regulation during the Aggradation
Phase but also calls into action another set of mechanisms largely
quiescent during that phase. This idea is based, in part, on the set of
relationships discussed in Chapter 3 and summarized in Figure 5-1.
Availability of many resources increases as a result of clear-cutting.
There is a greater availability of soil moisture throughout the total profile
caused by severely reduced transpiration. Removal of the canopy causes
radiant energy reaching the forest floor to be increased by several orders
of magnitude. Concentrations of dissolved substances in the soil solution
are increased about an order of magnitude owing to accelerated decomposition and mineralization resulting from warmer and moister soil.
There is also an increase in the activity of nitrifying organisms related to
the removal of vegetation. Heterotrophic processes may for a time exhibit
positive feedback (as shown in Figure 3-5) that raises levels of decomposition to a maximum the first year after cutting, while mineralization
reaches its maximum during the second year.
The cutover ecosystem responds to these conditions of increased
resource availability by a burst in primary production (Figure 5-2), not
only by species that characterize the precutting forest but also by a group
of species not part of the predisturbance forest (e.g., buried-seed species)
that may have evolved specifically to fill a niche created by this type
of disturbance (Chapter 4). Compared to the aggrading forest, primary
productivity for the recently cutover ecosystem swings through at least
one very wide oscillation. Cutting reduces productivity to near-zero, but
productivity rapidly rises and for a few years may exceed that of the uncut
aggrading forest. Thus, productivity is rapidly restored, and within a few
years hydrologic and biogeochemical functions begin to approach the
predisturbance levels discussed in Chapter 2.
In contrast to the rapid changes in available nutrients and water in
the soil, increases in erodibility of the ecosystem

are relatively slow to

develop (Chapter 3). Processes related to dead biomass maintain a high
level of regulation over erodibility for about 2 years. The clear-cutting and
enforced-devegetation experiment showed that these mechanisms begin
to weaken seriously only in the third growing season. In well-designed
clear-cuts with immediate revegetation, accelerated productivity prevents
serious erosion from ever occurring.
The coupling of heterotrophic processes to autotrophic processes is
far from perfect. Considerable leakage of nutrients from the ecosystem
occurs during the first few years, even in immediately revegetating
clear-cut systems (Chapter 5). Such losses might be even higher if the
release of gaseous nitrogen were included. This suggests that the rapid
increase in productivity that follows disturbance is a relatively inefficient
activity and is costly in terms of nutrient and biomass storage within
the ecosystem. However, the sacrifice of efficiency which results in accelerated
production which may be considered an effective strategy of ecosystem stability
since it forestalls a still-greater sacrifice in biotic regulation of erosion.

162

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

The Forest Floor as a Regulator of Ecosystem Activity. The forest floor plays
a major role in ecosystem homeostasis. Nutrient and energy costs during
the critical period that immediately follows disturbance are paid by
drawing on nutrients and energy stored in dead biomass, primarily in the
forest floor. In a sense, the forest floor functions as a “‘regulator’’ for the
ecosystem, with a net storage of energy and nutrients during the first third
of the Aggradation Phase and a net liberation of energy and nutrients
during the Reorganization Phase. This would be an important corollary to
Margalef’s dictum (1968) that “biomass is the keeper of organization,”
except that in this case dead biomass serves this function.
Not all northern hardwood ecosystems have a forest floor of the mor
type common to northern New Hampshire. Some have a characteristic
mull-type soil, where most leaf litter that falls on the mineral soil is
rapidly decomposed, and the remainder is incorporated into the mineral
soil (i.e., the A,-horizon) by faunal activity (Lutz and Chandler, 1946;
Bormann and Buell, 1964); mixing is due in large part to extraordinarily
large populations of earthworms (Eaton and Chandler, 1942). Usually,
mulls occur on richer sites and have a higher level of fertility than mor
soils and are thought to sustain a high level of nitrification (Melillo, 1977).
A basic question arises as to the behavior of organic matter in mull soils:
Does it act as a regulator of ecosystem activity in the same way as organic
matter in mor-type soils?
The large amount of dead wood on the forest floor immediately after a
clear-cut may function as a nutrient reservoir in a manner somewhat
similar to the forest floor. Dead wood is probably far less important
during the critical years immediately after clear-cutting because of
resistance to rapid decay. It seems likely that the principal importance of
dead wood may be realized toward the middle and end of the Reorganization Phase, when the decomposition of slash would provide a modest
source of nutrients for new growth. Perhaps of more importance, dead
wood provides a substrate for the nitrogen-fixing organisms discussed in
Chapter 2.
The role of dead wood in ecosystem dynamics needs careful study,
particularly since new whole-tree harvesting techniques completely
remove all aboveground wood from the clear-cut stand.

Linkage between Primary Productivity and Heterotrophy. The rapid
response of the ecosystem to clear-cutting may be considered in terms of
heterotrophic processes and primary productivity linked by a number of
feedback channels. Perturbation favors an increase in heterotrophy, and,
in fact, for a time various heterotrophic processes may be linked by
positive feedback. Primary productivity is positively linked to heterotrophic end products as well as to soil moisture and energy conditions
resulting from destruction of the original vegetation. As the rate of
primary productivity increases, however, it exercises a negative-feedback
control on heterotrophic processes. For example, we would expect
available soil moisture to drop as primary productivity and transpiration,

Reorganization: Recovery of Biotic Regulation

163

correspondingly, are increased and would expect nitrification to be
limited as the vegetation reestablishes itself. Eventually, we would expect
the rate of primary productivity to decline as the special growth conditions that immediately follow disturbance give way to conditions that
characterize the intact aggrading system.

SUMMARY
1. Primary productivity of northern hardwood ecosystems recovers
rapidly after clear-cutting. This rapid increase in productivity is largely
based on the growth response of exploitive species utilizing resources
made available by destruction of the living vegetation and accelerated
decomposition of the forest floor.
2. Biotic regulation of large losses of water and dissolved nutrients is
established in 3 to 5 years after cutting, but losses may exceed those of
uncut forests for 10 to 20 years, or to about the end of the Reorganization
Phase.
3. Coupling between increased amounts of available nutrients after cutting
and uptake of nutrients by regrowing vegetation is far from complete.
4. Comparison of nutrient uptake plus loss of nutrients in drainage water
and estimated nutrient release from the forest floor suggests that a
large amount of nitrogen is unaccounted for and that considerable
cation leaching occurs from the mineral soil. Unaccounted for nitrogen
loss from the forest floor may result from unmeasured denitrification
losses or from transport to the mineral soil.
5. After a rapid early rise, primary productivity may decline at 6 or 7 years
after cutting but recover and rise for several decades thereafter. The
rise may be due to a shift from species utilizing inefficient exploitive
growth strategies to those using more efficient conservative strategies,
gradual occupancy and utilization of deeper layers of soil, and an increase
in cation-exchange and water-holding capacity associated with the
growth in mass of the forest floor.
6. The Aggradation Phase of ecosystem development is the most highly
regulated of all phases in the developmental sequence. Regulation has
a strong feedback component associated with the close relationship
between primary productivity and resource availability resulting from
the even-aged condition of the vegetation.
7. Clear-cutting initiates a strong homeostatic response based on feedback between factors controlling resource availability and those
controlling primary productivity. This response brings exports of
nutrients and water under control relatively quickly and prevents
serious erosion from ever occurring.
8. Ecosystem recovery after disturbance is expensive and is powered
primarily by energy and nutrients from the forest floor. The forest
floor acts as a regulator of ecosystem activity, storing energy and
nutrients in times of quiescence and releasing them in times of stress.

CHAPTER

6

Ecosystem Development
and the Steady State

The biomass accumulation model of ecosystem development which we
propose (Chapter 1) has four phases after clear-cutting: Reorganization,
Aggradation, Transition, and Steady State (Figure 1-2). In discussing this
model, our strategy has been to move from the most verified to the least
verified aspects. Many elements of the first two phases, Reorganization
and Aggradation (Chapters 1-5), are based on observation and measurement of, and experiment with, actual stands; and the conclusions now can

be tested and evaluated. We now consider the remaining phases of the
model, Transition and Steady State.
The model illustrates one pathway by which an aggrading northern
hardwood forest might develop into a steady-state ecosystem. Our
treatment is a theoretical one based ona logical assemblage of information on
natural history and biogeochemistry, but it is not based on actual measurements of extant steady-state ecosystems.
We propose an orderly pattern of autogenic development after
clear-cutting, which, given sufficient time and a fairly constant macroenvironment, can lead to a steady-state condition. In nature, however,
departures from this inherent tendency toward order are caused by
fortuitous events (exogenous disturbances), which introduce an element
of disorder into the pattern. These exogenous events complicate the
interpretation of developmental relationships of the northern hardwood
ecosystem. Thus, although it is easy to recognize extant ecosystems that
correspond reasonably well to our proposed Reorganization and Aggradation Phases, it is difficult to find stands that correspond exactly to our

Ecosystem

Development and the Steady State

165

proposed Transition and Steady-State Phases. Although there are a few
candidates (e.g., Charcoal Hearth and Bowl Forests, New Hampshire),
extant stands that correspond to the Transition and Steady-State Phases
are difficult to identify with certainty. This results from several causes.
Because of human activity, stands containing really old-aged trees are
fairly rare, and their history of disturbance, or lack of it, is mostly
unknown. Age of individuals in itself is insufficient to place a stand within
a developmental sequence. Not only is age in northern hardwood species
often difficult to determine because trees may have rotten centers, but
old-aged trees can be found in the late Aggradation, Transition, or
Steady-State Phases.
Despite the difficulty of verifying the proposed end point of ecosystem
development, the model allows consideration of many aspects of
development of northern hardwoods. Whether or not the Steady State
is ever spatially significant is less important than understanding the
mechanisms underlying the strong autogenic trend toward its achievement.

EVIDENCE

FOR

A STEADY

STATE

Quite apart from discussing the means by which a steady state is
achieved, it is important to ask if the idea of Steady State itself is
reasonable. Woodwell and Sparrow (1965) define the Steady State as a
condition in which there is no net change in total biomass over time and
annual ecosystem respiration approximately equals annual gross primary
productivity. Changes in total biomass within the ecosystem are governed
by relationships between the four major biomass compartments (greenplant living biomass, dead wood, forest floor, and organic matter in the
mineral soil; Figure 1-5).
Both the forest floor (Covington, 1976) and dead wood (A. Brush,
personal communication) compartments reach an equilibrium (i.e.,
input ~ output) about midway through the Aggradation Phase (Chapter
1). If we assume that organic matter in the mineral soil behaves in
the same way (Chapters 1 and 5), a steady state according to the
Woodwell-Sparrow definition would be realized if the green plant living
biomass became stabilized. We think it likely that stabilization in the
amount of living biomass might be achieved several centuries after
clear-cutting.
The idea of the steady state is among the more controversial of
ecological constructs. A steady state concept based on the premise that
ecosystem respiration equals gross primary productivity should be considered at best approximate. In a strict sense, there can be no absolute
steady state but only a system undergoing slow long-term change.

166

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

STEADY-STATE

MODELS

A widely accepted model of primary and secondary ecosystem development (Margalef, 1968; Odum, 1969; Whittaker and Woodwell, 1972;
Whittaker et al., 1974; Whittaker, 1975) is characterized by an asymptotic
curve of biomass accumulation culminating in a steady state or “‘climax”’
condition at maximum levels of biomass (Figure 6-1). Our reasoning,
however, suggests that an asymptotic curve of biomass accumulation is
insufficient to portray the developmental potential of the northern
hardwood ecosystem following clear-cutting.
Our model of biomass accumulation (Figure 6-1) departs from the
asymptotic model in several significant ways. The standing crop of total
biomass after cutting declines (Reorganization Phase), steadily increases
to a maximum (Aggradation Phase), erratically declines (Transition
Phase), and finally stabilizes with somewhat irregular oscillations about a
mean (Steady-State Phase). This developmental pattern reflects the initial
even-aged condition of the cutover northern hardwood ecosystem and the
gradual change to an all-aged condition, which we term the ShiftingMosaic Steady State. The biomass accumulation pattern we propose and

Reorganization

k>+Aggradation>+— Transition -—Steady

State—>

)
(Living
Dead
—=
Biomass
Total
+
Alas Sa
Figure 6-1. Two models of ecosystem development following clear-cutting (time
zero) based on total (living plus dead) biomass accumulation. Line A is a simple
asymptotic model that assumes a net biomass accumulation until the steady
State is achieved and maximum biomass occurs during the Steady-State Phase:
Line B is our model—which culminates in the Shifting-Mosaic Steady State.
Developmental phases of our model are indicated.

Ecosystem

Development and the Steady State

167

the conditions that underlie its expression lead to conclusions about
ecosystem energetics, structure, nutrient cycling, and stability quite
different from those arising from the assumption of an asymptotic curve
of biomass accumulation.

LIVING

BIOMASS

ACCUMULATION

Our ideas about the behavior of living biomass accumulation through
time were first derived by studying long-term simulations of forest growth
generated with JABOWA, and, in the following paragraphs, we use
JABOWA as a vehicle to elaborate our hypothesis on the development
and nature of the steady state. We emphasize, however, that the logic
underlying the hypothesis can stand on its own.
Long-term JABOWA simulations, beginning with a clear-cutting and
calculated for constant environmental conditions, yield the same pattern
of change in living biomass through time, i.e., rising to a peak, losing
biomass, and then irregularly oscillating around some mean. Actual
tte

ee

j1+|<_— Aggradation ——=|=—-

Transition ————>|——.

Steady State —=—

500

400

Steady State

300

Mean

Biomass

200

Living
t/ha
Biomass,
100

nll

O

100

=)

———h

200

Years

After

300

ee

400

noel |

500

Clear—Cutting

Figure 6-2. Changes in living biomass during ecosystem development after
clear-cutting based on the average of two JABOWA simulations. Proposed
phases of development (Reorganization, Aggradation, Transition, and ShiftingMosaic Steady State) are shown. A curve of total ecosystem biomass (living plus
dead) would tend to have the same pattern as for living biomass alone (Figure
6-1). This follows because (a) almost all input to the standing crop of dead
biomass in both the forest floor and dead wood compartments is derived directly
or indirectly from living plant biomass in the form of litter (Figure 1-5) and (b)
standing crops of dead biomass in the forest floor and dead wood compartments
tend to reach an equilibrium (Figures 1-8 and 1-9).

168

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
\

x

biomass values for the peak and the mean, which we define as steady
state, vary with different runs as does the time necessary to descend
from the peak biomass to steady-state biomass, but the same pattern is
repeated every time. The curve of living biomass accumulation we show
in Figure 6-2 is fairly typical; living biomass rises to a peak of about
490-t/ha at 170 years after clear-cutting, drops to about 390-t/ha by 350
years, and then oscillates about a mean

TOTAL

BIOMASS

of about 370-t/ha.

ACCUMULATION

In Chapter 1 (Figure 1-10) we presented data on total ecosystem biomass (living plus dead) in the Reorganization and Aggradation Phases.
We have no actual information on total organic matter for the later
developmental Phases of Transition and Steady State. However, one line
of reasoning suggests that total biomass, like living biomass, will exhibit
steady-state properties. Living biomass represents the sole, direct and
indirect, input of organic matter into the dead organic compartments
(forest floor and dead wood). We have already indicated, above, that forest
floor (Covington, 1976) and dead wood (A. Brush, personal communication) have a tendency to reach equilibrium. We also assumed that the
mineral soil shows the same tendency. Therefore, we can expect that dead
biomass as well as living biomass will fluctuate about some steady-state
mean. Because of the oscillations of living biomass and the inherent lag
in decay of organic matter, oscillations of total biomass will not be
synchronous with those of living biomass. However, over the longer
term, total biomass accumulation will be close to zero (Figure 6-1), and
over time gross primary production will approximately equal ecosystem
respiration.
We shall now examine the mechanisms by which such a steady state
could arise and maintain itself through time. Although developed
independently, these mechanisms turn out to be remarkably similar to
those proposed by Alex Watt (1947) more than 30 years ago in his
monumental paper, “Pattern and process in the plant community.”

THE

PLOT

AS A UNIT OF STUDY

Thus far, we have discussed the northern hardwood ecosystem as an
integrated unit equal to or greater than some minimum area necessary
to maintain the integrity of the ecosystem as a functioning unit. For
example, with JABOWA, which computes growth responses for 10 < 10-

m plots, we simulated a curve of living biomass accumulation (Figure 6-2)
for an area of 2-ha, or the sum of 200 plots. (Most of the biogeochemical
data that we relate to the biomass accumulation model are based on
watersheds that range from 12 to 40-ha.) We consider the living biomass

Ecosystem

Development and the Steady State

169

accumulation curve in Figure 6-2 to represent an integrated response for
the whole ecosystem. A quite different living biomass curve emerges if we
follow an individual plot through time.
We must digress here to point out that nature does not work on the
basis of JABOWA-sized plots but on the basis of irregularly-sized,
naturally-occurring patches that result from disturbance. Thus, the forest
that develops after clear-cutting might be considered one large even-aged
patch resulting from exogenous disturbance. With time individual trees or
groups of trees fall down, creating smaller patches of younger vegetation.
Eventually, the whole area of the forest will be composed of patches of
varying size and age. Although the discussion that follows is based on
10 x 10-m plots as defined by the JABOWA Forest Growth Simulator, we
think it provides a logical approximation of the natural situation.
An individual JABOWA plot will never exhibit a prolonged steady
state in which living or total biomass accumulation will approximate zero.
That is, assuming no outside disturbance, it is highly probable that an
individual plot would ultimately be dominated by a large old tree.
Eventually, the old dominant dies and falls over. When it does, it creates

a local disturbance, deposits a heavy concentration of dead biomass in a
small area, and promotes an increase in resource availability somewhat
like that characteristic for the ecosystem as a whole during the early part
of the Reorganization Phase (Chapter 3). These changes are followed by
rapid revegetation by numerous individuals, each with relatively small
living biomass. With time, the plot undergoes thinning, living biomass
accumulation occurs as the vegetation develops, and the biogeochemistry
of the plot returns to conditions similar to those found during the
Aggradation Phase (Chapter 2). Eventually, the plot again comes to be
dominated by one or two massive trees, and the cycle repeats itself. It is

Biomass
Total
—~>

line ==
Figure 6-3. Hypothetical fluctuations in total biomass of an idealized patch.
Assuming constant conditions of growth, death, and area, total biomass of an
idealized patch shows cyclic fluctuations marked by a relatively steep loss in
biomass (total respiration >GPP) and a more gradual rise in biomass (total
respiration <GPP). The decline is initiated by death of a large old tree occupying
the patch. These fluctuations are equivalent to Watt’s upgrade and downgrade

series (1947).

170

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
_

obvious that in an old, “‘undisturbed’’ ecosystem, every point within the
ecosystem, whether it be included in a JABOWA plot or a naturally
occurring patch, must continually, but irregularly, cycle between conditions approaching those of the Reorganization and Aggradation Phases
(Figure 6-3).

Even-Agedness: Synchronization of Development
Since clear-cutting imposes an even-aged condition on the ecosystem, the
behavior of most plots is synchronized for about a century and a half after
cutting. During the Aggradation Phase, as thinning continues and as the
density of dominants declines, plots tend to be occupied by fewer and
larger even-aged trees which date to the clear-cut. Thus, maximum living
biomass for the entire developmental sequence is attained at the end of
the Aggradation Phase, when a majority of plots support one or a few
(more or less) even-aged trees of massive size. Forest structure at this
stage might be considered as roughly equivalent to an old forest
plantation where spacing has been adjusted to maximize living biomass
accumulation. Interestingly, it seems that in the minds of many novelists,
conservationists, foresters, and ecologists this type of massive, more or
less even-aged successional forest is equated with ‘“‘virgin,” ‘“‘climax,”
“pristine,” or steady-state forest.
The end of the Aggradation Phase, when the ecosystem is dominated
by old even-aged trees, must be considered a period of instability in the
developmental sequence. The populations of even-aged dominants do not
live forever; hence, the biomass peak is followed by a period of decline of
living biomass (the Transition Phase), which results as even-aged dominants die out and are replaced by patches of young vegetation growing up
from the forest floor. This leads to a drop in the living biomass of the
ecosystem as the much lower weights of these patches are averaged into
the whole.
Ecologists and foresters have reported that peak living biomass occurs
toward the end of a pioneer stage (Loucks, 1970) or at the end of the life
of an even-aged stand (Korstian, 1924). Apparently, the peak is reached
at an age determined by the longevity of the species composing the stand,
and after that point only a lower level of living biomass will be supported
so long as the stand is free of exogenous disturbance [Korstian, 1924 (plots 11

and 12); Davis, 1966; Loucks, 1970; G. Furnival, personal communication].

The steady state is achieved after the progressive elimination of these
old even-aged dominants and with the development of dominants of all
ages and a more or less constant distribution of different-aged dominants
on the plots that compose the ecosystem. Dead biomass, which is
temporarily increased by accelerated input from the living biomass
compartment (Figure 1-5) during the Transition Phase, eventually comes
into equilibrium at a lower level. Thus total biomass in the Steady-State
Phase is less than that at the end of the Aggradation Phase.

Ecosystem

Development and the Steady State

171

Plot Status and Ecosystem Development
The developmental phase of the ecosystem is determined by the state of
the naturally occurring patches comprising the ecosystem. To gain a
more detailed view of the developmental process, we used JABOWA to
simulate the behavior of living biomass in individual plots.
Based on the projected living biomass for the ecosystem as a whole at
the end of the Reorganization Phase (Figure 6-2), we assigned plots with
living biomass (dry wt) ranging 0 to 0.6-t/100-m? to State A. We use the
term State to refer to the condition of a plot, in contrast to Phase, which
refers to the condition of the ecosystem as a whole. Plots in the State A
condition may be dominated

by herbs, shrubs, or young forest (e.g., one

hundred 4-cm-dbh trees or three 18-cm-dbh trees = 0.6-t/100-m7). Plots
with a living biomass ranging from 0.6 to 4.9-t/100-m? are assigned to
State B. These plots may be dominated by many small trees, a few
intermediate-size trees, or a large tree (e.g., four 38-cm-dbh trees or one
67-cm-dbh tree = 4.9-t/100-m7). Plots with a living biomass greater than
4.9-t/100-m* are considered to be in State C. State C plots may be
dominated by one or two massive trees (e.g., two 69-cm-dbh trees or one
92-cm-dbh tree = 10.6-t/100-m’). The plots in the various states are
dynamically related to each other and have the developmental options
shown in Figure 6-4.
The relative area (i.e., percentage of plots) in States A, B, and C and
the trends of the States through time define the position of the ecosystem
along the temporal scale of development (Figure 6-5). According to
computer simulation, during the first 20 years the ecosystem is dominated by
State A plots and is in the Reorganization Phase. For the next 150 years
(Aggradation Phase), States B and C plots dominate. The abundance of B
plots reaches a peak about 70 years after cutting, when they occupy 98% of
the area of the ecosystem. Thereafter, their abundance declines sharply,
while the abundance of C plots increases. By Year 170, C plots occupy about
55% of the ecosystem’s area, and the ecosystem as a whole exhibits
maximum biomass. State A plots temporarily disappear after Year 110.

eas

oo
State
c

——____!——

aoe

Figure 6-4. Developmental options 3 plots in various States of pomess accumulation. State A, 0-0.6 metric tons of living biomass per 100--m?; State B,
0.6-4.9-t/100-m?: State C, >4.9-t/100-m?. All plots have the option of remaining
in the same State with gain or loss of biomass as long as they stay within the
limits of that State.

172

Ecosystem

Pattern and Process in a Forested

\

~

y Peharuiean)

Aggradation

j=
2
£100
Me:

=

o

/

/

8

eet

Transition —_——>|=——- Steady State

———}=-

?

s
\

oe

80F

&

a

<q

5

it

Pe

ane

OST

BIOS

Beas

s

g

——>—

Se &

aN

ru

\

7

nie SS,

<a
.

ep)

8

State C

Cy

Ne
ere NN re

ens

ee Se

ro)

5
oO

o

A

200

Years

After

300

fe

400

an}

500

Clear-Cutting

Figure 6-5. The percentage of ecosystem area in State A (<0.6-t/ 100-m?), State

B (0.6—4.9-t/100-m?), and State
clear-cutting. Based on JABOWA
plots.

C (>4.9-t/100-m*) in relation to time after
simulations involving two hundred 10x 10-m
F

This pattern of plot distribution during Reorganization and Aggradation Phases results because the majority of plots progressively accumulate
biomass and tend to follow the developmental sequence State A — State
B- State C (Figure 6-4), while relatively few plots lose biomass and drop
to a lower state. This is largely a consequence of even-agedness, fairly
long potential lifespans for some dominants, and natural thinning.
The Transition Phase shows a drop in the proportion of State C plots
and a balancing increase in plots in States A and B. State A plots
reappear after an absence of 60 years. The change in proportions of the three
states during the Transition Phase is influenced by the death of many
large individuals that were even-aged, quite old, and approaching the
maximum age attainable by the species. In a sense, the Transition Phase
may be thought of as a random opening of the forest due to age-induced

senescence.
The developmental state of the individual plot, as reflected by its
biomass accumulation, to some degree mirrors its biogeochemistry. Thus,
a recently disturbed plot with little living biomass would tend to exhibit a
biogeochemistry similar to that exhibited by the ecosystem as a whole
during the early part of the Reorganization Phase, or a plot in State B
would tend to exhibit a biogeochemistry similar to that of an ecosystem in
the mid-Aggradation Phase. Thus, the proportions of plots in various
states not only define the position of the ecosystem along the temporal
scale of development but also strongly influence the biogeochemistry of
the ecosystem.

Ecosystem

Development and the Steady State

173

However, plots in the same state (i.e., with about the same amount of
living biomass) are not exactly equivalent biogeochemically when they are
in different phases of development. To illustrate the point, we might
consider a State A plot in a recently clear-cut ecosystem (Reorganization
Phase) and in an older forest where several large trees have fallen and
created a gap. In both cases, the State A plot would exhibit a temporary
increase in resource availability after the disturbance; however, the
nature and timing of the increase in resource availability would be
different. The State A plot in the clear-cut would show fairly uniform
conditions of water, nutrient, and energy availability throughout the area
of the plot. The gap in the older forest, while exhibiting increased
nutrient availability (Pigott, 1975), soil moisture (Douglass, 1967), and
radiant energy at the ground level, would show a highly irregular pattern
of availability relating to the geometry of the hole created by treefall.
Penetration of radiant energy to the forest floor is dependent on the size,
shape,.and orientation of the opening in the canopy, while soil moisture
and nutrient availability are influenced, among other things, by the
distribution of functional roots remaining below the gap (Figure 6-6).
The patterns of decomposition of a State A plot in a clear-cut and in a
gap in an older forest could be quite different. In a clear-cut, stems are
removed, more solar energy reaches ground level (because all adjacent
plots are clear-cut), and decomposition is rapidly accelerated in the forest
Unthinned
Pine

Thinned
Pine

(6 X 6 ft)

(18 X 18 ft)
L

\

SONY 9

AV;

:

oe

*
es

A

SANS SR

_

Maximum

—___

Moisture

-

0

d

ee

ee

Content

gS
Shes
[s)

S

2

o
lo?)

Cc

=

5
E
5
2

es

ai
‘Minimum
SMeistore
Content

L
47:

je
0

4:5

9

4.5

0

0
Distance

In Feet

Figure 6-6. A comparison of soil moisture distribution beneath thinned and
unthinned stands of loblolly pine. Thinning was done during April 1959 (from
Douglass, 1967) 1 ft = 30.5-cm.

174

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

floor. Our estimates suggest that, for about 15 years, ecosystem respiration
exceeds gross primary productivity and that after this time the plot begins
to accumulate biomass (Chapter 5). Let us assume that a State A plot iS
created in the older forest by the fall of a large tree that uproots several
smaller ones and that about 15 tons of dead wood are deposited in a gap of

300 m2. This treefall represents an addition of 50,000 g/m? to the dead

wood compartment, mostly in the form of slowly decaying trunks. If it
took 30 years for this material to decay, there would be an annual loss of
dead biomass of about 1700 g/m?-yr for the plot, and to this should be
added any net loss of organic matter in the soil. Even if we doubled the
highest net living biomass accumulation measured in our 55-yr-old forest
(435 g/m2-yr; Table 1-1), it seems probable that the State A forest plot
would require many more years than the State A plot in the clear-cut to
show a net accumulation of total biomass. However, since nutrients were

not removed from the forest plot, the subsequent rate of living biomass
accumulation might be higher.
Although the proportions of plots or patches in various states of biomass
accumulation are useful as a general guide to the biogeochemistry of an
ecosystem, proportion alone may not be a precise indicator of biogeochemistry. Other factors (e.g., amount of dead wood, condition of surrounding plots) also influence a plot’s biogeochemical behavior.

The Shifting-Mosaic Steady State
In most discussions of steady state or ‘‘climax”’ ecosystems (e.g., Vitousek
and Reiners, 1975), the condition of the steady-state ecosystem is loosely
defined by one or two whole-ecosystem parameters, such as biomass
accumulation equals zero or gross primary productivity equals totalecosystem respiration. More often than not, authors are extremely vague
or totally unconcerned about the fine structure of the steady-state
ecosystem or the means by which the steady state might perpetuate itself
through time. Yet such information is basic to any analysis of the
energetic, biogeochemical, or stability relationships of the steady-state
condition. Visualizing the steady state is not an easy task, and it is with
some trepidation that we attempt an approximate characterization of
what a hypothetical northern hardwood steady state might be like, and
how it might perpetuate itself.
Based in part on a JABOWA simulation, we suggest that a steady state
is achieved several hundred years after clear-cutting, when the standing
crops of living, and total, biomass begin to oscillate about a mean
(Figures 6-1 and 6-2). The proportion of the ecosystem in States A, B, and
C remains more or less constant with time (Figure 6-5), but the state of
any individual plot may change as it gains or loses biomass. For example,

new plots in State A arise when gaps are created by the fall of large trees.
An ecosystem in this dynamic, but relatively unchanging, condition we
term the Shifting-Mosaic Steady State.

Ecosystem Development and the Steady State

175

Several factors suggest that in a real steady-state ecosystem the
proportion of total area in State A patches would be several times greater
than that projected by the JABOWA simulation, which is based strictly on
kill routines reflecting competition between trees (Botkin et al., 1972a,b). It
does not include estimates of death or destruction arising from crushing
effects as massive dominants fall (Figure 4-8). Earlier we reported
observations where the fall of large dominants essentially cleared areas
equivalent to three to five JABOWA-sized plots (10 x 10m). Also, using
JABOWA we cannot consider local forces of disturbance that operate
in any forest ecosystem—forces such as localized disease or insect attacks.
lightning strikes, or attrition on trees surrounding gaps resulting from the
weight of snow and ice and the pressure of high winds (Spurr and Barnes,
1o7S):
Given these considerations, the Shifting-Mosaic Steady State may be
visualized as an array of irregular patches composed of vegetation of
different ages. In some patches, particularly those where there has been a
recent fall of a large tree, total respiration would exceed GPP, while in
other patches the reverse would be true. For the ecosystem as a whole,
the forces of aggradation and of decomposition would be approximately
balanced, and gross primary production would about equal total ecosystem respiration. Over the long term, nutrients temporarily concentrated
in small areas in fallen trunks would be made available to larger areas
by root absorption and redistribution by litterfall.
The structure of the ecosystem would range from openings to all
degrees of stratification, with dead trees concentrated on the forest floor
in areas of recent disturbance. The forest stand would be considered
all-aged and would contain a representation of most species, including
some early-successional species, on a continuing basis.
The picture that the Shifting-Mosaic Steady State projects to us is
remarkably like the ‘“‘virgin”’ forest described in northern New Hampshire
at the turn of the century:
... seedlings of tolerant species continue to exist under dense shade, but their
growth is scarcely perceptible. When openings are made in the forest by the
decay and death of the veteran trees, these suppressed seedlings begin to
grow more rapidly under the stimulus of increased light. Reproduction of the
more intolerant or light demanding species also takes place in the natural
openings formed and these make up for lack of tolerance in rapidity of
growth. Vacant places in the forest are thus soon filled up with a flourishing
succeeding growth of tolerant and intolerant species struggling against each
other for a place in the new stand (Chittenden, 1905).

Corroborative Studies of Ecosystem

Development

Studies of other forest ecosystems have yielded developmental patterns
that conform reasonably well with the one we propose for the northern
hardwood ecosystem (Figure 6-1). Watt (1925, 1947), after intensive study

176

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

of development

and

structure

of British

beechwoods,

constructed

a

diagrammatic model (Figure 10 in Watt, 1947) of succession in initially
even-aged beech forest. Our Shifting-Mosaic Steady State seems to
be almost a replica of his proposed old-age beechwood. R. B. Davis’
study (1966) of stand dynamics in red spruce forests of coastal Maine
provides a number of interesting comparisons with the total biomass
accumulation pattern shown in Figure 6-1. He noted a trend from evento uneven-aged conditions with an attendant decrease in living biomass.
Davis suggested that the steady-state condition (his State C) is achieved
at roughly 150 years but occurs only infrequently due to the prevalence of
cutting, fire, and blowdown. Cooper (1913), Stearns (1949), and Goodlett
(1954) proposed mechanisms similar to the Shifting-Mosaic Steady State for
the perpetuation of boreal and northern hardwood forests.
The development of high-elevation fir forests in northeastern mountains (Sprugel, 1976; Sprugel and Bormann, 1979) shows some remarkable
similarities to the Shifting-Mosaic Steady State in northern hardwoods.
These diminutive fir forests occur near ridge lines and are subjected to
strong winds; however,

stands are not often flattened. Rather, under the

influence of wind, waves of death and regeneration move through the
forest at a fairly constant rate. New waves are regularly established
downwind. Thus, every point in the ecosystem cycles through an upgrade
and downgrade series just like every point in the Shifting-Mosaic Steady
State. In terms of vegetation development, productivity, and biogeochemistry, the upgrade—downgrade series in the fir forest (Sprugel and
Bormann, 1979) is analogous to that in the Shifting-Mosaic Steady State
northern hardwood forests. The major difference is that the wind, which
is generally unable to flatten the whole fir forest, organizes patches in the
first state of development into long lines or waves that move through the
forest at a fairly constant rate. The first state, equivalent to our State A, is
followed by successive states, equivalent to States B and C, and then the
first state is reestablished under the destructive influence of wind. In this
way, every point in the fir ecosystem is turned over about once every
60 years. An area large enough to contain a complete set of developmental
waves would exhibit steady-state characteristics, with GPP = total respiration. Thus, the high-altitude fir forest and the northern hardwood forest
are similar in that the steady state is composed of patches in all states of
development in more-or-less constant proportions. These forests differ in
that patches in the northern hardwood ecosystem are randomly distributed
and have a long cycling time (up to 300 years), while those in the fir forest
are organized largely in waves and have a much shorter cycling time
(about 60 years).

Ecosystem

TRENDS ASSOCIATED
DEVELOPMENT

Development and the Steady State

WITH

177

ECOSYSTEM

Eugene Odum (1969, 1971) presents a comprehensive, generalized model
of ecosystem development in which autogenic development is characterized by an asymptotic curve of biomass accumulation and trends in a
number of ecosystem attributes are associated with early and “mature”
developmental stages. Odum’s model and associated hypotheses have
provided a healthy stimulus to the field of ecosystem ecology by organizing thinking on ecosystem dynamics and by providing a focus for
further research. We now examine some conclusions drawn from the
application of Odum’s model to development of the northern hardwood
ecosystem and make a comparison of these conclusions and those drawn
from our model of biomass accumulation. We recognize that this
comparison is not entirely parallel, since Odum’s hypothesis is meant to
apply to both primary and secondary succession and developmental and
mature stages are not sharply defined. On the other hand, our model
represents secondary development of a forested ecosystem after a
catastrophic disturbance and involves fairly specific definitions of both
structure

and

function.

Nevertheless,

some

fundamental

differences

in

interpretation of ecosystem behavior become apparent when we compare
the conclusions drawn from these two models. Not all of these differences
are limited to the specific case in question (i.e., northern hardwood
ecosystems): some interpretations seem to have more general applicability.

Energetics
P/R Ratio. The asymptotic model indicates that the P/R ratio (the ratio of
gross primary production to total ecosystem respiration) is >1 in early stages
and approaches 1 as development proceeds to mature stages. That model
suggests that the P/R ratio should be an excellent functional index of the
relative maturity of the system. Our model indicates that the P/R ratio does
not follow a simple curve from >1 to 1. Prior to the Shifting-Mosaic Steady
State, where P/R = 1, there are two periods where the P/R ratio is <1 (.e.,
the Reorganization and Transition Phases). For forest ecosystems in
general, with large accumulations of living biomass, it seems probable that
after any catastrophic disturbance which shifts large amounts of living to
dead biomass, there will be a period of time when the P/R ratio will be <1.

Consequently, the unqualified use of the P/R ratio as a simple functional
index of development has strong limitations.
Maximum Biomass. The asymptotic model projects maximum biomass
during the steady state, while the Hubbard Brook Biomass Accumulation
Model predicts peak biomass at the end of the Aggradation Phase (Figure
6-1).

178

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

We think the idea of peak biomass prior to the steady state may have
wide applicability to terrestrial ecosystems, and maximum attainable
biomass accumulation may be the result of synchrony imposed upon the
system by either nature or man. In northern hardwoods, peak biomass is
achieved because even-agedness after clear-cutting imposes synchrony on
all of the patches comprising the ecosystem. As a consequence, most
patches, performing in lockstep, accumulate biomass for about a century
and a half. Thereafter, ecosystem biomass drops as patches become more
asynchronous and all-aged. A similar pattern of biomass behavior has
been reported for British Calluna heathland after fire (Gimingham, 1972).

Community Dynamics
Habitat Diversity. Odum (1971) broadly defines spatial heterogeneity and
suggests that pattern becomes better organized with time. We may
consider a plot in State A as equivalent to an open or brushy habitat, a
plot in State B as analogous to a habitat dominated by vigorous trees
of intermediate size, and a plot in State C as equivalent to a habitat
dominated by one or two old trees. Using this definition of habitat, we
suggest that, because of the even-agedness that follows clear-cutting,
general habitat diversity remains low for a considerable period of time
and then rises to a maximum during the steady state (Figure 6-7A).
Thus, even though the habitat of individual plots changes during the
first century and a half after cutting, the overall habitat of the ecosystem at any one time tends to be fairly uniform (i.e., most plots are at
about the same developmental state). Habitat diversity increases as the
ecosystem becomes more and more a mixture of plots in all states of
development. In effect, the attainment of the Shifting-Mosaic Steady
State brings species that were temporarily separated in earlier developmental phases into close proximity. This would tend to diminish the
effectiveness of temporal isolation along a successional gradient as an
isolating mechanism in the evolution of species as suggested by Loucks
(1970).

Species Richness. Odum’s model using various diversity indices suggests
that diversity will increase as development proceeds. Odum (1971, p. 148)
also suggests that species diversity tends to be low in physically controlled
ecosystems and high in biologically controlled ecosystems.
Species richness is a simple but useful measure of diversity (Whittaker,
1975). However numerous difficulties are encountered in trying to
compare the total species diversity for different ecosystems, not to
mention the problems of interpretation relative to ecosystem development. Detailed lists of all species in an ecosystem are never available and
genetic material from seeds, spores, etc., are not normally included, so
diversity is usually calculated on the basis of a few dominant or obvious
groups. Similarly, we do not have information on the species richness of
animals and microbes in the various stages of development for the

Ecosystem

Development and the Steady State

179

northern hardwood ecosystem. Using species richness of rooted vascular
plants (number of species occurring on 1-m? plots) as a simple index of
diversity, we find the average number of species for randomly chosen
1-m? plots is lowest in the mid-Aggradation Phase (Figure 4-3), highest
in recently clear-cut areas, and probably would be intermediate in the
Shifting-Mosaic Steady-State Phase as the plots composing the ecosystem
become all-aged (Figure 6-7B). The mixture of shade-tolerant, shadeintolerant, and intermediate species is a contributory factor to the high
diversity of the recently-cut areas. In contrast, species richness of plants is
lower during the mid-Aggradation Phase since shade-intolerant and many
intermediate species are generally excluded from the ecosystem.
Questions of scale (size of landscape unit) and expression of potential
diversity are immediately obvious. Clearly, a tree can fall during the
developmental sequence and make an opening in the canopy. Reappearance of intolerant and intermediate species in such an opening might raise
the species richness of the entire ecosystem, of which that patch was a
Reorganization

k++<Aggradation>+— Transition —|« Steady State>

Diversity
Habitat

Spp/m?
No.
Species
Richness

Species
Richness
Spp/Ecosystem
No.

O

100
200
Years After

300

400

500

Clear-Cufting

Figure 6-7. A schematic view of long-term trends of habitat diversity and species
richness shown in relation to developmental phases after clear-cutting. Solid lines
represent behavior patterns formulated from observation of extant stands, dashed
lines show expected behavior of hypothetical stands.

180

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

component, to the highest level. Therefore, using the entire watershedecosystem as the reference unit, species richness would tend to be
highest in both the recently-cut areas and in the Shifting-Mosaic Steady

State (Figure 6-7C).
Considering only the actively growing plants, the observed patterns of
species richness on either the ecosystem scale or the smaller scale provide
an interesting contrast to Odum’s model of ecosystem development
(Figure 6-7C). Species richness for the northern hardwood forest
tends to be lowest during the mid-Aggradation Phase of ecosystem
development, when biotic control of metabolism and biogeochemistry is
maximal (Chapter 2). Species richness peaks during the earlier, presumably more physically controlled portion of ecosystem development when
biotic control is weakest. Obviously, there are many aspects of the
relationships between species diversity and ecosystem development in
need of refinement.
Selection Pressure. Odum (1969) suggests that during ecosystem development from early successional to mature stages natural selection pressure
at first favors species with high rates of growth and reproduction (“‘r”
selection). During more mature stages of ecosystem development,
selection favors species with lower growth potential but better capabilities
for competitive survival (““K”’ selection).
Our model suggests that natural selection during the Reorganization
Phase might favor ‘“‘r’’ selection, while “‘K’’ selection would tend to be
more dominant in the Aggradation Phase rather than the Shifting-Mosaic
Steady-State Phase. This is because early Reorganization is characterized by
disturbed conditions and maximum resource availability while the Aggradation Phase is characterized by full occupancy of the site and strong
competition. The Shifting-Mosaic Steady State represents a spatial mixture
of the conditions that characterize the Reorganization and Aggradation
Phases.
The exploitive and conservative plant-growth strategies discussed in
Chapter 4 are roughly equivalent to “r’’ and ‘“‘K” strategies. The developmental sequence after clear-cutting would at first favor selection for
exploitive strategists (Table 4-8), which are able to capitalize on resources that have been temporarily increased (Chapter 5). Thereafter,
because of increasing competition for water, light, and nutrients, selection
pressure would favor the conservative strategists. In the Shifting-Mosaic
Steady State, the selection pressure in patches, disturbed by treefall, would
tend to favor the exploitive strategists, while throughout much of the
remaining area selection for conservative strategies would prevail.

Biogeochemistry
The Odum (1969) model does not discuss changes in hydrology or erosion
during ecosystem development.

Ecosystem Development and the Steady State

181

Hydrology. Water plays a major role in ecosystem dynamics as a
requirement of plants, a vehicle of intrasystem nutrient cycling, and a
vehicle of transport (export) of particulate matter and dissolved substances. We suggest that major variations in hydrologic output would
occur only during the Reorganization Phase (Figure 6-8A). Oscillations in
hydrologic export also may occur during the Transition and Steady-State
Phases owing to local disturbance and regrowth resulting from treefall.
Runoff from forest cutting may be directly related to the basal area
Reorganization

+1«Aggradation>++— Transition —+«Steady State >

0

(A)

SoS

a?
to Se

(B)
(+)
wn
w

E

2

0

amo

oD

Oo2

ven ©)

F 5 (-)
5
2g
[sj

oO

(C)
1S)
©
>

Ow

ow
QO

a6
“-

O8
enep)

3°
Q
<

Ly

O

200

100

Years

After

300

400

500

Clear-Cutting

ng of
Figure 6-8. A schematic view of changes during 500 years after clear-cutti
of
rate
(B)
water;
drainage
of
a 60-yr-old northern hardwood forest: (A) export
(—)
and
biomass
ing
accumulat
(+)
ecosystem
total biomass storage, with the
water.
losing biomass; (C) the export of dissolved substances in drainage

182

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

removed (Hibbert, 1967), but Douglass (1967) reports that changes in
runoff from forest cuts smaller than 20% of a stand’s basal area are often
difficult to detect at a gauging weir.
Erosion. Our data (Chapters 2, 3, and 5) indicate that the northern
hardwood ecosystem is relatively resistant to erosion as long as
disturbances do not seriously disrupt the forest floor. Even after
clear-cutting (when it is done in a careful way), there is relatively little
increase in erosion. In fact, we proposed that homeostatic responses after
clear-cutting prevent greatly accelerated erosion from occurring. Erosion
levels would rise modestly during the initial part of the Reorganization
Phase but soon would be brought under control by developing vegetation.
During the proposed course of ecosystem development, it seems probable
that accelerated erosion would not occur, although isolated treefall
(Chapter 4), particularly in the Transition Phase, could cause substantial
local soil disturbance and promote local soil erosion.
Weathering and Other Nutrient Sources. This topic is not considered in
detail in the Odum model. Weathering of minerals within the ecosystem
is a primary source of available nutrients for elements with a sedimentary
cycle. For some elements, precipitation also is a major source (Chapter 2).
Biological fixation is a source of nitrogen; absorption and impaction by
foliage is a source of airborne sulfur and other elements.
During the developmental sequence, it seems unlikely that all of these
processes would proceed at the same rate. For example, during the initial
part of the Reorganization Phase, the soil solution is rich in dissolved
substances, while in the Aggradation Phase concentrations of dissolved
substances are several-fold lower. These dissolved substances also are end
products of weathering reactions and may affect weathering rates by mass
action. Similarly, other processes may fluctuate with time. For example,
the volume and architecture of the developing forest canopy may alter
the rate at which

aerosols

are

collected

and

thus deposited

within

the

ecosystem.
The very low rate of removal of inorganic particulate matter from the
ecosystem raises an interesting question about long-term weathering
relationships. The ecosystem is being relatively enriched with Fe, Al, Si,
and K (Chapter 2). Enrichment results in the development of a mineral
soil profile in the form of SiO; and Fe and AI oxides. These relatively
inert compounds accumulate near the top of the soil profile (i.e., the
B-horizon), while in the same zone the amount of weathering substrate
declines. Without introduction of new weathering substrate, the generation of available cations like Ca and Mg by weathering might tend to
decline with time (development) and perhaps limit production and lower
the amount of biomass the ecosystem can sustain.
How can new weathering substrate be brought to the surface? Several
mechanisms operating within the ecosystem can accomplish this, for
example, burrowing animals (not very important at Hubbard Brook) and

Ecosystem

Development and the Steady State

183

treefalls that produce throw mounds, which in effect invert the soil profile
and move some C-horizon material to the surface. These mechanisms,
however, must ultimately be supplemented by erosion and transportation,
which strip off, in the form of particulate matter, the upper layers (i.e.,
SiO>, and Fe and Al oxides) and, in effect, lower the ecosystem in place
thereby bringing more weathering substrate into the weathering zone.
A basic question arises: Is the rate of erosion sufficient to bring in
adequate amounts of weathering substrate on a continuing basis? From a
theoretical point of view, this is an exceedingly interesting question, since
if the answer were no, this would imply that weathering substrate would
become with time an increasingly important limiting factor. Perhaps, over
millenia of time, periods of very intense erosion would be required to
renew the weathering substrate and in effect renew the ecosystem.
Export of Dissolved Substances and Particulate Matter. The Odum model
suggests that an important trend in ecosystem development is the
“tightening” of biogeochemical cycles. Mature systems, as compared to
developing ones, are proposed to have the capacity to entrap and hold
nutrients.
We suggest that the trend toward tighter nutrient cycles does not
parallel ecosystem development and that, instead, the greatest regulation
over nutrient export occurs in the Aggradation Phase. Increased nutrient
loss occurs during the Reorganization and Transition Phases; with
biomass stabilization in the Shifting-Mosaic Steady State, export levels
may be somewhat higher than in the Aggradation Phase. This pattern
reflects in part the net rate at which nutrients are bound within the
ecosystem in accumulating biomass (Bormann and Likens, 1967; Likens
and Bormann,

1972a,b; Vitousek

and Reiners,

1975; Vitousek,

1977).

There is little doubt that total biomass storage plays a major role in
regulating nutrient export from the northern hardwood ecosystem. This
relationship seems quite clear for young-successional ecosystems, and
in earlier chapters we documented the correlation between decline in
biomass and high nutrient export in stream water draining recently
clear-cut ecosystems and the relatively low nutrient export from young
forests which are rapidly accumulating total biomass.
However, more fundamental questions can be raised about the presumption that export patterns of terrestrial ecosystems are primarily a
function of biomass storage. Other factors such as weathering rate,
denitrification, or nitrification in addition to biomass storage may change
with time. Thus, not only may biomass storage fluctuate as an ecosystem
develops but so too may nutrient input and release. Streamflow and
nutrient concentrations in drainage water also may fluctuate.
The export of dissolved nutrients during both the Reorganization and
Aggradation Phases is reasonably well known by direct measurement
(Chapters 2, 3, and 5), but almost nothing is known of longer-term phases.
Nevertheless, we can make some approximations using the premise set

184

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

forth that export of a particular element is equivalent to sources of new
nutrients minus storage of nutrients within the ecosystem. This notion can
be formalized:
Export = Sources — Storage.

Nutrient storage (exclusive of nutrients stored in rock and secondary
minerals) in the northern hardwood ecosystem is largely accounted for by
nutrients bound in living and dead organic matter and held on exchange
sites, mostly organic in nature (Hoyle, 1973). Proposed biomass storage
relationships for the ecosystem through time are shown in Figure 6-8B.
Assuming that sources of net nutrients are constant, as did Vitousek
and Reiners (1975), for terrestrial ecosystems in general, the following
pattern of nutrient export shown in Figure 6-8C emerges. This pattern,
however, differs from that presented by Vitousek and Reiners, since they
used an asymptotic model of biomass accumulation, while we used the
Hubbard Brook Biomass Accumulation Model and attempt to take into
account changes in biogeochemistry and hydrology. The Reorganization
Phase for northern hardwood forests is characterized by a high rate of
total biomass loss over a short period of time and by a maximum rate of
export of dissolved substances and particulate matter in drainage water.
A net loss of nutrients from the ecosystem results. The Aggradation
Phase exhibits a high rate of total biomass storage throughout most of the
period but tapers to very little at the end of the Phase. Coincident with
this, the ecosystem accumulates nutrients, and the export of dissolved
substances in drainage water during the early part of the Aggradation
Phase is at a minimum for the entire developmental sequence. However,
dissolved substance export may increase toward the end of the Phase as
biomass storage decreases. The Transition Phase is marked by a net loss
in total biomass over a fairly long period of time. Based on JABOWA
simulations, this loss of biomass can occur somewhat abruptly or fairly
regularly throughout this Phase. These options make it difficult to propose
a detailed model of drainage-water chemistry for this period, but for the
period as a whole the ecosystem probably loses substantial amounts of
nutrients that were stored in biomass (Table 6-1), and the export of
dissolved substances in drainage water may be higher than that of the
Aggradation Phase. The Steady-State Phase is characterized by both
Storage and loss of total biomass, cycling about the steady-state mean.
Over the long term, biomass storage would remain more or less constant,

and the standing crop of nutrients held therein would do the same. On
this basis, nutrient export in stream water would be generally greater than
that of the Aggradation Phase but would fluctuate according to the cyclic
behavior of biomass storage and rates of endogenous disturbance.
Treefall during the Transition and Shifting-Mosaic Steady-State
Phases
could produce appreciable disturbance of the forest floor; however
,
because of the isolation of these disturbed areas from each other it seems
improbable that individual treefalls would result in greatly accelera
ted
removal of eroded material from the ecosystem.

Ecosystem

Table 6-1. Estimated Annual

Development and the Steady State

185

Net Loss of Nutrients Due to Net Loss of Biomass

During the Transition Phase, Year 170 to Year 350?
Nutrient Content in
Living Biomass (kg/ha)

170-yr-old
Ecosystem

350-yr-old
Ecosystem

Estimated Annual
Net Loss (kg/ha-yr)

N
Ca
K
S
P
Mg

1540
1447
548
182
163
142

2S
1146
473
142
130
118

Pil
1.67
0.42
0.22
0.18
0.13

Dry biomass (10°)

497

383

0.63

Nutrient

@The calculation assumes dead biomass pools at Years 170 and 350 are in balance.
Estimates were made using JABOWA, the forest growth simulator.

Because of the relationships between biomass storage and nutrient
export in stream water it has been suggested that stream-water concentrations can serve as an index of the developmental state of the ecosystem
(Vitousek and Reiners, 1975; Vitousek, 1977). Although stream-water
concentrations seem to reflect the developmental state of relatively
young, even-aged northern hardwood stands, this parameter has limited
applicability to older stands. For example, using Vitousek and Reiners’
assumptions, the same level of nutrient concentrations in stream water
could

occur

at various

points in our

biomass

accumulation

curve,

i.e.,

portions of the curve having the same rate of biomass accretion or loss
(see Figures 6-1B and 6-8B). Similar rates of accretion and loss can occur
in various developmental phases. Thus, for interpretive purposes, data on
stream-water concentrations must be accompanied by quantitative data
on the ecosystem and its structure and development. Necessary data
involve ecosystem (watershed) area, the proportion of the ecosystem in
patches at different stages of development, relative age of patches, and so
forth.
Moreover, relatively small changes in the export of nutrients from
ecosystems are influenced by a number of factors. These include temporal
changes in water chemistry not related to ecosystem development. For
example, short-term changes in microclimate, such as soil frost, may
appreciably change stream-water chemistry and obscure long-term trends
(Likens et al. 1977). Changes in stream-water chemistry related to
ecosystem area above the sampling point also must be considered.
Ecosystems of markedly different size may yield appreciably different
stream-water concentrations (N. Johnson, personal communication), although export per unit area may be similar (J. Sloane, personal
communication). Without a detailed analysis of the overall ecosystem,

186

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

then, it seems to us unwise to label an ecosystem “old-age,”
“‘steady
state,” or “‘climax’’ and then use short-term, stream-water chemistry to
characterize the proposed condition.
To sum up, nutrient patterns during ecosystem development as deduced from presumed biomass-storage patterns and measured streamwater chemistry leave much to be desired, but they may provide a rough
estimate of long-term nutrient relationships. It is obvious that we need
more intensive study of both biotic and abiotic functions and their
interactions in ecosystems before we can fully appreciate the dynamics of
nutrient cycling and its change with time.
>>

6¢

Stability
Every ecosystem is subject to an array of external energy inputs—radiant
energy, wind, water, and gravity. All of these represent potentially
destabilizing forces that may destroy or diminish ecosystem organization or reduce its substance. For an ecosystem to grow or to maintain
itself, it must be able to channel or meet these potentially destabilizing forces in such a way that their destructive potential is not realized.
Control or management of destabilizing forces is the essence of ecosystem development and stability. Stated another way, stability is a
function of the capacity of the ecosystem to control or channel the forces
impinging on it.
We use relative export characteristics as indicators of system stability,
with low and fairly constant export of dissolved substances and particulate
matter signifying a stable. system and higher and irregular export characterizing a less stable system.
The Reorganization Phase (Chapter 3) is the “loosest” of the phases. It
is characterized by (1) the highest concentrations of dissolved substances

in drainage water, (2) the lowest levels of transpiration, and the highest
levels of streamflow and erosion, and (3) rapidly changing biogeochemistry as revegetation proceeds. The biogeochemistry of the Reorganization Phase reflects the complete destruction of the canopy by clearcutting, a decrease in total biomass as decomposition outweighs gross
primary productivity, and a net loss of nutrients. ‘““Looseness” of the
system is associated with high species richness and dominance by plants
with exploitive strategies.
The Aggradation Phase, particularly the early part, is characterized
(Chapter 2) by (1) low, highly predictable and fairly constant concentrations of dissolved substances in stream water draining the ecosystem, (2)
the highest levels of transpiration and the lowest levels of streamflow, (3)
low and predictable net export of dissolved nutrients, and (4) very low
levels of erosion (i.e., particulate matter export). All of these criteria
indicate that the early aggrading ecosystem is a “tight’’ ecosystem. These
biogeochemical characteristics are strongly influenced by a more or less
continuous forest canopy, a high rate of biomass accumulation, and a high

Ecosystem Development and the Steady State

187

rate of net nutrient accumulation in living and dead biomass. It is
interesting to note that the “tightness” of the ecosystem, or stability by
our definition, is associated with dominance by species employing the
conservative strategy and that species richness is at a minimum.
Based on projected biomass behavior alone (Figure 6-8B), Transition
and Shifting-Mosaic Steady State would occupy positions somewhere
between Reorganization and Aggradation, with export characteristics
falling somewhere between the two extremes (Figure 6-8C).
The Aggradation Phase exhibits the lowest biogeochemical exports
(and by our definition has the highest degree of biogeochemical stability),
but, in a sense, this phase may be thought of as culminating in a
biologically unstable condition. That is, the even-aged aggrading forest
can survive a long time and during that time exhibit maximum biogeochemical regulation, but with time the ecosystem is populated with
many now old, more or less even-aged trees, each with a substantial
destructive potential (Chapter 4). Such a situation has many aspects in
common with a population of animals just prior to a population crash,
with the exception that the mixture of the species comprising the old
agegrading northern hardwood forest would tend to spread such a crash
over many decades. The Transition Phase then might be thought of as a
prolonged crash period leading to an all-aged steady state with less
regulation over biogeochemical export.

Developmental

Time

Phase

———>>

Figure 6-9. Left: A graphic model of stability-resilience after Margalef (1969)
and Hill (1975). The meaning of areas A, B, and C is discussed in the text. Right:
The graphic model on the left is extended through time as a cylinder. The
diagram is a bisect of the cylinder showing the position of the developing
northern hardwood ecosystem within areas A, B, and C. The bisect represents a
second-growth forest that is clear-cut and allowed to develop to the ShiftingMosaic Steady State without external interference. The arrows to area C
represent the system’s response to a severe perturbation (e.g., a hot fire followed
by severe erosion; see Figure 6-10).

188

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Ecosystem

Development and the Steady State

189

Figure 6-10. Grantham Mountain, Plainfield, New Hampshire. A fire burned over
the summit of this mountain in 1953. (A) The extent of the fire is shown as the
black region in an infrared photo taken at the time of the fire. (B and C)
Photographs taken in the autumn of 1977 showing the burned area near the
summit, much of which is now bare rock. Aerial photos taken in 1941 and a
forest-type map made in 1947 show few bare or open spots in the area before it
was burned in 1953 (A. Plumb, personal communication). The burned area
previously supported modest spruce and spruce-hardwood forests on thin soils.
The fire and subsequent erosion drove portions of the ecosystem over the
resiliency threshold (Figure 6-9) and converted the forest ecosystem into a bare
rock-shrub system. Centuries will be required for these bare-rock areas to once
again support forests. (Photos by Adrian Bouchard.)

Treefall, which is essential to the maintenance of the Shifting-Mosaic
Steady State, also may play an important role in long-term biogeochemical relationships. For example, as mentioned previously, with
development, weathering substrate may tend to be isolated from the most
active zone in the soil. Through treefall, however, this substrate may be
brought to the surface in throw mounds and made more available to the
functioning ecosystem.
One definition of stability is concerned with the ability of the ecosystem
to return to its original condition after an external perturbation. This is
usually referred to as stability-resilience. Resilience is concerned with
the ability of the system to absorb disturbance and still persist within

190

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

threshold boundaries. Threshold limits are discernible only after perturbation of the ecosystem by severe external stress (Hill, 1975). Margalef
(1969), to clarify the concept of resilience, proposed the idea of mapping
the stability of an ecosystem into three areas. Hill (1975) summed
Margalef’s proposal in the following terms:
Within the central area [A in Figure 6-9], the system may oscillate in a
spontaneous manner as it adjusts to predictable environmental changes, or to
cycles generated by interactions between species ...The system moves, if
subjected to moderate stress, to an area B, which surrounds area A.
However, such changes can be assimilated or buffered, enabling the system to
return to area A. If the stress is severe enough the system moves into area C,
outside B, and the properties of the system may seek new steady state levels
instead of returning to original conditions. Consequently, the boundary
between B and C may be regarded as a threshold of system resilience to
particular stress conditions.

To gain a temporal concept of stability—resilience relationships during
secondary development, we have added a third dimension, time, to
Margalef’s two-dimensional model. The model may be conceived as a
cylinder composed of three shells—A, B, and C. The length of the
cylinder is the time dimension. A bisect of the cylinder yields ecosystem
responses through time.
;
Using ecosystem export characteristics (Figure 6-8) as a black box
measure of ecosystem response, we have mapped the behavior of a
second-growth northern hardwood forest ecosystem that was clear-cut
and allowed to develop to the Shifting-Mosaic Steady State but ultimately
subjected to a disturbance that drove it beyond the resilience threshold of
area C (Figure 6-9).
Clear-cutting evokes a sharp response in export behavior, but the
response is within the threshold limit. The mechanisms discussed in
Chapter 4 rapidly restore the ecosystem to area A. Even though there are
changes in species composition, the even-agedness, more or less continuous canopy, and high rate of biomass accumulation keep the ecosystem
near the core of area A. Gradually, however, with the development of an

ecosystem composed of large even-aged trees and a reduction in the rate
of biomass accumulation the system moves toward area B. Next, the
relatively high death rate of large trees and the loss of biomass move the
system into area B. Gradually, however, the system returns to area A as it
becomes all-aged. However, it is less close to the core of area A than the
Aggradation Phase. This is because it is not consistently accumulating
biomass, and it is more irregular than the Aggradation Phase because it
tends to cycle around the steady-state mean. At any time, the ecosystem
might be driven over the resiliency threshold by a major disturbance such
as a hot fire followed by extreme erosion (Figure 6-10). This would reduce
the ecosystem to a primary condition and prevent its return to original
conditions for a very long time if at all.

Ecosystem

Development and the Steady State

191

Summary
1. A biomass accumulation model is presented showing the development
of a steady state after clear-cutting in a northern hardwood forest.
This model departs in several major aspects from the widely accepted
asymptotic model of ecosystem development.
2. When the ecosystem is viewed as a collection of patches, the steady
state is a condition in which the proportions of patches in different
states of development remain more or less constant, yet with each
patch continuously undergoing a sequence of biomass accumulation
and loss. We call this condition of the ecosystem the Shifting-Mosaic
Steady State.
3. Developmental trends predicted from the Hubbard Brook BiomassAccumulation Model are compared with those predicted by the
asymptotic model. There are a number of basic differences regarding
energetics, community dynamics, and ecosystem export patterns.
a. The maximum amount of biomass a northern hardwood ecosystem can support is not found in the steady state, as predicted
by the asymptotic model, but in an earlier phase. Maximum
supportable biomass is a product of synchronous behavior of
patches composing the ecosystem, and this behavior might be
common to many kinds of forest ecosystems.
b. The use of the P/R ratio as a simple index of ecosystem
development has strong limitations.
c. In general, habitat diversity remains low throughout much of the
developmental period and then rises to a maximum in the SteadyState Phase.
d. Species richness of plants for the entire ecosystem is highest in
recently-cut areas (Reorganization Phase) and the Shifting-Mosaic
Steady State and lower in the mid-Aggradation Phase. Average
number of species per randomly chosen plot (1 m’)is highest during
the Reorganization Phase, lowest during the mid-Aggradation
Phase, and intermediate in The Steady-State Phase.
e. In terms of export from the ecosystem, control during the early
Aggradation Phase of development is “tighter” than in the
Steady State. This is due to even-agedness, a more or less
continuous canopy, and a high rate of biomass accumulation.
4. Although changes in biomass storage affect nutrient export from the
ecosystem, a number of unknowns (e.g., rates of weathering, nitrogen
fixation, denitrification, and so forth) complicate predictions of
biogeochemical flux and cycling, particularly in later phases of
ecosystem development.
5. Stability—resilience relationships of the Hubbard Brook Biomass Accumulation Model change through time because of endogenous and
exogenous disturbances.

CHAPTER

7

The Steady State as a
Component of the
Landscape

Models of ecosystem development usually portray autogenic succession as
an orderly progression of biologic changes (e.g., Odum, 1969; Woodwell,
1974). The macroenvironment within which development occurs is presumed to be more or less constant throughout the autogenic sequence.
Yet every terrestrial ecosystem is subjected to a range of disturbances
varying from those that barely alter the structure, metabolism, or
biogeochemistry of the ecosystem to those that wholly or dramatically
change the system. Defining ‘“‘disturbance’’ is itself a considerable
problem, because it is difficult to draw a line between biological and
physical-chemical events that may be considered within the scope of
autogenic development and other events that might be considered to
seriously deflect the autogenic pattern. In developing the Hubbard Brook
Biomass Accumulation Model (Chapter 1) of ecosystem development, we
followed the procedures of Odum (1969), Botkin et al. (1972a,b), and

Woodwell (1974) and emphasized autogenic development, while deemphasizing exogenous disturbance. This was a necessary decision if our model
was to reflect an uninterrupted sequence from the initiation of secondary
development to the establishment of the steady state.
An imposing and growing body of literature, however, has emphasized
the importance of fire and wind as common, widespread perturbations
that historically have shaped the structure and function of North
American forests. Several hypotheses, while recognizing the importance
of autogenic development,

systems

have proposed

have been destroyed

that, historically, forest eco-

and restarted at irregular, but relatively

short, intervals by catastrophic disturbances.

The reality and even

the

The Steady State as

intellectual
(Stephens,

value

of the

a Component of the Landscape

steady-state

concept

have

been

193

questioned

1955; Raup, 1957; Loucks, 1970; Heinselman, 1973; Rowe and

Scotter, 1973; Wright and Heinselman, 1973; Henry and Swan, 1974).
Loucks (1970) proposed that before settlement by Europeans forests in
Wisconsin were repeatedly but irregularly burned at relatively short
intervals (Figure 7-1). These catastrophic disturbances presumably truncated the development of the ecosystem, in effect rejuvenating it and
restarting it at an earlier developmental state. Recovery patterns for
production and biomass accumulation and some species and community
parameters of the ecosystem are portrayed as wave phenomena, irregularly restarted by fire at relatively short intervals (i.e., a curve that
rises to a peak, declines, and rises again, and so on). Loucks’ hypothesis
neither allows nor considers an autogenically derived steady state but
seems to imply that it occurs only rarely and is composed primarily of
tolerant plant species. Accurate fire histories compiled in the western
region
.of the Lake States support the conclusion that a steady state was
rarely achieved in presettlement forests (Frissell, 1973; Heinselman, 1973).
A similar, but less well-documented hypothesis, has arisen from studies
in central New England, where strong cyclonic winds (e.g., hurricanes) are
thought to interrupt autogenic development regularly prior to the steady
state (Stephens, 1955, 1956; Raup, 1957; Henry and Swan, 1974).
These hypotheses raise fundamental questions about the relationship

between autogenic development and the incidence of major disturbance
and questions as to the utility of the steady-state concept in the
interpretation and management of northern hardwood ecosystems. Is the
steady state merely a theoretical concept with little or no reality in
nature? Were historic northern hardwood ecosystems mostly characterpatterns triggered by random
ized by wave-form
disturbance at
intervals much shorter than the time necessary to achieve the steady

Random

Response

1250

Perturbation (Fires)

Of

Ecosystem

1450

1650

S50

R1950

Time
Figure 7-1. A model of transient phenomena and ecosystem responses (in
biomass, primary productivity, diversity of seedling layer, etc.) as a function of
time for southern Wisconsin forests. Ecosystem development is restarted by
each perturbation, and the whole series of phenomena and responses is thought
to constitute a stable system. With fire suppression by man, the cyclic process is
disrupted (after Loucks,

1970).

194

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

state? Are recurring catastrophes promoted by autogenic development
patterns that progressively immobilize nutrients or increase fire or wind
susceptibility? Has European man substantially changed the historic
pattern? To consider these difficult questions we must examine the
historical record to determine, as best we can, the regularity with which
pre-European northern hardwood forests in the White Mountain region
were destroyed by catastrophic fires or winds.
Our evidence suggests that substantial areas of the region were free of
catastrophic disturbances for long periods of time. This does not establish
the widespread occurrence of steady-state ecosystems in pre-European
times, but it does suggest that the potential for their occurrence existed.
We also consider ways in which European man altered the forest. One
of the major effects is the repeated imposition of even-agedness on
the ecosystem by a variety of land-use practices. As a result, the biomass of the ecosystem tends to cycle through a sequence of peaks and
troughs.

EXOGENOUS

DISTURBANCE

DEFINED

Effects of disturbance are extremely complex since many factors, both
biological and physical, may act to make trees more susceptible to the
action of physical forces. These include biological processes like competition, senescence, insect and disease attack, and simple growth in size, as
well as climatic fluctuations that are unfavorable to growth, such as hard
frosts, severe drought, or prolonged periods of unfavorable weather.
Physical disturbance itself can act as a positive feedback by making a tree
more susceptible to subsequent disturbance by weakening its competitive
position—by breaking its limbs and reducing its leaf area or by increasing
its susceptibility to disease and insects.
Most agents of disturbance occur as a continuum; for example, winds
may range from mild breezes to winds of hurricane force. Consequently,
it is difficult to draw a line between what we call endogenous disturbance
and exogenous disturbance. We have defined endogenous disturbance as
disturbance caused by the fall of trees weakened or killed in the autogenic
development process. The fall of these trees might be caused by their own
weight or loading by wind, ice, or snow. Whatever the final cause that tips
them over, their fall is inevitable even in the most protected of locations.
Endogenous disturbance is included in our developmental model and is
an integral part of the developmental process. Exogenous disturbance is
considered as resulting from forces that may be thought of as external to
the developmental process, such as intense winds or fires. These forces
not only hasten the death or fall of trees weakened in the developmental
process, but they damage or kill many trees that were in reasonably
healthy condition prior to the event. These disturbances also affect. in a

The Steady State as

a Component of the Landscape

195

fairly intensive way, a variety of ecosystem processes. Exogenous disturbances of this kind are not included in our developmental model.
We shall now consider intense winds and fire as factors that shape the
northern hardwood forest ecosystem in the White Mountain region.

COMPARATIVE EFFECTS
MAJOR PERTURBATIONS

OF

Before proceeding, it is useful to recognize that the major perturbations
being considered here (e.g., fire, wind, or clear-cutting) may have
appreciably different effects on subsequent behavior of the ecosystem.
Although all bring about a temporary increase in the ratio of oxidation
to primary production, this is achieved in very different ways. Fire may
largely destroy aboveground biomass and reduce gross primary productivity
to nearly zero. At the same time, fire removes nutrients by volatilization.
Oxidation by fire is very rapid, and in some cases fire also might promote
increased biological oxidation (decomposition) of organic matter remaining
in the soil. The increase in resource availability (e.g., soluble ash products)
tends to be rapid, but may be quickly flushed from the ecosystem.
Clear-cutting also may destroy most aboveground vegetation, and substantial quantities of nutrients are removed in wood products. In this case,
oxidation is by biological processes and occurs less rapidly than in fire but is
still relatively fast. The forest floor is the major site for increased
decomposition (see Chapter 3), and the increase in resource availability may
be spread over a somewhat longer time than that occurring with fire.
Most intense winds are erratic in their effects (Figure 7-2). Many or all
of the larger trees may be blown down, but some residual trees are often
left standing (Spurr, 1956a; Spurr and Barnes, 1973). Immediate effects on

GPP would seem to be less severe than with intense fires or clear-cutting.
The remaining forest may be a patchwork of open areas and remaining
vegetation with a tangle of leaning and fallen trees. Little material is
removed

from

that

decomposition

the

subdued

than

the ecosystem.
after

Under

response

clear-cutting.

these circumstances, it seems

of the

forest

However,

floor

massive

likely

would

be more

amounts

of tree

trunks may be added to the dead wood compartment. As discussed
earlier, decomposition of this material may keep the oxidation/GPP ratio
for the ecosystem

as a whole >1 for decades after the event. In turn, this

might imply a relatively small increase in resource availability spread over
several decades (i.e., as the total biomass of the system declines, there is a
net release of nutrients).

In terms of age structure, both fire and clear-cutting can result in
essentially even-aged stands or stands with a few age classes (Gilbert and
Jensen, 1958; Frissell, 1973; Heinselman, 1973; Wright and Heinselman,
1973). Wind also may bring about an even-aged stand, but in many

196

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

The Steady State as a Component of the Landscape

197

Figure 7-2. Wind-damaged northern hardwood forests in northern Pennsylvania
showing the erratic nature of wind damage. (A) An area of about 1 ha blown
down in a strong windstorm. Near the center all trees are flattened, but toward
the periphery some intact trees are mixed with windfalls. (B) A wind-damaged
site showing many smaller trees released by the destruction of the overstory
(Photos courtesy of the Hammermill Paper Company.)

ee

cases the ecosystem that develops after an intense wind event may be
composed of an occasional overstory tree and released understory trees
mixed with an even-aged group of seedlings, sprouts, and advance
regeneration that becomes established or released in openings (Spurr and
Barnes, 1973).

DISTURBANCE IN PRESETTLEMENT
NORTHERN HARDWOOD FORESTS
To gain a better focus, we shall examine the occurrence of catastrophic
fire and wind in and around the northern hardwood forest region and
then narrow our perspective to the hardwood forest of the White
Mountains of northern New Hampshire.
Fire
The northern hardwood forest grades into the boreal forest along its
northern border. Within these areas, catastrophic fires, both natural and
man-made,

were

and are common

throughout the area (MacLean,

1960;

Rowe and Scotter, 1973). Fire histories reconstructed by Heinselman (1973)
and Swain (1973) indicate that fire has been an important component of
transitional forests between boreal and deciduous zones for thousands of
years. Heinselman’s detailed study of the Boundary Waters Canoe Area in
northwestern Minnesota indicates a natural fire rotation of 100 years in
presettlement times; i.e., on the average, an area equivalent to the whole
area was burned over every 100 years. Between 1681 and 1894, 83% of the
area burned in nine fire periods. Collectively these data suggest that only a
relatively small proportion of the transitional forest is free from fire for
periods exceeding several hundred years. Heinselman (1973) questions the
utility of the Clementsian concept of climax under these recurrent-fire
conditions.
Old even-aged stands of white pine occur throughout the Great Lakes
region and are generally thought to have originated after intense fires
(Chapman, 1947). Based on even-aged stands Graham (1941) postulated a
great fire in the upper peninsula of Michigan between 1400 and 1600, and

Maissurow (1941) speculated that forest fires burned through 95% of the
virgin forests of northern Wisconsin. Hough and Forbes (1943) reported an

198

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

even-aged white pine stand in Tionesta Forest in northwestern Pennsylvania
that originated from a fire in 1644.
In more detailed studies involving dating by fire scars and stand age,
Frissell (1973) reports that fires occurred on the average every 10 years
between 1650 and 1922 in Itasca Park in central Minnesota and occurred
throughout the area of the Park. In common with Heinselman’s findings,
fires often resulted in the subsequent establishment of even-aged pine
stands and in a presettlement mosaic of largely even-aged stands dating
from different fires. Lutz (1930), based on a fire-scar study, reported 40
fires between 1687 and 1927 at Heart’s Content Forest in northwestern
Pennsylvania. Five of these fires, 1749, 1757, 1872, 1903, and 1911, were

considered to be severe, and two were thought to be associated with
severe drought years. Stearns (1949) in his study of old-aged northern
hardwood forests in Wisconsin reported serious fires after lumbering but
proposed that fire was overrated as an initial destructive agent in old-aged
hardwood stands.
The record of fire occurrence in northeastern forests, based on
even-aged stands, fire scars, or charcoal, is far less complete than for the

western extension of the northern hardwood forest. Cline and Spurr
(1942) suggest that more or less even-aged stands of old-growth white
pine in southwestern New Hampshire originated from fires. More
recently, Henry and Swan (1974), working in the same area and using tree
rings and the occurrence of charcoal in the soil, dated one of these fires as

occurring in 1665S.
Based on early historical writings, it seems probable that fires started
by Indians were common in presettlement times in southern and central
New England and westward to Pennsylvania (Lutz, 1930; Day, 1953;
Spurr, 1956b; Thompson and Smith, 1970). Kalm (1770) reported
extensive Indian fires along the southern Champlain Valley of New York
State and Vermont in 1750.
Historical evidence for the deliberate use of fire by the Indians in
northern New England, however, seems to be lacking (Day, 1953; Brown,
1958a). Indian populations in the mountainous regions were small and
migratory. In the vicinity of Hubbard Brook, Indians apparently spent the
fall, winter, and spring months in the river valleys. Maize, beans, squash,
and pumpkin were planted in early spring, and then most of the group
migrated to the coast for the summer season, returning in the late
summer

(Likens, 1972b).

In river valleys surrounding Hubbard Brook, early explorers noted the
occurrence of white pine stands of various size and age (Brown, 1958a).
These may have originated after abandonment of Indian garden sites or
after fire that had been used to clear land. Day (1953), however, suggested

that the usual incentives for Indians to burn the forest were lacking in
northern New England—agriculture was less practiced, summer travel
was by canoe rather than overland, winter travel was by snowshoe and
was not hindered by underbrush, and deer hunting took the form of

The Steady State as a Component of the Landscape

199

stalking or still hunting rather than driving. Comments from land
surveyors on the nature of the land along survey lines of township borders
made from 1783 to 1787 make no mention of fire or fire scars in the
presettlement forest of northern Vermont (Siccama, 1971).
The available literature suggests that fires were common in presettlement times throughout much of the northern hardwood and boreal region
surrounding the area of the White Mountains and northern Vermont.
Within the White Mountain region there is very little evidence,
vegetational or historical, for the common occurrence of widespread fire
in presettlement northern hardwood forests. Certainly, there are no fire
histories

comparable

to those found

by Heinselman

(1973) and Frissell

(1973) in Minnesota.
Wind
Wind. effects, because of their relative independence from control by man,
will be considered in terms of both pre- and postsettlement time periods.
Stearns (1949), in a study of land-survey records, reported considerable
wind damage to presettlement northern hardwood forests in northeastern
Wisconsin. Surveyors’ maps made about 1859 show areas of blowdown
covering one to several square kilometers, and their notes record many
instances of blowdown in small areas. In nearby Menominee County,
Wisconsin,

80

million

board

feet

(one

board

foot = 2,359-cm*)

of

drought-weakened timber blew down from 1930 to 1937 (Secrest et al.,
1941). These data emphasize the importance of wind in the western
extension

of the

northern

hardwood

forest,

but,

because

of marked

differences in topography and wind regimes, it is difficult to relate these
experiences directly to the forests of northern New England.
Smith (1946) proposed that New England forests are subject to three
major classes of destructive windstorms: tropical cyclones (hurricanes),
extratropical cyclones, and more-localized intense winds associated with
stormfronts and thunderstorms. Northern New Hampshire and Vermont
have been struck by severe hurricane-force winds only twice, in 1815 and
1938, over the period 1492 to 1976 (Ludlum, 1963). Smith would include
the 1788 hurricane, but Ludlum (1963) indicates that this storm was
confined to southeastern Vermont and central New Hampshire.
The effects of the hurricane in 1938 are reasonably well known because
of survey records by the U.S. Forest Service (see Smith, 1946; Spurr,
1956a). Nearly three billion board feet of timber were blown down and
243,000 ha of forest land in Connecticut,

Rhode

Island, Massachusetts,

and Vermont were severely damaged. The total forest land in those states
was about 5.3 million ha in 1940 (Barraclough, 1949), of which we
estimate about 4.5 million ha were in the zone of hurricane damage
mapped by Smith (1946). Thus, only about 5% of the zone affected by the
hurricane was severely damaged. Although many stands were completely
destroyed or lost patches of trees, most stands within the mapped region

200

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

escaped with damage to isolated trees. Most observers agree that topography was a major factor in determining damage (Smith, 1946).
At the Bartlett Experimental Forest, approximately 65-km northeast of
Hubbard

Brook,

Victor

Jensen,

silviculturalist

with

the

U.S.

Forest

Service, observed that damage to northern hardwood forests from the
1938 hurricane was very limited. It was principally confined to defective
trees

or local wind-prone

sites, while

most

old-growth

and

even-aged

northern hardwoods were relatively unaffected (Jensen, 1939, personal
communication).
The long return period, two severe hurricanes during 484 years, and the
restriction of the most devastating effects to particular sites relative to the
position of the storm track, suggest that hurricanes are not a major
recycling factor for most parts of the hardwood forest of northern
Vermont and New Hampshire. Smith (1946) also considered these
northern hardwood regions to be areas at low risk from large-scale
storms, including extratropical storms.
The intense relatively localized winds associated with frontal showers
and thunderstorms may be a more important factor than larger-scale
storms, because of their much greater frequency and, perhaps, their
greater cumulative areal coverage. There are almost no precise data on
these winds, but cursory observations of northern hardwood forests in the

Hubbard Brook region over the last 20 years suggest that small-scale
windthrow of single trees to small- and moderately-sized patches of trees
is not uncommon.
In the presettlement forests of northern Vermont,

5 of 163 comments

on vegetation along land survey lines mentioned windfalls of various sizes
(Siccama, 1971). Lorimer (1977) also records that windfalls covered 2.2%
of the total surveyed distance in northeastern Maine in the 1793-1827
surveys. Most of these windfalls were recorded in conifer forests, while
only a few occurred in mixed stands or in hardwood stands.
Windthrow Mounds and Forest History. Stephens (1955, 1956), by a careful
analysis of windthrow mounds, fallen trees in all stages of decay, and
living trees, was able to reconstruct a 500-yr history of a 0.4-ha area in the

Harvard Forest in central Massachusetts. About 14% of the area of the
plot was covered in mounds and pits (Figure 4-8). The abundance of
mounds may have been a factor in the selection of the study site, but this
point is not made clear. The analysis indicated that four of the six
windthrow events were considered to be major: one in the fifteenth
century and three others in 1635, 1815, and 1938. These last three dates

correspond to the occurrence of major hurricanes in east central
Massachusetts (Smith, 1946; Ludlum, 1963). Henry and Swan (1974)
applied Stephens’ methodology to a 0.04-ha plot in the Pisgah Forest in
southwestern New Hampshire. To optimize the opportunity to reconstruct forest history, the plot was placed in an area where rotting material
was abundant. They determined that a severe fire about 1665 resulted

The Steady State as

a Component of the Landscape

201

in more or less even-aged conifer forest which grew without major
disturbance for 262 years. From 1897 to 1938 four wind events, culminating
in the 1938 hurricane, completely destroyed the larger trees and initiated
new growth. These studies emphasize the frequency and magnitude of
wind as a disturbing force in forest ecosystems of central New England,
but it should be borne in mind that the amount and frequency of
disturbance per unit area of land reported in these studies is very much a
function of the study site selected by the investigator.
Nevertheless, in a qualitative sense, windthrow mounds are a widespread phenomenon. Their occurrence in northern hardwood forest in
Pennsylvania led Goodlett (1954) to conclude that windthrow of individual trees or small groups of trees was an important factor in
maintaining intolerant species in the presettlement northern hardwood
forest. Stephens (1956), in an 8000-km journey to the Cumberland and
Smokey Mountains, south through
Quachita and Boston Mountains,

the southern Piedmont, west to the
and back to Massachusetts, found

mounds and pits of uprooted trees practically everywhere. Lutz (1940)
concluded that windthrow is a universal phenomenon in forest regions
and that over long periods of time soil under forest stands may be
repeatedly subjected to disturbance when trees are uprooted. This
conclusion applies quite well to the Hubbard Brook region and is
reflected in the pit and mound topography mapped on Watershed 6
(Bormann et al., 1970). We point out, however, that many of the mounds
noted in our study and other studies could result from treefall due to
endogenous

causes,

e.g.,

trees

weakened

by competition,

disease,

or

senescence that topple in modest winds or from ice or snow accumulations.
It seems reasonable to conclude that presettlement northern hardwood
forests in the White Mountains were subjected to frequent disturbances
by wind, but this was mostly of a modest scale. However, localized
wind-prone sites might have suffered extensive wind damage at fairly
frequent intervals. More intense effects might have been localized on
particularly wind-prone sites.

Natural Catastrophic Rotations
Heinselman (1973) proposed the term “natural fire rotation” as the time
necessary to burn over an area equal to an area under consideration. For
the Boundary Waters Canoe Area of northern Minnesota this was about
100 years. We believe that, in presettlement times, natural fire or cyclonic
wind rotations for much of the White Mountain region were many
centuries or even a millenium. Our conclusion is based on the
convergence of several lines of evidence.
1. In terms of damage from large cyclonic wind storms, the lower
elevations of the White Mountain region are among the lowest
wind-risk areas in New England (Smith, 1946), while modern

202

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

statistical data suggest that the White and Green Mountain regions
are, perhaps, the least susceptible areas to fire within the northern
hardwood region.

Many factors, such as recurrence of severe drought years, lightning, condition of the vegetation, propensity to accumulate fuel,
and human activities, determine an ecosystem’s susceptibility to
intense forest fires. Although it is difficult to combine these factors
into a meaningful index of fire susceptibility, an extensive record of
forest-fire activity on national forest lands from 1945 to 1976 (the
period of most reliable record), suggests that forests in the White
Mountains and Green Mountains of northern New England are
among the least burnable (Figure 7-3).
Fires occur in the White Mountain National Forest at the rate
of 4.3 per million acres (4.3/405,000 ha) per year, with about onethird of these ignited by lightning. Although this is the lowest
ignition rate for any of the 11 national forests in the northern
hardwood region, the more interesting fact is that on the average
only 8 acres per million acres; (3 ha/405,000 ha) burn each year.
This is the smallest area burned per year among the 11 forests. With
the exception of the Green Mountain Forest (10 acres/million acres;

4 ha/405,000 ha) and Chequamegon

Forest in Wisconsin

(43 acres/

million acres; 17 ha/405,000 ha), the White Mountain National Forest

annual burn rate is 15 to 40 times lower than that of other forests. It
is more than two orders of magnitude lower than that of the national
forests in lower Michigan, and about 40 times lower than that of the
national forests in Minnesota,

one of which contains the Boundary

Waters Canoe Area—the site of Heinselman’s excellent study (1973) of
forest-fire history referred to earlier in this chapter. Perhaps still more
interesting is the fact that the highest burn rate in the White Mountain
National Forest for any year is S6acres/million acres (23 ha/
405,000 ha). This is one to two orders of magnitude smaller than that
of the other forests, with the exception of the Green and Chequamegon Forests.
The principal cause of forest-fire ignition in the northern hardwood
region is due to the activities of man (Haines et al., 1975). Data on the
recreational use of national forests (Figure 7-4) indicate that the White
Mountain National Forest is among the most heavily used, with usage
more than two times that of the northern forests surrounding the Great
Lakes.
Given the heavy use by man, the lowest ignition and annual burn
rates, and the lowest area burned in any one year, we propose
several possible conclusions: Fire-suppression crews in New England
are more efficient, despite the rugged terrain and access of all areas
of the forest to recreational users. New Englanders are more careful
in the woods even though the bulk of them reside in cities. Or, and
this is our opinion, a combination of meteorologic, biologic, and

(68€02)

aaisiuew PS
pue uouny

Ss
&

eyyeMelH
(ge)

(6LZb)

(8Sst)

emoddiyy

(y69%)

sousdns

J@JOOIN

(SO)

uoBbawenbeyd

(adINIBS JSOIOY “S'N ‘Ur ‘Wayeg sniunr
SUOdAY al4 JeENUUY BIAS 1S98104 "S'fl) WO
Aq paijddns eyep Auewtid) 926} 9} Sp6} Woy ‘pouad JA-ZE & JOAO S}Sa10j |BUOIVEU OU} WO
Jsabue| au} S| Seseyjuased ul JequunuU
pajejnoyeo eyeg (‘pue] JSas0J |PUOHJeU JO Sede UOI||!LW 18d oe e}ep ||) ‘yeah a|buls e ul pouing abease
Aq pasned ‘O} JO S}UN UI “Se4ly JO JoquINU
QUL ‘SaJ0e OO} JO SHUN ul Ajjenuue peuing ebea0e abelane D uWN|OD (gq) ueW puke (\y) BulUjYbI)
U! S}SOJOJ |EUONEU JO} SONSHE}S S114 “E-L aunBig
jenuue ebesane (Aey 10 emaddiyD aes) g puke y SULUN|OD ‘uoiBas POOMPIeY UJOYYOU JU}
(LEZ)

Auaybally

“UN OU
(9S)

Se

203
The Steady State as a Component of the Landscape

204

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Wisconsin

Minnesota

Michigan

New
White

Mountain

Hampshire

Maine

Allegheny

Pennsylvania

Green

Vermont

Mountain

|
Millions

2

Of Visitor

Of

3
Days

National

Per

Forest

4
Year

Per

Million

Acres

Land

Figure 7-4. Average annual recreational use of national forest land in the
northern hardwood region from 1965 to 1976 by states. National forests within
the states are listed. Weighted average acreage in national forests, 1965-76, in
millions of acres is shown by number in bar (1 acre = 0.405 ha). One visitor day
equals 12 hr.

topographic factors make White Mountain forests less susceptible to
fire.
. Indian populations, elsewhere a significant factor in the occurrence
of presettlement fires, were sparse and had less incentive to burn. At
any rate, there is practically no historical evidence for widespread
burning during the several centuries preceding the arrival of
European settlers. We hope to extend our knowledge of the fire
record by charcoal analysis (Swain, 1973) of a 13,000-yr-old sediment
core from Mirror Lake in the Hubbard Brook Valley and from peat
cores from high-elevation bogs in the White Mountains (M. Davis,
personal communication).
. All areas within the region are not equally susceptible to catastrophic damage. Burning potential or wind susceptibility is determined by a number of physiographic and biologic characteristics.
The potential for fire to spread is determined by factors such as
patterns of wind flow, distribution of lakes, streams, and wetlands,

rugged topography and bare ridges, and droughtiness of soil due to
texture, soil depth, slope, and aspect (Heinselman, 1973; Rowe and
Scotter, 1973). Wind-susceptible sites are places where high winds

The Steady State as

a Component of the Landscape

205

are constricted and accelerated such as along the flanks of hills, over
ridge tops, through gaps, or along narrow valleys or soils where deep
root penetration is not possible (Smith, 1946). In the well-watered
rugged landscape of the White Mountains it seems reasonable to
think that many areas would be protected from the easy sweep of
fire or from intensive cyclonic winds.
. Ecosystems themselves contribute to their spatial and temporal
vulnerability to wind and fire. Differences in flammability are related
to species composition and the accumulation and spatial distribution
of organic fuel (Bloomberg,

1950; Mutch,

1970; Heinselman,

1973;

Rowe and Scotter, 1973). Similarly, susceptibility to wind damage
may be related to size of individual trees, whether they are deciduous
or evergreen, and structure of the stand (Smith, 1946; Spurr, 1956a;
Henry and Swan, 1974). Although we have not found specific
information on the susceptibility to fire of the various developmental
stages of northern hardwood forests, a number of ecologists and
foresters are of the opinion that mesic northern hardwood forests are
relatively resistant to fire (Chittenden, 1905; Bromley, 1935; Hough,
1936; Egler, 1940; Stearns, 1949; Winer, 1955). In the words of many

workers in forest fire control, they are ‘‘asbestos” forests. On the other
hand,

it would

seem

that

as northern

hardwood

stands

become

composed of larger and older trees their vulnerability to wind
increases. Toppling of large trees might be coupled with an increase in
susceptibility of the area to fire (Hough, 1936; Stearns, 1949; Wright

and Heinselman, 1973).
. Finally, a basic difference between fire-dependent and fire-resistant
ecosystems relates to the rate at which biological decomposition
reduces the fuel load of dead wood or organic matter on the mineral
soil surface (Wright and Heinselman, 1973). Apparently, in some
systems litter production is so much greater than decomposition
that fuel accumulation reaches enormous proportions as autogenic
succession proceeds (Bloomberg, 1950). In humid temperate or
tropical systems characterized by intense fungal, bacterial, and
detritivore activity, decomposition can reduce susceptibility to fire
by a rapid turnover of litter and a tendency toward modest standing
crops of dead wood and forest floor material. Our studies indicate
that the forest floor under northern hardwood forests in the White
Mountains does not continuously accumulate but rather reaches an
equilibrium and that massive inputs of branch and limb material are
turned over in one or two decades (Chapter 1). It is interesting to
note that, innorthern hardwood forests where geologic conditions lead
to more base-rich fertile soils (mull soil, Bormann and Buell, 1964), the
forest floor (the layer of the organic matter on top of the mineral soil) is
completely replaced by bare mineral soil with only seasonal litter
cover. Northern hardwood forests with mull soils would be even less
susceptible to fire.

206

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem
»

Probability of a Steady State

Loucks’ (1970) hypothesis that forest ecosystems are periodically restarted
or recycled by fire at intervals short enough so that an autogenically
derived steady state is rarely achieved seems reasonable for large areas of
fire-dependent vegetation (see Quarternary Research 3(3), 1973). Before
discussing the applicability of this hypothesis to the White Mountains
region, it seems appropriate to point out that Loucks’ concept of
catastrophic recycling and our concept of steady state share some basic
assumptions. Both include disturbance and “restarting”’ as fundamental
components of ecosystem function, and in some respects the difference
between the two concepts is best considered one of timing and degree.
Our steady state includes endogenous disturbance and constant recycling
by randomized local perturbations which eventually cover the whole area.
Loucks’ catastrophic perturbations are applied to the whole system at
once, and the whole system is recycled in one time sequence; in essence,
the patches composing the system are synchronized.
The evidence available to us indicates that Loucks’ hypothesis cannot
be generally applied to northern hardwood ecosystems of the White
Mountains. During presettlement times, there may have been some
fire-prone areas in which return periods of fire were short enough to
regularly truncate autogenic development, or over millenia the whole
region might have been recycled. Using modern fire records for the
Province

of New

Brunswick,

Canada,

Wein

and

Moore

(1977)

have

estimated fire-rotation periods (i.e., 100 divided by the percentage of total
area burned annually for a forest type) ranging from about 650 to 2000
years for various forest types in which northern hardwood species are important. Similar estimates derived from the modern fire record for the
White Mountain National Forest (Figure 7-3) would yield incredibly long
fire-rotation periods. Consequently, it seems that fairly large areas of
presettlement hardwood forest within these humid, rugged, and highly
dissected mountains were free from catastrophic disturbance for periods
of time sufficient for a steady-state condition to have been achieved.
The presettlement northern hardwood landscape might be conceived as
a collection of ecosystems in various stages of development. Some areas,
particularly fire- or wind-prone sites, might have been regularly recycled
by catastrophic disturbance, but substantial areas might have supported
ecosystems approaching the steady state. We say “‘approaching”’ because
smaller-scale exogenous disturbances by wind, snow, or ice that kill or
maim healthy trees seem unavoidable over extensive areas for long
periods of time. These disturbances might best be considered within the
pattern of autogenic development, but their imposition on the ecosystem
would upset the theoretical proportions of States A, B, and C based on
endogenous disturbance alone (Figure 6-5).
The “defense” of the reality of the autogenically derived steady state
may seem to be a polemic exercise, but it serves two useful purposes.
Ecology, like all other fields, is affected by the swinging pendulum of

The Steady State as

a Component of the Landscape

207

opinion. For decades Clementsian notions of succession and climax
thoroughly dominated much ecological thinking and buttressed land-use

policies
occurring
come

that

assigned

ecosystems

under

attack,

disturbances
(Raup,

and

the

a minor

role

in most

properly,

these

1967).

Quite

concept

of catastrophic

naturally
ideas

have

disturbance,

par-

ticularly fire, as an integral part of the structure and function of temperate
forest ecosystems has gained ground. But the pendulum may swing too
far toward catastrophic recycling at the expense of concepts of long-term
autogenic development that are themselves continuing to evolve. This is
not a trivial matter, for theories of ecosystem development are beginning
to play a major role in studies of evolution (e.g., Loucks, 1970; Connell
and Slatyer, 1975; Smith, 1975) as well as in land-use management
decisions (e.g., Kilgore, 1973; Wood and Botkin, unpublished data).
Finally, we suggest that it might be useful to consider the catastrophic
recycling hypothesis and the autogenically derived steady state as
components of a two-dimensional geographical space. Because of modest
levels of exogenous disturbance or long periods between large-scale
disturbances, forested regions of the humid, temperate mountains of the
northeastern United States might be considered as centers where
autogenic development has its highest probability of achieving steadystate conditions, while in almost every direction away from these centers

catastrophic recycling takes on increasing importance.

POSTSETTLEMENT

DISTURBANCE

Settlement by Europeans markedly changed the nature, frequency, and
extent of exogenous disturbance in the northern hardwood forests of the
White Mountain region. Changes were primarily affected by land-use
practices, lumbering and land clearing, and a marked increase in the
frequency and intensity of fires associated with these practices, and with a
general increase in population size within the region. Brown (1958a,b)
proposes three periods of land utilization for the area around Hubbard
Brook. These apply generally to the White Mountain region but with
somewhat different dates.

The Period of Settlement:

1760-1840

Land clearing for agriculture and production of wood products were
major activities during this period. However, most attention was devoted
to subsistence farming, and the production of lumber was limited to local
needs. Except for river valleys and lower elevation tracts, Brown believed
that these early settlers had relatively little effect on the primeval forest.
This idea is supported by data on land clearing in the town of Thornton,

adjacent to the Hubbard Brook watershed (Table 7-1), where only 6% of
the total land area was cleared by 1830.

208

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

Table 7-1. Land Usage During 1790-1830 in Thornton, New Hampshire®
Usage
Mowing
Pasture
Arable
Orchard
Percentage of total area
4Values are in hectares.

1790

1800

1816

1820

1830

96
68
30
0
eS)

148
152
37
0
2.6

192
260
53
9
3.9

190
332
Sil
13
4.4

202
488
81
18
6.0

Thornton has a total area of 13,209 ha (from Likens,

Farm and Forest Economy:

1972b).

1840-1880

During

this period,

decline,

but the tides of clearing, cultivation,

land clearing reached

its maximum

and began to

and abandonment

flowed

unevenly. New lands were being cleared, while others were being
abandoned. There are no accurate statistics on the total area of northern
hardwood land cleared in the White Mountains (Likens, 1972b). One of
the most important events was the penetration of the railroad into these
mountainous reaches. Transportation of bulk goods at low prices made
possible the utilization of previously little-recognized timber resources. In
addition to providing an opportunity to transport lumber and logs to
distant markets, the railroad directly increased the use of wood. For

approximately 30 years, 1850-1880, many locomotives were wood burners.
Lumbering and sawing and the agricultural life of the community became
closely dovetailed. Farming and saw milling were spring and summer
occupations, while attention was focused on cutting and getting logs out
in the winter. Logging was generally limited to small, irregular, and
scattered units. The highly diversified ownership pattern and Yankee
individuality discouraged aggregation of the large units necessary for
larger timber operations; however, a few large professional lumbering
companies emerged during this period (Coolidge and Mansfield, 1860).
Most cutting occurred fairly close to the railroad or to rivers large enough
to support log drives, and the relative abundance of timber elsewhere in
New England held stumpage values at such a low level that the policy of
selecting only the larger and better trees was an economic necessity.
Spruce was the favored species and was often selectively cut some
distance into the mountains. Hardwoods were rarely used as lumber. At
the close of this period, large areas of the White
“virgin forest” (Brown, 1958a; Gove, 1968).

Large-Scale Commercial

Mountains

were

still

Logging: 1880-1940

Large-scale forestry operations in northern New Hampshire date
mostly after 1870. Until 1869, the state of New Hampshire owned
the greater part of the White Mountain region and Coos County

The Steady State as a Component of the Landscape

209

north of it. However, the policy of the state was to dispose of public
lands as fast as possible, and large tracts were sold for almost nothing
(Chittenden,

1905). By 1890, because of increased demand, better prices,

increased capitalization, and better transportation, lumbering had become
one of the great industries of the state (Walker et al., 1891). One of
the major factors leading to large-scale commercial logging was that
numerous
logging companies were able to acquire units of land
sufficiently large to sustain logging operations for a period of years. With
the land base secured, it was possible to invest the large quantities of
capital needed to build the necessary internal transportation facilities, i.e.,
roads and logging railroads. To defray the substantial overhead costs, it
was thought necessary to clear-cut. At first trees were cut for lumber, but
with time pulp became increasingly important. Softwoods were preferred,
but, after the development of hardwood pulping methods in the early
1900s, hardwoods were utilized as well (Brown, 1958b).
The Report of the Forestry Commissioners of 1893 estimated that all
timber of any commercial value had been removed from 0.45 million ha
in a 120 X 175-km

rectangle that included

about

160,000ha

of primeval

Timber

of commercial

value

forest
refers

the White Mountains, but that

remained

to softwoods,

(Walker

et al., 1891).

since hardwoods

had

practically no sale value at that time (Chittenden, 1905).
The Forest Survey of 1903, fairly detailed for its day, reported that
about 12% of northern New Hampshire supported virgin spruce forest
but that there were practically no virgin hardwood stands. Most
hardwood stands had contained some spruce, but the spruce had been
removed by high-grading (Chittenden, 1905). By 1940, most of the area
had been cutover and few virgin stands remained (Brown, 1958b).
Postsettlement

Forest Fire

The incidence and extent of forest fires in the White Mountain region
greatly increased during postsettlement times. For the early settlement
period (the late eighteenth century), there is evidence that extensive fires
occurred in southern New Hampshire and in Maine (Plummer, 1912;
Fobes, 1948; Lorimer, 1977). These fires were often associated with
the burning of slash during land clearing and ignition of slash after
lumbering.
Forest fires were apparently common throughout New Hampshire in
the post Civil War period. The Forestry Commission commented in 1885

that; in the previous 25 years, forest fires destroyed as much timber as had

been harvested (Hale et al., 1885). They also commented that the
primeval forest within the White Mountains had recently been invaded by
the axe and that there was every reason to suppose that fire would quickly
follow. In 1891, the Forestry Commission reported (Walker et al., 1891)
that extensive tracts within the White Mountains had been burned. These

210

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

fires included one of the largest fires recorded for the region, the Zealand
fire of 1888, which covered 5000 ha (Chittenden, 1905). This fire occurred
in 1886, according to Belcher (1961). In 1893, the Forestry Commission
again emphasized that fires follow cutting and that standing forests do not
burn well.
Chittenden (1905), in what was probably the most reliable survey of
the time, mapped burned areas throughout the northern third of New
Hampshire. About 6% (34,000ha) of the total area was burned in
scattered fires in 1903, an exceptional fire-year in the northeastern United
States. Chittenden reported that the virgin forest was strikingly free of
fire, despite the exceptional fire-year. He also offered the opinion that the
mountainous topography precludes fires that sweep unhindered over vast
areas.
Since the advent of fire protection, fire is of relatively rare occurrence
in the White Mountains region, despite the fact that the region is heavily
used by tourists, campers, and hikers, as well as by wood-using industries.
As stated earlier, for the 30-yr period prior to 1976, only 0.025% of the
275,000 ha comprising the White Mountain National Forest had been
burned.

Effects of European

Man

During presettlement
and postsettlement
periods, European
man
increased the frequency and areal extent of major exogenous disturbances
in the northern hardwood forests of the White Mountains. Virtually the
entire area has been cut at least once, either by clear-cutting or highgrading, many areas have been burned, and substantial areas have been
cleared and abandoned.
It is impossible to make a general statement about the effects of
increased catastrophic disturbances on the structure and function of the
northern hardwood ecosystem. Some potential for future growth was
probably lost in severely burned or eroded areas (Chittenden, 1905), and
a few systems were driven over the stability-resilience border (Figure
6-9). Today the hardwood area is mostly covered by young forests, many
of which are now undergoing cutting for a second or third time.

INCREASED REGULARITY OF WHOLE-SYSTEM
BIOMASS OSCILLATION
The intervention of European man in northern hardwood forests
appreciably increased the land area occupied by even-aged forests. In
presettlement forests, relatively large areas were probably in an all-aged
condition owing to autogenic processes working over long periods of time
without interruption by large-scale catastrophic events. Many stands were
probably composed of patches in all stages of development, i.e., they
were asynchronous.

The Steady State as

a Component of the Landscape

211

Clear-

-+——_—_—_—_———- Presettlement ——————>|
(a)

Cutting

>
}«

(b)

Total
Biomass

Time
Figure 7-5. Hypothetical pattern of total biomass in a northern hardwood ecosystem in the presettlement period, when system-wide perturbations [(a), fire; (b),
wind] recur at fairly long intervals, and in the modern period, with regular harvest
by clear-cutting at 60- to 70-yr intervals.

Activities (such as clear-cutting, intense fires, or land clearing and
abandonment) that remove preexisting living biomass often result in the
establishment of even-aged stands (Gilbert and Jensen, 1958). In effect,
these activities might be thought of as organizing forces that impose
synchrony on the patches composing the ecosystem. The development of
an initially even-aged synchronous stand after clear-cutting represents the
central theme of this book.
The second- and third-generation cuts now occurring in the northern
hardwood forest tend to be some form of clear-cutting (blocks, strips).
This, of course, truncates the trend of the developing forest as it proceeds
toward asynchrony and reestablishes synchrony (Chapter 6). Thus,
continuing harvest of the hardwood forest by clear-cutting has the effect
of increasing the regularity with which the biomass of the whole
ecosystem oscillates (Figure 7-5). Management of the northern hardwood
forest by clear-cutting produces a pattern of recycling through time quite
similar to that proposed for the natural behavior of ecosystems in
fire-prone areas (Loucks, 1970). Paradoxically, in the latter areas,
management (fire suppression) is disrupting the short-term recycling
thought to be characteristic of those areas in presettlement times and is
leading toward an autogenically derived condition seldom achieved
previously (Heinselman, 1973).

Summary
1. Disturbance is defined as the disruption of the pattern of the
ecosystem by physical forces; fire, wind, and the force of falling trees.
2. Endogenous disturbance is an integral part of the autogenic developmental process.

212

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

3. Major exogenous forces, fire, wind damage, and clear-cutting, all result
in an immediate decrease in gross primary productivity but are
dissimilar in their effects on the oxidation/GPP ratio, nutrient and
biomass export, and on the age structure of the ecosystem immediately
after the disturbance.
4. Fire during presettlement times was common in most areas surrounding the White Mountains of northern New Hampshire but relatively
uncommon within the mountains.
5. Large-scale cyclonic winds are not a major disturbance factor over
much

of the lower elevations in the White Mountains,

but small and

intermediate wind effects may be important agents of disturbance over
the long term.
6. Large-scale disturbance by natural catastrophes in the presettlement
northern hardwood forests of the White Mountain region is thought to
occur only at long intervals and is not considered to be an inexorable
deterrent to the development of a steady-state condition.
7. Care should be exercised in extrapolating hypotheses of catastrophic
ecosystem recycling developed in one region to other regions. The
forested region in the humid mountains of northern New England may be
considered a center where autogenic development has its highest
probability of achieving steady-state conditions, while in almost every
direction away from this center catastrophic recycling takes on increasing
importance.
8. During postsettlement times, European man has greatly increased the
frequency and extent of exogenous disturbance in the White Mountain
region. This has been done through forest cutting, land clearing and
abandonment,

and through an increased incidence of fire.

9. Management of northern hardwood forests by clear-cutting produces a
pattern of recycling similar to that proposed for fire-prone areas during
presettlement times. Conversely, fire suppression in the latter areas
leads. toward an autogenically derived condition seldom achieved in
presettlement times.

CHAPTER

8

Forest Harvest and
Landscape Management

When designing a plan to harvest forest products, forest managers face a
variety of questions: Will the plan yield the most satisfactory profit
commensurate with short- and long-term expectations? Does the plan
promote or allow for the establishment of an adequate crop of new
individuals of desirable species? Is the environmental impact acceptable?
How can a high level of productivity of the forested ecosystem be sustained?
What is the maximum or optimum rate of harvest?
These same concerns are voiced by conservationists with somewhat
different emphasis: What are the short- and long-term impacts of various
harvesting practices on natural forests, including soil fertility and the
quality of drainage waters? How rapidly will the landscape return to its
natural condition? Will the natural system be degraded by repeated
harvest? Is the area being used or managed in the best way for all
interests?
The Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study can contribute partial answers to
some of these questions as they apply to northern hardwood forests, but
perhaps the most useful contribution is to allow a more precise
formulation of the questions themselves.

AIR POLLUTION
Traditionally, landowners have been concerned about the protection of
their property against destruction from outside forces, e.g., vandalism,
fire, and, more recently, off-the-road vehicles and camping. However,

214

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

there are more subtle outside influences, such as air pollution, which may
seriously degrade landscapes. These factors should be of major concern
to landowners, managers, and conservationists. Some of the important

questions include: What areas are affected and to what degree? What
are the spatial and temporal dimensions of the problem? What are the
short- and long-term ecological effects of air pollutants on forested and
associated aquatic ecosystems? What and where are the sources of the air
pollutants, and how can they be controlled? How do the costs of pollution
control compare with the benefits to and rewards from the affected natural
ecosystems? We believe that owners of forest land and conservationists
should enter the current debate about standards for air pollution and
should work toward greater protection of forest land from regionally
dispersed air pollutants.
What are some of the problems, real and potential? Our work at
Hubbard Brook has shown that a variety of materials, injected into the
atmosphere from man’s activities, are dispersed over large regions and
transported by air masses to areas quite remote from large urban or
industrial centers. Airborne gases and particles may be removed from the
airstream in several ways: by gravity in wet and dry deposition, through
impaction on surfaces, and by biological assimilation of gases. All three of
these mechanisms operate in humid forest ecosystems, so that relatively
large quantities of air pollutants may be removed from the air in these
areas. Strong acids (e.g., H,SO,), oxidants (e.g., ozone), heavy metals
(e.g., Pb), and pesticides (e.g., DDT) are some of the anthropogenic
airborne contaminants that are spread over wide areas (Likens and
Bormann, 1974a,b,c; Smith, 1975; Bormann, 1976; Braekke, 1976; Cleveland et al., 1976; Dochinger and Seliga, 1976; Groet, 1976; Likens, 1976).

Acid Precipitation
Acid precipitation

at a pH <5.6) is now common

over

most of the eastern United States (Chapter 2; Likens and Bormann,

(rain and snow

1974;

Likens, 1976) and is affecting forested landscapes. Forested ecosystems are
very complex and are affected by a variety of environmental variables.
Thus, it is difficult to ascertain the specific effect of acid precipitation
within

this

milieu.

The

added

stress,

nevertheless,

is real.

Field

and

laboratory studies have shown that acid precipitation can increase the
leaching of nutrients from the foliage (Wood and Bormann, 1974;
Abrahamsen

et al., 1976), accelerate cuticular erosion of leaves, produce

leaf damage when the pH of precipitation falls below 3.5, alter response
to associated pathogens, symbionts, and saprophytes, affect the germination of conifer seeds and the establishment of seedlings, affect the
availability of nitrogen in the soil, increase leaching of ions from the soil,
decrease soil respiration, and lower rates of decomposition (Ambio, 1976;
Braekke, 1976; Dochinger and Seliga, 1976; Likens, 1976). In fact, forest

growth in the eastern United States appears to have declined since about

Forest Harvest and Landscape Management

215

1950 (Whittaker et al., 1974; Cogbill, 1975), but it is impossible to state at
this time what the role of acid precipitation has been in this decrease
(Cogbill, 1976).

Heavy Metals
Using the moss Leucobryum glaucum as a collecting agent, Groet (1976)
determined that about 24-mg of lead/m*-yr were deposited in the vicinity
of the White Mountains. Schlesinger et al. (1974), on the basis of bulk
precipitation samples, calculated a value of about 20-mg of Pb/m?-yr for
the same general area. These and other data suggest that relatively high
rates of deposition of airborne heavy metals are occurring in the
northeastern United States. Increased amounts of Ag, Au, Cr, Ni, Pb, Sb,

and V in recent lake sediments in the Adirondack Mountains of New
York State and the White Mountains of New Hampshire also have been
attributed to long-range atmospheric transport and deposition (Galloway
and Likens, 1977). The biological consequences of the pollutants that are
currently falling on the northeastern United States are a major concern.
The forested landscape is a very efficient filter. Many airborne and
waterborne substances are effectively removed from active circulation by
deposition in woody biomass, forest soils, or sediments in lakes or other

impoundments. One striking example is lead. Some 97% of the lead
falling on the forest at Hubbard Brook is retained and stored within the
ecosystem (Siccama and Smith, 1978). Drainage waters from the Hubbard
Brook Experimental Forest are of high quality, whereas concentrations of
lead in precipitation frequently exceed published limits for drinking
water. We must ask: How long can ecosystems carry on these filtration
activities without serious impairment of their natural structure, metabolism, and biogeochemical functions?
Oxidants

Ozone from photochemical air pollution, emanating from the New York
City area, has been traced to sites in Connecticut and northeastern
Massachusetts.

In fact, southwestern Connecticut is reported to have one

of the worst ozone pollution problems in the country, with daily
maximum concentrations frequently more than double the Federal
standard of 0.08-ppm (Cleveland et al., 1976). The effects of oxidants
such as ozone on the northern hardwood ecosystem are poorly known.
Western forests have been seriously damaged by ozone and peroxyacetyl
nitrate (PAN) in various areas (e.g., Miller, 1973; Miller and Elderman,
1977; Williams et al., 1977).
The added stress of photochemical oxidants on the northern hardwood
ecosystem, in combination with acid precipitation, heavy metals, and
other airborne pollutants, may represent a threat to the continued
productivity of these forests.

216

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

HARVESTING

FOREST

PRACTICES

°

Clear-Cutting Methods
It is not our objective to review and evaluate all types of timberharvesting practices. Rather we comment on only three types of
clear-cutting: stem-only harvesting, in which all merchantable trunks
between stump and crown are harvested; whole-tree harvesting, in which
the entire portion of the tree aboveground is harvested and chipped for
use in paper pulp or reconstituted paper products; and complete-tree
the entire tree, aboveground

harvesting,

in which

harvested

and

stem-only

harvesting,

chipped.

and belowground,

is

Currently,

in the

White

Mountain

region,

lumber,

millwood,

and

pulpwood

as

with

end

products, is the most widely used. Whole-tree harvesting on a commercial
scale has just begun (Bryan, 1976). A special variety of complete-tree
harvesting which involves 10- to 20-yr harvests of puckerbrush (the
mixture of woody species that arises after a clear-cut) is receiving
considerable study at the University of Maine (Chase et al., 1971, 1973;
Ribe, 1974; Young,

1974).

Regeneration of Vegetation After Clear-Cutting
Our studies of recently clear-cut sites, cut by the stem-only method,
confirm what foresters have known for some time. The regenerative
capacity of the northern hardwood forest ecosystem in the White
Mountain region is excellent as long as cutting is done in a careful manner
(Chapter 4). Regeneration after cutting results from activation of a variety
of reproductive and growth strategies and from a temporary increase in
resource

availability (available nutrients, solar radiation, and water) after

cutting. Together these lead to rapid regrowth of vegetation (Chapter 5).
Erosion, which is generally not greatly accelerated with careful cutting
methods, is rapidly brought under control. The major biological effect of
clear-cutting is to promote and synchronize regeneration and growth
mechanisms (Table 4-1) that usually occur naturally in scattered openings
in the forest.
As yet there is little information on regeneration after harvesting by
the whole-tree or puckerbrush methods. However, whole-tree harvesting
results in considerably more soil disturbance than stem-only harvesting
(Zasada, 1974), but this point is debatable (R. Pierce, personal communication). Complete-tree harvests involve tearing stumps out of the soil.
Increased disturbance of the forest floor and/or removal of living root
systems might inhibit regeneration of those species dependent on advance
regeneration, buried seeds, and vegetative reproduction.

Forest Harvest and Landscape

Management

217

Nutrient Export After Clear-Cutting
In general, in the White Mountain region, there is a significant increase
of dissolved nutrients in drainage water after the stem-only type of
clear-cutting. Although this may be thought of as a cost paid for rapid
recovery (Chapter 5), it should be. given careful consideration in the
design of the harvesting method. Loss of dissolved substances not only
represents loss of nutrients from the ecosystem but also has an
environmental impact on aquatic ecosystems draining the cutover forest.
As long as clear-cuts are limited to small areas, e.g., several hectares, and
the cut area forms a small part of a larger forested watershed, biotic
activities

in streamwater

(Fisher

and

Likens,

1973;

Likens

et al. 1978;

Meyer, 1977) plus dilution by water from uncut forests (Hornbeck
and Federer, 1975) will tend to minimize environmental impacts. However, careless cutting, cutting procedures that reduce the effectiveness
of regenerative mechanisms or accelerate losses of dissolved substances
and particulate matter, or cutting of too large a proportion of the total
drainage basin could promote significant downstream environmental
impacts.
In designing harvesting procedures, thought should be given not only to
the immediate increase in loss of nutrients in drainage waters resulting
from new cutting but also to the rate and amount of drainage loss from
previous cuts in the same watershed. In evaluating the total environmental effects, the additive impact of all cuts—past and present, large and
small—must be considered.

Management of the Forest Floor
The forest floor plays a central role in the biogeochemistry and ecology of
northern hardwood ecosystems on acidic geologic substrates (Chapter 2).
Mineral soils in the White Mountains tend to be relatively infertile, with a
relatively high proportion of available nutrients localized in the forest
floor. Not only does the forest floor play a major role in annual nutrient
cycling, but it acts as a regulator of ecosystem metabolism by storing
nutrients during the Aggradation Phase and releasing them after disturbance (Chapters 3-5). The forest floor carries out other functions as well: It
promotes infiltration and percolation of water, minimizes erosion, and
serves as a repository of buried seeds and the rooting substrate for advance
regeneration.

Convergence. The forest floor is a product of ecosystem development and
of convergence (Dansereau, 1957). Convergence results from the tendency of nature to moderate extremes and to move toward a middle
position. For example, the long-term development of a northern hardwood ecosystem (i.e., over a millenium) may result in an absolute increase in resource availability through formation of the soil profile, but
development also is marked by the tendency for the characteristics of

218

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

heterogenous soil microsites to even out or converge. Thus, wetter and
drier

microsites

become

more

mesic

as development

proceeds,

and

it

seems likely that changes in soil moisture would be accompanied by
convergent changes in soil fertility. Of course, convergence cannot
overcome all initial differences in microsites (also, new microsites are
continuously being formed, e.g., by treefall), but convergence would tend
to moderate extremes within the ecosystem and to even out the spatial
distribution, or geometry, of resource availability. Countless cycles of leaf
litter might be considered a major, but imperfect, mechanism whereby
organic matter and nutrients are distributed fairly evenly in the forest
floor. This, in turn, leads toward a more equable distribution of primary
production. In other words, productivity of the ecosystem may be affected
by the geometry of the forest floor.
Seedbed Preparation. Manipulations of the cutover site to expose mineral
soil and encourage the establishment of light-seeded species might work
in a direction opposite to that of nature by rearranging the geometry of
forest floor material.
Rearrangement of the forest floor may result from a variety of activities
such as road building (discussed below), log skidding, and seedbed
preparation. The creation of skid trails is sometimes encouraged to
enhance the establishment of birch seedlings (Filip, 1969; Kelso, 1969). In
some instances, special instruments such as bulldozers equipped with
blades, rock rakes (Filip and Shirley, 1968), or disks (Bjorkbom, 1967)
have been used to expose mineral soil.
In preparing seedbeds, these questions should be considered:
1. Does stirring and mixing of the forest floor promote more rapid
decomposition and mineralization while at the same time diminishing the natural regenerative response of the ecosystem? Experimental results with forest floor material from Hubbard Brook show that
mixing promotes an increase in both ammonification and nitrification (Melillo, 1977), while Chase et al. (1968) report that mixing
organic and mineral layers stimulates both decomposition and
nitrification. If this occurs on a practical scale, seedbed preparation
might lead to greatly increased losses of dissolved substances in
drainage water.
2. Does the method of seedbed preparation severely disturb the forest
floor, diminish control of erosion and transportation, and significantly
accelerate loss of particulate matter?
3. Is there a cost in diminished productivity of the resulting stand
associated with seedbed preparation techniques, which increase
disruption of the forest floor to foster establishment of light-seeded,
commercially important species? In studies of seedbed preparation,
numbers of seedlings established on a prepared site relative to
seedlings established on the undisturbed forest floor often are used as
the major criterion determining the success of the treatment. This

Forest Harvest and Landscape Management

219

approach may underestimate the possibility that the factors which
promote the establishment of seedlings may not be optimal for
subsequent growth. Yet, production is the ultimate economic goal of
management. This problem has several dimensions.
a. There is some question as to whether seedbeds in mineral soil
favor the very species (i.e., birches) they were created to promote.
Numerous

workers

(Tubbs, 1963; Marquis et al., 1964; Hoyle,

1965; Marquis, 1965, 1973) have reported superior growth of
birch in humus rather than mineral soil, even though germination
and survival were greater on mineral soil (Marquis et al., 1964).
These workers speculated that differences might be due to
greater nutrient availability in humus.
b. Earlier we raised the possibility that seedbed preparations may
increase dissolved nutrient losses from the ecosystem. Such losses
might reduce subsequent productivity of the exosystem (Lundmark, 1977).
c. Site manipulations that lead to extremely irregular distributions
of forest floor material, with substantial areas of exposed mineral
soil and areas of heaped-up organic matter, might result in a
geometric distribution of resource availability that is less
favorable to overall productivity than the natural distribution.

Roads
The construction of both permanent roads and temporary logging roads
has received considerable attention from forest engineers and foresters
(e.g., Kochenderfen

1970;

Stone,

1973;

Patric,

1976a,b;

Swanston

and

Swanson, 1976). It is not our intention to review the extensive literature
associated with road building in forested land and its ecological impact.
Rather, we discuss briefly an area of research that our study of the northern
hardwood ecosystem suggests might be of widespread interest, or at least
one that should receive additional thought from forest managers and
ecologists alike.
A major emphasis among those studying the environmental impact of
road building has been the effects upon hydrology and various soilerosion processes (Swanston and Swanson, 1976). With the exception of a
handful of papers (e.g., Pfister, 1969), the long-term effects of road
building on future forest productivity have received little attention. Yet
judging by the report of the Chief of the U.S. Forest Service (Report of
the Chief of the Forest Service: 1970-75) on the number of roads
constructed annually on U.S. Forest Service lands alone, it seems safe to
assume that tens of thousands of kilometers of permanent and temporary
roads are constructed annually on public and private forested lands in the
United States. In the northern hardwood forests of the White Mountain
region, about 2 to 10% of the harvested area (J. Hornbeck, personal
communication) is utilized in the construction of temporary logging roads.

220

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Patric (1977) cites 6 to 16% in West Virginia, while Kochenderfer (1977)
reports that roads and landings occupy 10% of nine central Appalachian
areas logged with wheeled skidders and 8% in areas logged with jammers.
Temporary roads may alter long-term productivity in a number of ways
(Figure 8-1), all of which should receive further study. One of the most
obvious impacts of road building in the northern hardwood ecosystem is
disruption of the forest floor geometry already discussed. Forest floor
material is removed from the area occupied by the road crown, side
ditches, and any adjacent slopes used in cut and fill (Akesson, 1963);
Gownslope forest floor material also may be covered by fill. Thus, forest
floor material may be removed from or buried over widths ranging from
about 9 m in fairly level areas (Akesson, 1963) to greater widths as slope
increases. We should assess whether the rearrangement of forest floor
material in road building results in changes in productivity; for example,
will accelerated growth of trees in areas of humus deposition offset lesser
growth in areas of exposed mineral soil?
A much more subtle question concerns the rearrangement of subsurface flow patterns. In addition to the obvious flow of water in stream
channels, both permanent and temporary, water moves downslope as
subsurface flow. Subsurface flow helps to maintain flow in stream
channels during both wet and dry periods. In the summer of 1976, we dug

Potential Effects Of Temporary
On Primary Productivity

Roads

Exposed Subsoil, Nutrient Deprivation
Depending On The Character Of The
Subsoil And Slope
Delayed

Establishment

Seed Bed
Sprouting

Discouraged

Due

For Light-seeded
And Buried Seed

To Frost

Heaving

Species, But
Mechanisms

Compaction Effects
On Production And
Infiltration

Reduced

Production

? ~<— Deprivation

Of

Due

Downslope

To

Interception

Of

Downslope

Surface

And

Reduced
—=

Subsurface

Flow

Flow
a

s

CS
°

QS

l= Ken)
Ge

;
°

Roadbed

Pro-

duction Due
To Excessive
Drainage

hie 4

Hydrologic Concentration
Enhanced
Erosive
Force

Qga0e

Figure 8-1. Potential effects of temporary roads on primary productivity.

Forest Harvest and Landscape Management

221

a 22-m-long soil pit along a contour in the Hubbard Brook Experimental
Forest. The pit penetrated into the underlying impervious till. Inspection
of this pit after a heavy rain indicated seepage above the till throughout
the downslope face of the pit. In one place, although there was no surface
evidence of subsurface drainage, i.e., vegetation characteristic of wet
sites, there was an underground channel carrying flowing water.
We should evaluate the role of the downslope movement of surface
water in the maintenance of ecosystem productivity: Does subsurface flow
provide the vegetation of lower slopes with a supply of water in addition
to precipitation, and does it contribute to the generally high levels of
production typical of lower slopes?
Megahan (1972) has studied the effects of logging roads on subsurface
flow in the mountains of central Idaho. He estimated that roads in his
study area intercepted 10 to 20-cm of downslope flow, concentrated it in
drainage ditches, and channeled it to streambeds. Megahan (1972) and
E. R.- Burroughs (personal communication) have pointed out that the
conversion of subsurface flow into surface flow by roads may have
profound ecological effects on downslope vegetation. We suggest that this
could be a fruitful area of research in northern hardwood forests of the
northeastern United States, as well as in the northwestern United States.

Long-Term

Effects of Forest Harvesting

Perhaps the most difficult question for the forest manager is how to
evaluate the long-term effect of harvesting procedures on the future
structure, metabolism, and biogeochemistry of the forested ecosystem. This

question has tended to polarize the thinking of a number of foresters
(Stone, 1973; Marquis, 1976; Patric, 1976a,b) and conservationists (Curry,
1971), who cite either the continuous use of some European forests or the
occurrence of forest catastrophes to prove that harvesting may or may not
have a long-term impact on the forested ecosystem.
Actually, the question of maintenance of long-term forest productivity, except for instances of fairly obvious degradation associated with
harvesting, is very difficult, if not impossible, to answer with any precision using historical data. The complexity of the forested ecosystem, the
fickleness of the climatic variables affecting growth, the time periods
involved, and the incompleteness of historical records on growth variables
like primary production preclude the detection of any but the most gross
changes in productivity due to repeated cycles of harvesting.
Our inability to measure the long-term impact of repeated harvesting
on most forest lands points up a major need—the construction of realistic
forest growth models that would provide reasonable estimates of the
long-term ecologic and economic cost/benefit relationships resulting from
various harvesting procedures. Until such understanding is developed,
estimates of long-term effects will have to remain largely what they
are—educated guesses. Given the complexity of forest ecosystems, basing

222

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Ecosystem

policy on educated impartial judgments is not as unscientific as it may
seem to some space-age minds; in any event, recognition of the
limitations of the procedure should induce caution in decision making.
Rotation Time. Rotation time is the period between successive cuts. One
approach in estimating a rotation time that will not diminish long-term
productivity of the forest is to estimate the time required for the
ecosystem to reacquire nutrients lost as a result of harvesting. Given
sufficient time, these losses can be made up by various nutrient inputs into
the ecosystem and by the weathering of minerals already in the ecosystem
(Chapter 2, Figure 1-14).
Based on our model of ecosystem development, it is apparent that
there are several ways in which harvesting practices can alter the length
of time necessary to regain nutrients. Using nitrogen as an example, in
Figure 8-2I we portray the standing crop in an aggrading forest that has
been clear-cut by the stem-only method and allowed to regrow. The curve

B‘

0

2

nee cia

res

2
uJ

eee
ah

©)

Cc

(©
oO

“ut

—_

my

ke

2.)

8

wu

ee
%)

:

-!

It

Oo
ke

aie

- 5

a

as

- -

not

PS ad

ee
ce

Nee

t

B

my

1
1
'
\

ae

4

i
Iv

= a
Bae

2

2
fe =

& os

2 2

=

=
S =

2

Bee

G

Gu

Time ——~—

aoe

2

noe

Bice

hee

Dies

Forest Harvest and Landscape Management

223

portraying changes in standing crop of nitrogen is broken into three
segments—AB, BC, and CD. Segment AB represents nitrogen removed
in wood products; BC represents the decline in standing stock during the
Reorganization Phase, when losses of dissolved substances and gaseous
exports exceed nitrogen inputs in precipitation and nitrogen fixed by
microorganisms; CD represents the Aggradation Phase, when inputs
exceed outputs and the system accumulates nitrogen (Figure 2-10). The
rotation time ¢ is the number of years necessary to replenish the standing
stock to the precutting level.
Several major points emerge from evaluation of Figure 8-2:
1. The amount of nitrogen lost from the ecosystem is not simply the
amount removed in wood products (i.e., segment AB), as suggested
by some authors (e.g., Patric and Smith, 1975), but also includes net
nitrogen losses during the Reorganization Phase (segment BC).
Covington’s (1976) estimate of the forest floor decline after
stem-only clear-cutting indicates that nitrogen losses from the forest
floor may be several times the amount removed in wood harvest.
Considering these total losses, it seems clear that estimates of the
time necessary to restore nutrients lost during harvesting would be
grossly underestimated if based on the replacement of nutrients
removed in wood products alone (Figure 8-21).
2. The amount of nitrogen removed in wood products (segment AB) is
strongly affected by the type of harvest. Our estimates at Hubbard
je

Figure 8-2. This figure is intended to illustrate some of the potential effects of
various harvesting and seedbed procedures on the time required for northern
hardwood ecosystems in the White Mountain region to regain nitrogen lost through
harvesting. Time periods are based on hypothetical changes in the standing stock of
total nitrogen in the ecosystem. Curve segment AB results from nitrogen removal in
wood products; segment BC portrays net nitrogen losses during the Reorganization
Phase; Segment CD represents net nitrogen buildup during the Aggradation Phase.
The time required by the ecosystem to return to precutting levels of total nitrogen
stock, point A, is shown by t. (I) Stem-only harvest (AB) with a modest effect on net
losses during the Reorganization Phase (BC) and the rate of nitrogen gain during
the Aggradation Phase (CD). (II) Complete-tree harvest (A’B’) in which B’'C’ = BC,
the slope of C’D’ = slope of CD, and ft. > t,; tis primarily influenced by the increased
nitrogen removal in wood products. (III) Stem-only harvest (A”B”) in which
harvesting procedures increased both nitrogen losses during Reorganization and
the length of the Reorganization Phase, i.e., B’C” > BC, slope of C’D” = slope of
CD, and t;> t,; this case suggests that careless harvesting or seedbed practices
can substantially lengthen the recovery period. (IV) Complete-tree harvest (A’””B”)
after which net nitrogen losses are increased during the Reorganization Phase and
the rate of nitrogen buildup is decreased during the Aggradation Phase, i.e.,
B’’C’” > BC, slope of C’’D” <slope of CD, and t,>> t,. These patterns illustrate
that under some circumstances recovery of the ecosystem can be delayed by additive effects on AB, BC, and CD and that the time necessary for ecosystem recovery
may be greatly lengthened. Obviously, there are many more possibilities than
shown here.

224

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Brook suggest that a complete-tree harvest of a 60-yr-old stand
would remove about 4.3 times the nitrogen removed in a stem-only
harvest. A whole-tree harvest of a 90-yr-old stand at Bartlett
Forest would remove 2.3 times the nitrogen taken out in a stem-only
harvest (Hornbeck, 1977). Even if we assumed that all three harvest
methods had equivalent losses during the Reorganization Phase
(segment BC) and equivalent rates at which nitrogen was accumulated during the Aggradation Phase (segment CD), it is apparent
that whole-tree and complete-tree harvests would significantly
increase the time necessary to replace nitrogen lost in harvesting
(Figure 8-2II).
3. Net nitrogen losses during Reorganization (BC) are probably strongly
influenced by management procedures. For example, pulling up root
systems in complete-tree harvests or seedbed preparations could
result in excessive forest floor disturbance and soil mixing. Such
disturbance might lead to increased rates of decomposition and
nitrification while reducing the efficiency of natural regeneration in
taking up solubilized nutrients. Also, biological nitrogen fixation is
known

to occur in dead wood, and removal of dead trees, tops, or

stumps in whole- or complete-tree harvests might lower the nitrogen
input via fixation during reorganization of the ecosystem. As a
consequence, net nitrogen losses during Reorganization (BC) would
increase and lead to a longer replacement time (Figure 8-2III).
4. Rates of nitrogen accumulation during the Aggradation Phase
(segment CD) may be lowered both by the magnitude of harvesting
and/or by harvesting procedures. Lowered rates of nitrogen accumu-

lation would lead to an increase in the length of the recovery period
(Figure 8-2IV).
This type of analysis suggests that whole-tree or complete-tree harvests
do not actually increase production, as proposed by some authors (Lowe,
1973), but rather increase harvests at one time while lengthening the time
required for the ecosystem to return to precutting nutrient levels. The
return-time may be lengthened simply because more nutrients are
removed in wood products, but changes in net nutrient losses during
Reorganization and/or decreased rates of accumulation during Aggradation may act, in an additive way, to increase return-times substantially
above those calculated on wood-product removal alone.
One important point not shown in Figure 8-2 is that repeated harvests
at time periods shorter than those required to regain precutting nutrient
levels could cause a general deterioration of the ecosystem. Such
deterioration can be thought of as a series of curves such as those shown
in Figure 8-2 but with point A at a lower starting level on each successive cut;
deterioration also could be represented by effects on the segments BC

and/or CD. For example, the rate of nitrogen accumulation (CD) might be
lower after each successive cut.
The “puckerbrush” method of complete-tree harvesting may present

Forest Harvest and Landscape Management

225

special problems. Our data indicate that the rapid growth of puckerbrush
in White Mountain forests is related to the decline of the forest floor, with

some nutrients transferred to the rapidly regrowing vegetation (Chapter
5). It seems likely that repeated harvests at 10- to 20-yr intervals would
lead to a rapid decline in forest productivity due to insufficient time to
rebuild the forest floor.
It is conceivable that forest fertilization could be used to make up
nutrient deficits resulting from more intensive harvesting, but this is not a
simple matter of adding a one-time application of fertilizer equivalent to
estimated losses. Questions arise as to the amount of nutrients to be
replaced, the timing of fertilizer applications (e.g., Waring, 1973), the
effect of intensive harvesting on exchange capacity, which in our
ecosystems is largely determined by organic surfaces, the amount of
fertilizer that moves directly to drainage water (e.g., Ramberg, 1976), and

so forth.
Finally, some consideration should be given to the fossil fuel costs
attached to new harvesting procedures. In view of the national need to
conserve energy, careful evaluations should be made of harvesting
techniques that promise more products per unit area but involve energyexpensive machinery and fertilization. An increased use of whole-tree or
complete-tree harvesting might represent a shift away from forests that
are largely self-maintaining and solar-powered (Bormann, 1976) to forests
dependent to a larger extent on fossil energy.
Within this framework, intensive study should be launched to estimate
the energy costs, economic benefit, and environmental impact of new
harvesting techniques. This should be done immediately, before large
amounts

of

capital

are

committed

to

whole-tree,

complete-tree,

or

puckerbrush harvesting and the related processing. Experience from the
last decade suggests that once a heavy financial commitment to new
technology is made, reasons will be found to continue its use.

Acceptability of Clear-Cutting
One of the objectives of the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study is to link
basic research with forest management. To this end we present a few
comments on the ecological acceptability of stem-only clear-cutting in
northern New England.
Our studies suggest that many similarities exist between redevelopment
occurring in clear-cut ecosystems and in openings in the forest created by
naturally occurring treefall. This suggests to us that clear-cutting has the
potential to work with nature rather than against it and that clear-cutting
may be considered as an ecologically acceptable procedure in White

Mountain northern hardwood forests. However, it also is apparent that
misuse of stem-only clear-cutting can lead to unnecessary short- and
long-term degradation of the forest ecosystem. Therefore, it should be
coupled with carefully designed safeguards.

226

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

In the following paragraphs we suggest some safeguards that have
become apparent as a result of the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study. By
no

means

are

these

considered

to be all-inclusive,

nor

are

all of the

conclusions original with us. Many, but not all, of our suggestions have
already been incorporated in stem-only clear-cutting procedures advocated by the U.S. Forest Service.
To be acceptable, clear-cutting (stem-only) systems should meet the
following specifications (Likens et al., 1978):
1. Cutting should be limited to sites with strong recuperative capacity.
Clear-cutting on steep slopes or on thin soils can lead to long-term
changes in the structure, metabolism, and biogeochemistry of the
forest ecosystem. This was shown dramatically in the deforestation
experiment at Hubbard Brook in which small patches of forest with
thin soil on bedrock were converted to bare rock by the accelerated
erosion that followed cutting (Reiners et al., 1979).
2. Cutting should be done in the context of a larger watershed unit and
in relation to all previous cuts in the unit. This will allow the
maintenance of water quality by dilution and by “purifying”
activities within the drainage streams.
3. Cuts

should

be relatively small, for example,

several

hectares,

to

insure the availability of seed sources and to minimize losses of
dissolved substances and eroded material. Two methods of clearcutting—block-cutting
and progressive strip-cutting—are under
study at Hubbard Brook. Block-cutting is a complete clear-cut done
all at once. In progressive strip-cutting all trees are harvested over a
4-yr period; the forest is divided into a series of 25-m strips, and
every third strip is harvested at 2-yr intervals. Preliminary data
(Hornbeck et al., 1975b) indicate that accelerated water and nutrient
losses may be significantly reduced by progressive strip-cutting.
4. The cutting and harvesting procedure should do minimum damage
to the forest floor. This will safeguard the natural regenerative
capacity of the ecosystem and sustain area-wide control over
erosion.
5. Roads should consume an absolute minimum amount of area,
commensurate with sound ecologic and engineering principles.
6. Mechanical damage to the stream channels should be avoided by
leaving a sufficiently wide strip of uncut trees along both banks.
7. Proper ecological weight should be given to species, such as pin
cherry, raspberry, and elderberry, which have little importance as a
source of wood products. These exploitive species play an important
role in the recovery process by conserving nutrients and minimizing
erosion and are also an important source of food for wildlife.
8. Planned rotation times should be long enough for the ecosystem to
regain, by natural processes, nutrients and organic matter equivalent
both to that lost as a result of product removal and to those losses
accelerated by clear-cutting. Current studies in the White Mountain

Forest Harvest and Landscape Management

227

region (Covington, 1976) suggest that, on the average, about 65 years
is required for organic matter in the forest floor to rebuild to precutting levels. Hence we suggest that a rotation time in excess of
65 years is compatible with natural regenerative processes. The U.S.
Forest Service guidelines for management of timber harvest in the
White Mountain National Forest suggest a 110- to 120-yr rotation
for cutting (Weingart, 1974).

LANDSCAPE

MANAGEMENT

Plans for the management of landscapes in the White Mountain region
include many areas where commercial forestry is very limited or
excluded. It is our hope that some of the material in this book and in our
earlier volume, Biogeochemistry of a Forested Ecosystem, will be useful to
landscape planners and managers concerned with those areas.
We suggest in closing that a longer planning frame would allow areas
utilized for commercial forestry to serve more effectively a multiplicity
of uses

and

needs,

including

those

of interest

to forest

industrialists,

conservationists, and recreational and regional planners.
If forest cutting could be stabilized so that a certain proportion of all
lands dedicated to forest utilization were clear-cut (stem-only) every few
years (perhaps on an 80- to 100-yr rotation), taking into account the
safeguards mentioned earlier, a number of regional benefits might be
obtained. These benefits result from a planned long-term harvesting
schedule rather than a boom-or-bust schedule governed solely by market
conditions. Such a harvesting regime would create a landscape composed
of relatively unchanging proportions of northern hardwood forest in all
stages of development. The proportion of the region in each developmental phase would remain constant, but individual sites would undergo
development and eventually be cut at the next rotation. The benefits to
the region would be as follows:
1. An even flow of wood products might result in more stable
wood-using industries.
2. Water flowing from the region would be of high quality, and changes
in quality and quantity due to harvesting activities would be
minimal.
3. The maintenance of natural gene pools and biological diversity
would be enhanced. Species of plants and animals tend to be tied
to particular developmental phases of the ecosystem. The cutting
regime, along with the maintenance of natural areas not subject to
cutting, would guarantee adequate representation of all developmental conditions.
4. Hunting and fishing potential also would be stabilized by maintenance of fairly constant proportions of the landscape in different
developmental phases.

228

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

5. Although aesthetic and recreational values are largely personal,
from several points of view these properties would be enhanced by
the increased landscape diversity resulting from availability of all
phases of forest growth, optimum diversity of plant and animal
species, and streams and lakes of high quality.
Finally, it is necessary to note rapidly changing uses of the forest, other
than those related to timber and pulp production. These uses include
dispersed and intensive recreation, permanent and vacation housing,
increased winter and summer off-road vehicular traffic, and the increased

demand for wood as fuel. All of these uses have potential destabilizing
effects on the northern hardwood ecosystem.
There is no doubt that the coming decades will see demands for
increased yields of goods and services from northern hardwood forests.
At the same time, we can be assured that pressures for long-term
conservation of our solar-powered forest resources will mount. These
diverse goals can be reconciled only through a thorough understanding of
the structure, metabolism, and biogeochemistry of natural ecosystems.

References

Aber, J. D. 1976. A computer model of canopy dynamics and competition for
light and nutrients in northern hardwood forests. Ph.D. Thesis, Yale
University, New Haven, CT. 136 pp.
Abrahamsen,

G., K. Bjor, R. Horntvedt,

and

B. Tveite.

1976.

Effects of acid

precipitation on coniferous forest. Pp. 37-63. In: Impact of Acid Precipitation
on Forest and Freshwater Ecosystems in Norway, F. H. Braekke, ed. SNSF
Project, Research Report FR6/76, Oslo, Norway.
Akesson, H. A. 1963. Drainage of forest roads. Canad. Pulp Paper Assoc.
Woodlands Sect. Index No. 2260(B-8-b):6—12.
Alexander, M. 1961. Introduction to Soil Microbiology. John Wiley, NY. 472 pp.
Ambio. 1976. Report from the International Conference on the Effects of Acid
Precipitation in Telemark, Norway, June 14-19, 1976. Ambio, 5(5-6):200—264.
Anderson, R. N. 1968. Germination and Establishment of Weeds for Experimental
Purposes. Weed Sci. Soc. of America. 236 pp.
Anonymous.
1958. Manual of Forest Fire Control. Northeast Forest Fire
Protection Commission. 268 pp.
Art, H. W. 1976. Ecological Studies of the Sunken Forest, Fire Island National
Seashore. National Park Service Monograph Series No. 7, NY. 237 pp.
Art, H. W., F. H. Bormann, G. K. Voigt, and G. M. Woodwell. 1974. Barrier
Island forest ecosystem: The role of meteorological inputs. Science,
184:60-62.
Baker, F. S. 1949. A revised tolerance table. J. Forestr., 47:179-181.
Barraclough, S. L. 1949. Forest land ownership in New England with special
reference to forest holdings of less than five thousand acres. Ph.D. Thesis,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. 269 pp.
Barrett, J. W. 1962. Regional Silviculture of the United States. Ronald Press, NY.
610 pp.

230

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Belcher, C. F. 1961. The logging railroads of the White Mountains. Part IV. The
Zealand Railroad (1884-1892). Appalachia, 33:353-374.
Bjorkbom, J. C. 1967. Seedbed-preparation methods for paper birch. U.S. Forest
Service Research Paper NE-79. 15 pp.
Bjorkbom, J. C. 1972. Stand changes in the first 10 years after seedbed
preparation for paper birch. USDA Forest Service Research Paper NE-238.
10 pp.
Bloomberg, W. G. 1950. Fire and spruce. For. Chron., 26:157-161.
Blum, B. M., and S. M. Filip. 1962. A weeding in ten-year-old northern
hardwoods—methods and time requirements. USDA Forest Service Northeastern Forest Experiment Station Research Note 135.
Bormann, F. H. 1953. Determining the role of loblolly pine and sweet gum in
early old-field succession in the Piedmont of North Carolina. Ecol. Monogr.,
23:339-358
Bormann, F. H. 1976. An inseparable linkage: Conservation of natural ecosystems
and the conservation of fossil energy. BioScience, 26:754—760.
Bormann,

F. H., and M. F. Buell. 1964. Old-age stands of hemlock northern
hardwood forest in central Vermont. Bull. Torrey Bot. Club, 91:451-465.
Bormann,
F. H., and
G. E. Likens.
1967.
Nutrient
Cycling.
Science,

155:424-429.
Bormann, F. H., G. E. Likens, and J. S. Eaton. 1969. Biotic regulation of
particulate and solution losses from a forest ecosystem. BioScience,
19:600-610.
;
Bormann, F. H., G. E. Likens, and J. M. Melillo. 1977. Nitrogen budget for an
aggrading northern hardwood forest ecosystem. Science, 196:981-983.
Bormann, F. H., G. E. Likens, T. G. Siccama, R. S. Pierce, and J. S. Eaton. 1974.
The export of nutrients and recovery of stable conditions following
deforestation at Hubbard Brook. Ecol. Monogr., 44:255-277.
Bormann, F. H., and A. P. Nelson. 1963. Vegetation zonation in north-central
New England. AIBS Ecol. Soc. Amer. Field Trip Mimeo.
Bormann, F. H., T. G. Siccama, G. E. Likens, and R. H. Whittaker. 1970. The
Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study: Composition and dynamics of the tree
stratum. Ecol. Mongr., 40:377-388.
Botkin, D. B., J. F. Janak,

and J. R. Wallis.

1972a.

Rationale,

limitations, and

assumptions of a northeastern forest growth simulator. IBM J. Res. Devel.,
16(2):101-116.
Botkin, D. B., J. F. Janak, and J. R. Wallis. 1972b. Some ecological consequences
of a computer model of forest growth. J. Ecol., 60:948-972; IBM Research
Report No. 15799 (1971).
Bourdeau, P. F. 1959. Seasonal variations of photosynthetic efficiency of
evergreen conifers. Ecology, 40:63-67.
Brady, N. C. 1974. The Nature and Properties of Soils. MacMillan Publishing Co.,
New York. 639 pp.
Braekke, F. W., ed. 1976. Impact of Acid Precipitation on Forest and Freshwater
Ecosystems in Norway. SNSF Project Research Report FR6/76. Oslo,
Norway. 111 pp.
Braun, E. L. 1950. Deciduous Forests of Eastern North America. The Blakiston
Co., Philadelphia. 594 pp.
Bray, W. L. 1915. The development of the vegetation of New York State. Coll.
Forestry, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY; Tech. Publ. 3. 186 pp.

References

231

Bromley, S. W. 1935. The original forest types of southern New England. Ecol.
Monogr., 5:61-89.
Brown,

J. W. 1958a. Forest
conditions,
settlements

history

and

of Mount Moosilauke, Part I: Primeval
the
farm-forest
economy.
Appalachia

24(7):23-32.
Brown, J. W. 1958b. Forest history of Mount Moosilauke, Part II: Big logging
days and their aftermath (1890-1940). Appalachia 24(7):221-233.
Bryan, R. W. 1976. New Hampshire crew feeds the whole-tree chipper with
feller-buncher, forwarders. For. Ind., 103(4):48—49.
Campbell, R. W. 1975. The gypsy moth and its natural enemies. Agr. Infor. Bull.
No. 381. USDA Forest Service. 27 pp.
Chapman, H. H. 1947. Natural areas. Ecology, 28:193-194.
Chase, A. J., F. Hyland, and H. E. Young. 1971. Puckerbrush pulping studies.
Life Sci. and Agric. Exp. Station Tech. Bull. 49, Univ. of Maine, Orono, ME.
64 pp.
Chase, A. J., F. Hyland, and H. E. Young. 1973. The commercial use of
puckerbrush pulp. Life Sci. and Agric. Exp. Station Tech. Bull. 65, Univ. of
Maine, Orono, ME. 54 pp.
Chase, F. E., C. T. Corke, and J. B. Robinson. 1968. Nitrifying bacteria in soil.
Pp. 593-611. In: The Ecology of Soil Bacteria, T. R. G. Gray and D.
Parkinson, eds. Univ. of Toronto Press, Canada.
Chittenden, A. K. 1905. Forest conditions of northern New Hampshire. USDA
Bureau of Forestry Bull. No. 55. 100 pp.
Clark, F. B. 1962. White ash, hackberry, and yellow poplar seed remain viable in
the forest litter. Ind. Acad. Sci. Proc., 72:112-114.
Cleveland, W. S., B. Kleiner, J. E.McRae, and J. L. Warner. 1976. Photochemical
air pollution: Transport from the New York City areas into Connecticut and
Massachusetts. Science, 191:179-181.
Cline, A. C., and S. H. Spurr. 1942. The virgin upland forest of central New
England. Harv. For. Bull. No. 21. 51 pp.
Cogbill, C. V. 1975. Acid precipitation and forest growth in the northeastern
United States. M.S. Thesis, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. 62 pp.
Cogbill, C. V. 1976. The effect of acid precipitation on tree growth in eastern
North America. Pp. 1027-1032. In: Proc. First Internat. Symp. on Acid
Precipitation and the Forest Ecosystem, L. S. Dochinger and T. A. Seliga, eds.
USDA. For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rept. NE-23.
Cole, D. W. and S. P. Gessel. 1965. Movement of elements through a forest soil as
influenced by tree removal and fertilizer additions. Pp. 95-104. In: Forest-Soil
Relationships in North America, C. T. Youngberg, ed. Oregon State Univ.
Press, Corvallis, OR.
Colman, E. A. 1953. Vegetation and Watershed Management. Ronald Press, NY.
412 pp.
Connell, J. H., and R. O. Slatyer. 1975. Mechanisms of succession in natural communities and their role in community stability and organization. Mimeo., 59 pp.
Coolidge, A. J., and J. B. Mansfield. 1860. History and Description of New England.
A. J. Coolidge, Boston.
Cooper, W. S. 1913. The climax forest of Isle Royale, Lake Superior, and its
development I. Bot. Gaz., 55:1—44.
Corke, C. T. 1958. Nitrogen transformations in Ontario forest podzols. North
Amer. For. Soils Conf., 1:116.

232

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Covington, W. W. 1976. Forest floor organic matter and nutrient content and leaf
fall during secondary succession in northern hardwoods. Ph.D. Thesis, Yale
University, New Haven, CT. 98 pp.
Covington, W. W., and J. D. Aber. 1979. Leaf production during secondary
succession in northern hardwoods. Submitted to Ecology.
Critchfield, W. B. 1960. Leaf dimorphism in Populus trichocarpa. Amer. J. Bot.,
47:699-711.
Curry, R. 1971. Soil destruction associated with forest management and prospects
for recovery in geologic time. Pp. 157-164. In: Clearcutting Practices on
National Timberlands: Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Public Lands,
92nd Congress. U.S. Govt. Print. Office, Washington, DC.
Dansereau, P. 1957. Biogeography: An Ecological Perspective. Ronald Press, NY.
394 pp.
Davis,

R.

B.

1966.

Spruce-fir

forests

of the coast

of Maine.

Ecol.

Monogr.,

36:79-94.
Day, G. 1953. The Indian as an ecological factor in the northeastern forest.
Ecology, 34:329-346.
Dochinger, L. S., and T. A. Seliga, eds. 1976. Proceedings of The First
International Symposium on Acid Precipitation and the Forest Ecosystem.
USDA Forest Service General Tech. Report NE-23. 1074 pp.
Dominski, A. 1971. Accelerated nitrate production and loss in the northern
hardwood forest ecosystem underlain by podzol soils following clear cutting
and addition of herbicides. Ph.D. Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
157 pp.
Douglass, J. E. 1967. Effects of species and arrangement of forests on
evapotranspiration. Pp. 451-461. In: Proc. Internat. Symp. on Forest Hydrology. Pergamon Press, New York, NY.
Eaton, J. S., G. E. Likens, and F. H. Bormann. 1973. Throughfall and stemflow
chemistry in a northern hardwood forest. J. Ecol., 61:495-S08.
Eaton, T. H., Jr., and R. F. Chandler, Jr. 1942. The fauna of the forest humus
layers in New York. Cornell Agricultural Experiment Station Memoir 247.
26 pp.
Egler, F. E. 1940. Berkshire plateau vegetation, Massachusetts. Ecol. Monogr.,

10:145-192.
Egler, F. E. 1954. Vegetation science concepts: I. Initial floristic composition a
factor in old-field vegetation development. Vegetatio, 4:412-417.
Fernald, M. L. 1950. Gray’s Manual of Botany. American Book Co., NY.
1632 pp.
Filip, S. M. 1969. Natural regeneration of birch in New England. Pp. 50-54. In:
The Birch Symposium. USDA Forest Service, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station, Durham,

NH.

Filip, S. M., and N. D. Shirley. 1968. Cost of site preparation with a tractor rake
in northern hardwood clear cutting. N. Logger Timber Process. 17(5):18-19.
Fisher, S. G. 1970. Annual energy budget of a small forest stream ecosystem:
Bear Brook, West Thornton, New Hampshire. Ph.D. Thesis, Dartmouth
College, Hanover, NH. 97 pp.
Fisher, S. G., and G. E. Likens. 1972. Stream ecosystem: Organic energy budget.
BioScience, 22:33-35.
Fisher, S. G., and G. E. Likens. 1973. Energy flow in Bear Brook, New
Hampshire: An integrative approach to stream ecosystem metabolism. Ecol.
Monogr., 43:421-439.

References

233

Fobes, C. B. 1948. Historic forest fires in Maine, Econ. Geogr., 24:269-273.
Forcier, L. K. 1973. Seedling pattern and population dynamics and the
reproductive strategies of sugar maple, beech, and yellow birch at Hubbard
Brook. Ph.D. Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, CT. 194 pp.
Forcier, L. K. 1975. Reproductive strategies and the co-occurrence of climax tree
species. Science, 189:808-810.

Frissell, S. S., Jr. 1973. The importance of fire as a natural ecological factor in
Itasca State Park, Minnesota. Quat. Res., 3(3):397—407.
Fryer, J. H., and F. T. Ledig. 1972. Microevolution of the photosynthetic
temperature optimum in relation to the elevational complex gradient. Canad.
J. Bot., 50:1231-1235.
Fryer, J. H., F. T. Ledig, and D. R. Korbobo. 1972. Photosynthetic response of
balsam fir seedlings from an altitudinal gradient. Pp. 27-34. In: Proc. 19th
Northeastern Forest Tree Improvement Conference, Orono, ME.
Galloway, J. N., and G. E. Likens. 1977. Atmospheric enhancement of metal
deposition in Adirondack lake sediments. Report to Office of Water
Resources Research, Department of the Interior, July 1977. Washington,
DC.
Gessel, S. P., D. W. Cole, and E. C. Steinbrenner. 1973. Nitrogen balances in forest

ecosystems of the Pacific Northwest. Soil Biol. Biochem., 5:19-34. Pergamon
Press, Great Britain.

Gilbert, A. M., and V. S. Jensen. 1958. A management guide for northern
hardwoods in New England. Northeastern Forest Experiment Station Paper
No. 112. Upper Darby, PA. 22 pp.
Gilbert, G. K. 1914. The Transportation of Debris by Running Water. U.S. Geol.
Surv. Prof. Paper 86. 363 pp.
Gimingham, C. H. 1972. Ecology of Heathlands. Chapman and Hall, London. 266

Pp.
Goodlett, J. C. 1954. Vegetation adjacent to the border of the Wisconsin Drift in
Potter County, Pennsylvania. Harvest Forest Bull. No. 25. 91 pp.
Gosz, J. R., R. T. Holmes,

G. E. Likens, and F. H. Bormann.

1978. The flow of

energy in a forest ecosystem. Sci. Amer., 238(3):92-102.
Gosz, J. R., G. E. Likens, and F. H. Bormann. 1973. Nutrient release from
decomposing leaf and branch litter in the Hubbard Brook forest, New
Hampshire. Ecol. Monogr., 43:173-191.
Gosz, J. R., G. E. Likens, and F. H. Bormann.

1976. Organic matter and nutrient

dynamics of the forest floor in the Hubbard Brook forest. Oecologia (Berl.),
22:305-320.
Gove, W. 1968. The East Branch and Lincoln—A Logger’s Railroad. The
Northern Logger and Timber Process. Pp. 16-17, 48-54.
Graham, S. A. 1941. Climax forests of the upper peninsula of Michigan. Ecology,
22:355-362.
Grime, J. P. 1965. Comparative experiments as a key to the ecology of flowering
plants. Ecology, 46:513-S15.
Grime, J. P. 1974. Vegetation classification by reference to strategies. Nature,

250:26-31.
Groet, S. S. 1976. Regional and local variations in heavy metal concentrations of
bryophytes in the northeastern United States. Oikos, 27:445-456.
Haines. D. A., V. J. Johnson, and W. A. Main. 1975. Wildfire atlas of the
Northeastern and North Central States. USDA Forest Service General
Technical Report NC-16. 25 pp.

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

234

Hale, S. W., et al. 1885. Report of the Forestry Commission of New Hampshire.
P. B. Cogswell, Concord, NH.
Hanson, W. A. 1977. Population dynamics, habitat utilization and nutrient cycling of
white-tailed deer in the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, New Hampshire.
(unpublished) 99 pp.
Hardy, R. F. W., R. D. Holsten, E. K. Jackson, and R. C. Burns. 1968. The
acetylene-ethylene assay for nitrogen fixation: Laboratory and field evaluation. Plant Physiol., 43:1185—1207.
Harper, J. L., and J. Ogden. 1970. The reproductive strategy of higher plants: I.
The concept of strategy with specific reference to Senecio vulgaris L. J. Ecol.,

58:68 1-689.
Harper, J. L., and J. White. 1974. The demography of plants. Ann. Rev. Ecol.
Systemat., 5:419—463.
Harrington, J. F. 1972. Seed storage and longevity. In: Seed Biology, T. T.
Kozlowski, ed. Academic Press, New York, NY.
Harries, H. 1965. Soils and vegetation in the alpine and the subalpine belt of the
Presidential Range. Ph.D. Thesis, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ.
542 pp.
Hart,

G. E., Jr. 1961.

forests. USDA

Humus

depths under cut and uncut

northern

hardwood

Forest Service Research Note 113. 3 pp.

Hart, G. E., Jr., R. E. Leonard, and R. S. Pierce. 1962. Leaf fall, humus depth,
and soil frost in a northern hardwood forest. USDA
Forest Service,

Northeastern Forest Experiment Station, Forest Research Note 131. 3 pp.
Hawley, R. C., and A. F. Hawes. 1912. Forestry in New England. John Wiley,
New York, NY. 479 pp.
Heinselman, M. L. 1973. Fire in the virgin forests of the Boundary Waters Canoe
Area, Minnesota. Quat. Res., 3(3):329-382.
Henry, J. D., and J. M. A. Swan. 1974. Reconstructing forest history from live and
dead plant material—an approach to the study of forest succession in
southwest New Hampshire. Ecology, 55:772-783.
Hibbert, A. R. 1967. Forest treatment effects on water yield. Pp. 527-543. In:
International Symposium on Forest Hydrology, W. E. Sopper and H. W. Lull,
eds. Pergamon

Press, New

York, NY.

Hill, A. R. 1975. Ecosystem stability in relation to stresses caused by human
activities. Canad. Geographer, 19(3):206—220.
Hobbie, J. E., and G. E. Likens. 1973. Output of phosphorus, dissolved organic
carbon, and fine particulate carbon from Hubbard Brook watersheds. Limnol.
Oceanogr., 18(5):734-742.
Hoeft, R. G., D. R. Keeney, and L. M. Walsh. 1972. Nitrogen and sulfur in
precipitation and sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere in Wisconsin. J. Environ.
Qual., 1:203—208.
Holmes, R. T., and F. W. Sturges. 1975. Bird community dynamics and energetics
in a northern hardwoods ecosystem. J. Anim. Ecol., 44:175-200.
Hoover, M. D. 1944. Effect of removal of forest vegetation upon water yields.
Trans. Amer. Geophys. Union, Part 6. Pp. 969-975.
Horn, H. S. 1971. The Adaptive Geometry of Trees. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ. 144 pp.
Hornbeck, J. W. 1973a. The problem of extreme events in paired-watershed
studies. USDA Forest Service, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station, U.S.
Forest Research Note NE-175. 9 pp.

References

Hornbeck,

J.

W.

1973b.

Storm

flow

from

hardwood-forested

and

235

cleared

watersheds in New Hampshire. Water Resour. Res., 9(2):346-354.
Hornbeck, J. W. 1975. Streamflow response to forest cutting and revegetation.
Water Resour. Bull., 11(6):1257-1260.
Hornbeck, J. W. 1977. Nutrients: A major consideration in intensive forest
management. Pp. 241-250. In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Intensive
Culture of Northern Forest Types. USDA Forest Service General Tech. Rept.
NE-29.
Hornbeck,

1975. Effects of management

practices on

water quality and quantity: Hubbard Brook Experimental
Hampshire. Pp. 58-65. In: Municipal Watershed Management
USDA Forest Service General Tech. Rept. NE-13.

J. W., and C. A. Federer.

Forest, New
Symp. Proc.,

Hornbeck, J. W., R. S. Pierce, and C. A. Federer. 1970. Streamflow changes after

forest clearing in New England.
Hornbeck,

J. W., G. E. Likens,

Water Resour. Res., 6(4):1124-1132.

R. S. Pierce, and F. H. Bormann.

1975a. Strip

cutting as a means of protecting site and streamflow quality when
clear-cutting northern hardwoods. Pp. 208-229. In: Proc. 4th North American
Forest Soils Conference on Forest Soils and Forest Land Management,
August 1973, B. Bernier and C. H. Winget, eds. Quebec, Canada.
Hornbeck, J. W., R. S. Pierce, G. E. Likens, and C. W. Martin.

1975b.

Moderating the impact of contemporary forest cutting on hydrologic and
nutrient cycles. Pp. 423-433. In: Proc. of Internat. Symp. on Hydrologic
Sciences. Publ. 117. Tokyo, Japan.
Horsley, S. B., and H. G. Abbott. 1970. Direct seeding of paper birch in strip
clear cutting. J. Forestr., 68:635-638.
Hough, A. F. 1936. A climax forest community on East Tionesta Creek in
northwestern Pennsylvania. Ecology, 17:9-28.
Hough, A. F., and R. D. Forbes. 1943. The ecology and silvics of forests in the
high plateaus of Pennsylvania. Ecol. Monogr., 13:299-320.
Hoyle, M. C. 1965. Growth of yellow birch in a podzol soil. USDA Forest Service
Research Paper NE-38. 14 pp.
Hoyle, M. C. 1968. Tree growth and forest soils. Pp. 221-233. In: Proc. The Third
North American Forest Soils Conference, C. T. Youngberg and C. B. Davey,
eds. Oregon State Univ. Press, Corvallis, OR.
Hoyle, M. C. 1973. Nature and properties of some forest soils in the White
Mountains of New Hampshire. USDA Forest Service Research Paper
NE-260. 18 pp.
Hunt, C. B. 1967. Physiography of the United States. Freeman and Co., San
Francisco, CA. 480 pp.
Hurst, H. M., and N. H. Burges. 1967. Lignin and humic acids. Pp. 260-286. In: Soil
Biochemistry, D. A. McLaren and G. H. Peterson, eds. Marcel Dekker, New
York, NY.

Hutnik, R. J. 1952. Reproduction on windfalls in a northern hardwood stand.
J. Forestr., 50:693-694.
Jackson, R. M., and F. Raw. 1966. Life in the Soil. Institute of Biology’s Studies in
Biology No. 2. St. Martin’s Press, New York, NY. 66 pp.
Jensen, V. S. 1939. Edging white pine lumber in New England. USDA Forest
Service, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station Tech. Note No. 26. 2 pp.
Jensen, V. S. 1943. Suggestions for the management of northern hardwood stands in

the Northeast. J. Forestr., 41:180-185.

236

Pattern and Process in a Forested

Johnson,

Ecosystem

N. M., G. E. Likens, F. H. Bormann,

chemical

weathering

of silicate

minerals

Cosmochim. Acta, 32:531—545.
Johnson, N. M., G. E. Likens, F. H. Bormann,

and R. S. Pierce.

in New

1968. Rate of

Hampshire.

Geochim.

D. W. Fisher, and R. S. Pierce.

1969. A working model for the variation in stream water chemistry at the
Hubbard

Brook Experimental

Forest, New

Hampshire.

Water Resour. Res.,

§(6):1353-1363.
Jones, E. W. 1945. The structure and reproduction of the virgin forest of the
North Temperate Zone. New Phytol., 44:130-148.
Kalm, P. 1770. Peter Kalm’s Travels in North America, Vol. I. Revised by A. B.
Benson,

1937. Dover Publications, New

York, NY.

Kelso, E. G. 1969. Birch management of the White Mountain National Forest. Pp.
165-168. In: The Birch Symposium. USDA Forest Service, Northeastern
Forest Experiment

Station, Durham,

NH.

Kilgore, B. M. 1973. The ecological role of fire in Sierran conifer forests. Quat.
Res., 3(3):496-513.
Kittredge, J. 1948. Forest Influences. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, NY. 394

Pp.
Kochenderfer,
J. N.
1970. Erosion
control
on logging roads
in the
Appalachians. USDA Forest Service Research Paper NE-158. 28 pp.
Kochenderfer,
J. N. 1977. Area in skidroads, truck roads, and landings in the
central Appalachians. J. Forestr., 75:507-S08.
Korstian, C. F. 1924. Growth on cutover and virgin western yellow pine lands in
central Idaho. J. Agri. Res., 28(11):1139-1148.
Kozlowski, T. T., and T. Keller. 1966. Food relations of woody plants. Bot. Rev.,

32:293-382.
Kramer, P. J., and T. T. Kozlowski. 1960. Physiology of Trees. McGraw-Hill Book
Co., New

Kiichler,

York, NY.

A. W.

1964.

642 pp.

Potential

natural vegetation of the coterminous United
States. Amer. Geogr. Soc. Spec. Publ. No. 36, New York, NY. 116 pp.
Leak, W. B. 1963. Delayed germination of white ash seeds under forest
conditions. J. Forestr., 61:768-772.

Leak, W. B. 1974. Some effects of forest preservation.
Experiment Station Note NE-186. 41 pp.

Northeastern

Forest

Leak, W. B. 1978. Classification of forest habitat in the White Mountains of New

Hampshire.

18 pp.

Leak, W. B., and R. E. Graber. 1974. Forest vegetation related to elevation in the

White

Mountains

of New

Hampshire.

USDA

Forest Service. Res. Paper

NE-299. 7 pp.
Leak, W. B., and D. S. Solomon. 1975. Influence of residual stand density on the
regeneration of northern hardwoods. USDA Forest Service Res. Paper NE-310.
7 pp.
Leak, W. B., D. S. Solomon, and S. M. Filip. 1969. A silvicultural guide for north-

ern hardwoods in the Northeast. USDA Forest Service Res. Paper NE-143.
34 pp.
Leak, W. B., and R. W. Wilson, Jr. 1958. Regeneration after cutting of old-growth
northern hardwoods in New Hampshire. USDA Northeastern Forest Experiment Station Paper 103.
Leonard, R. E. 1961. Interception of precipitation by northern hardwoods. USDA
Forest Service, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station Paper No. 159. 16

pp.

References

237

Leopold, L. B., M. G. Wolman, and J. P. Miller. 1964. Fluvial Processes
Geomorphology. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, CA. 522 pp.

in

Likens, G. E., F. H. Bormann, and N. M. Johnson. 1969. Nitrification: Importance
to nutrient losses from a cut-over forested ecosystem. Science, 163:1205-1206.

Likens, G. E. 1972a. Effects of deforestation on water quality. Pp. 133-140. In:
Proc. Amer. Soc. Civil Engineering Symp. on Inter-disciplinary Aspects of
Watershed Management, Bozeman, MT.
Likens, G. E. 1972b. Mirror Lake: Its past, present and future? Appalachia,
39(2):23-41.
Likens, G. E. 1973. A checklist of organisms for the Hubbard Brook ecosystems.
Ecology and Systematics, Cornell Univ., Mimeo. 54 pp.
Likens, G. E. 1976. Acid Precipitation. Chem. Eng. News, 54:29—44.
Likens, G. E., and F. H. Bormann. 1970. Chemical analyses of plant tissues from
the Hubbard Brook ecosystem in New Hampshire. Yale University School of
Forestry Bull. 79. 25 pp.
Likens,

G. E., and F. H. Bormann.

1972a.

Biogeochemical

E., and F. H. Bormann.

1972b.

Nutrient

In: Ecosystem

and Function,

cycles. Sci. Teach.,

39(4): 15-20.
Likens,

G.

25-67.

Structure

Univ. Press, Corvallis, OR.
Likens, G. E., and F. H. Bormann.

1974a.

cycling in ecosystems.

J. Wiens,

Acid

rain:

ed. Oregon
A

serious

Pp.

State

regional

environmental problem. Science, 184:1176-1179.
Likens, G. E., and F. H. Bormann. 1974b. Effects of forest clearing on the
northern hardwood forest ecosystem and its biogeochemistry. Pp. 330-335.
In: Proc. First Internat. Congress Ecology, September 1974. Centre Agric.
publ. Doc. Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Likens,

G.

E., and

F. H.

Bormann.

1974c.

Linkages

between

terrestrial

and

aquatic ecosystems. BioScience, 24:447—456.
Likens,

G.

E., F. H.

Bormann,

N. M. Johnson,

and

R. S. Pierce.

1967. The

calcium, magnesium, potassium, and sodium budgets in a small forested
ecosystem. Ecology, 48:772-785.
Likens, G. E., F. H. Bormann, N. M. Johnson, D. W. Fisher, and R. S. Pierce.
1970. Effects of forest cutting and herbicide treatment on nutrient budgets in
the Hubbard Brook watershed-ecosystem. Ecol. Monogr., 40:23-47.
Likens, G. E., F. H. Bormann, R. S. Pierce, J. S. Eaton, and N. M. Johnson. 1977.

Biogeochemistry of a Forested Ecosystem.
146 pp.
Likens, G. E., F. H. Bormann,

Springer-Verlag, New York, NY.

R. S. Pierce, and W. A. Reiners.

1978. Recovery

of a deforested ecosystem. Science, 199:492-496.
Lorimer, C. G. 1977. The presettlement forest and natural disturbance cycle of
northeastern Maine. Ecology, 58:139-148.
Loucks, O. L. 1970. Evolution of diversity, efficiency and community stability.
Amer.

Zool., 10:17-25.

Lowe, K. E. 1973. The complete tree: Will it be used to supply the wood fibre
needs of the future? Pulp Paper, 47:42—47.
Ludlum,
D. M. 1963. Early American Hurricanes,
1492-1870. American
Meteorological Society, Boston, MA. 198 pp.
Lull, H. W.

1959. Humus depth in the Northeast.

J. Forestr., 57:905—909.

Lull, H. W., and K. G. Reinhart. 1967. Increasing water yield in the Northeast by
management of forested watersheds. USDA Forest Service Research Paper
NE-66.

238

Pattern and Process in a.Forested

Lull, H. W., and K. G. Reinhart.

Ecosystem

1972. Forests and floods in the eastern United

States. USDA Forest Service Research Paper NE-226. 94 pp.
Lundmark, J. E. 1977. Marken sol del on det skoglia ekosystemet. (The soil as part of
the forest ecosystem). Sv. Skogsvardsforb tidskr, 75:109-130.
Lutz, H. J. 1930. The vegetation of Heart’s Content, a virgin forest in northwestern Pennsylvania. Ecology, 11:1-29.
Lutz, H. J. 1940. Disturbance of forest soil resulting from uprooting of trees. Yale
University School of Forestry Bull. No. 45. 37 pp.
Lutz, H. J., and R. F. Chandler. 1946. Forest Soils. John Wiley, New York, NY.
514 pp.
Lyon, C. J., and F. H. Bormann, eds. 1961. Natural Areas of New Hampshire
Suitable for Ecological Research. Department of Biological Sciences, Publ.
No. 2., Dartmouth

College, Hanover,

NH.

Lyon, C. J., and W. A. Reiners, eds. 1971. Natural Areas of New Hampshire.
Department of Biological Sciences, Publ. No. 4, Dartmouth College, NH.
MacLean, D. W. 1960. Some aspects of the aspen—birch-spruce-fir type of
Ontario. Forest Research Division Tech. Note No. 94. Department of
Forestry. 24 pp.
Maissurow, D. K. 1941. The role of fire in the perpetuation of virgin forests of
northern Wisconsin. J. Forestr., 39:201—207.
Margalef, R. 1968. Perspectives in Ecological Theory. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL. 1i1 pp.
Margalef, R. 1969. Diversity and stability: A practical proposal and a model of
interdependence. Pp. 25-38. In: Diversity and Stability in Ecological Systems.
Brookhaven Symposia in Biology, No. 22.
Marks, P. L. 1974. The role of pin cherry (Prunus pensylvanica L.) in the
maintenance of stability in northern hardwood ecosystems. Ecol. Monogr.,
44:73-88.
Marks, P. L. 1975. On the relation between extension growth and successional
status of deciduous trees of the northeastern United States. Bull. Torrey Bot.
Club, 102:172-177.
Marquis, D. A. 1965. Regeneration of birch and associated hardwoods after patch
cutting. USDA Forest Service Research Paper NE-32. 12 pp.
Marquis, D. A. 1967. Clearcutting in northern hardwoods: Results after 30 years.
USDA Forest Service Research Paper NE-85. 13 pp.
Marquis, D. A. 1973. The effect of environmental factors in advance regeneration
of Allegheny hardwoods. Ph.D. Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
147 pp.
Marquis, D. A. 1975. Seed storage and germination under northern hardwood
forests. Canad. J. Forestr. Res., 5:478—484.
Marquis, D. A. 1976. Is forestry hurting the forest? An interview. Green America,
4(3). 4 pp.
Marquis, D. A., J. C. Bjorkbom, and G. Yelenosky. 1964. Effect of seedbed
condition and light exposure on paper birch regeneration. J. Forestr.,
62:876-881.
Martin, A. C., H. S. Zim, and A. L. Nelson. 1971. American Wildlife and Plants.
McGraw-Hill, New York. NY. 500 pp.
Mattson, W. J., and N. D. Addy. 1975. Phytophagous insects as regulators of
forest primary production. Science, 190:515—522.
McAtee, W. L. 1910. Plants useful to attract birds and protect fruit. USDA
Yearbook for 1909. Pp. 185-196.

References

239

McIntosh, R. P. 1967. The continuum concept of vegetation. Bot. Rev.,
33:130-187.
Megahan, W. F. 1972. Subsurface flow interception by a logging road in
mountains of central Idaho. Pp. 350-356. In: Proc. of National Symp.
Watersheds in Trans., Ft. Collins, CO.
Melillo, J. M. 1977. Mineralization of nitrogen in northern forest ecosystems.
Ph.D. Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, CT. 136 pp.
Meyer, J. L. 1977. Phosphorus dynamics in a forest stream ecosystem: Less than
thirteen in unlucky. Bull. Ecol. Soc. Amer. 58(2):38.
Miller, P. R. 1973. Oxidant-induced community change in a mixed conifer forest
Amer. Chem. Soc., Washington, DC; Adv. Chem. Ser. 122:101-117.
Miller, P. R., and M. J. Elderman, eds. 1977. Photochemical Oxidant Air Pollutant
Effects on a Mixed Conifer Forest Ecosystem: A Progress Report. University of
California, Statewide Air Pollution Research Center, Riverside, CA. 338 pp.
Mitchell, H. L., and R. F. Chandler.

1939. The nitrogen nutrition and growth of

certain deciduous trees of northeastern United States. The Black Rock Forest
Bull. No. 11. 91 pp.
Mitchell, M. J., and D. Parkinson. 1976. Fungal feeding of oribatid mites (Acari
cryptostigmata) in an aspen woodland soil. Ecology, 57:302-312.
Morey, H. F. 1942. The application of our knowledge of the organic layers of the
soil profile to flood control. In: Proc. of the Hydrology Conference, F. T.
Mavis, ed. School of Engineering Tech. Bull. No. 27. Pennsylvania State
College, State College, PA.
Muller, R. N. 1975. The natural history, growth, and ecosystem relations of
Erythronium americanum Ker. in the northern hardwood forest. Ph.D.
Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, CT. 178 pp.
Muller, R. N., and F. H. Bormann.

flow

ecosystem.

Science, 193:1126-1128.

Mutch, R. W. 1970.
51:1046-1051.

and

nutrient

1976. Role of Erythronium americanum

in energy

Wildland

dynamics

fires and

of

a

northern

ecosystems:

A

hardwood

hypothesis.

Ker.

forest

Ecology,

Nichols, G. E. 1913. The vegetation of Connecticut. Torreya, 13:89-112, 199-215.

Nichols, G. E. 1935. The hemlock—white pine-northern hardwood region of
eastern North America. Ecology, 16:403—422.
Nicholson, S. 1965. Altitudinal and exposure variations of the spruce-fir forest on
Whiteface Mountain. M.S. Thesis, SUNY, Albany, N.Y. 61 pp.
O’Brien, B. J., and J. D. Stout. 1978. Movement of turnover of soil organic matter

indicated by carbon isotope measurements, submitted for publication.
Odum, E. P. 1969. The strategy of ecosystem development. Science, 164:262-270.
Odum, E. P. 1971. Fundamentals of Ecology. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia. PA.
574 pp.
Olmsted,

N.

W.,

and

J. D.

Curtis.

1947.

Seeds

of the forest

floor.

Ecology,

28:49-53.
Olsen, R. A. 1956. Absorption of sulphur dioxide from the atmosphere by cotton
plants. Soil Sci., 84:107-111.
Oosting, H. J. 1956. The Study of Plant Communities. W. H. Freeman, San
Francisco, CA. 440 pp.
Oosting, H. J., and W. D. Billings. 1951. A comparison of virgin spruce-fir forest
in the northern and southern Appalachian system. Ecology, 32:84—-103.
Parsons, R. F. 1968. The significance of growth-rate comparisons for plant
ecology. Amer. Natur., 102:595-597.

240

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Patric, J. H. 1976a. Is forestry hurting the forest? An interview. Green America
4(3). 4 pp.
Patric, J. H. 1976b. Soil erosion in eastern forests. J. Forestr., 78:671—677.
Patric, J. H. 1977. Soil erosion and its control in eastern woodlands. Northern Logger
and Timber Process., 25(11). 6 pp.
Patric, J. H., and D. W. Smith. 1975. Forest management and nutrient cycling in
eastern hardwoods. USDA Forest Service Research Paper NE-324. 12 pp.
Pfister, R. D. 1969. Effect of roads on growth of western white pine plantations in
northern Idaho. USDA Forest Service Research Paper INT-65. 8 pp.
Pierce, R. S. 1967. Evidence

of overland flow in forest watersheds. Pp. 247-253.
In: Internat. Symp. on Forest Hydrology Proc., W. E. Sopper and H. W. Lull,
eds. Pergamon Press, Oxford, England.
Pierce, R. S., J. W. Hornbeck, G. E. Likens, and F. H. Bormann. 1970. Effects of
elimination of vegetation on stream water quantity and quality. Pp. 311-328.
In: Results on Research on Representative and Experimental Basins, Proc. of
Internat. Assoc. Sci. Hydrology. UNESCO, Wellington, New Zealand.
Pierce, R. S., C. W. Martin, C. C. Reeves, G. E. Likens, and F. H. Bormann.
1972. Nutrient loss from clear-cutting in New Hampshire. Pp. 285-295. In: Proc.
Symp. Watersheds in Trans., Ft. Collins, CO.
Pigott, C. D. 1975. Natural regeneration of Tilia cordata in relation to forest
structure in the forest of Bialowieza, Poland. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London
Ser. B, 270(904):151-179.
Pilgrim, S. L. A., and R. D. Harter. 1977. Spodic horizon characteristics of some
forest soils in the White Mountains, New Hampshire. New Hampshire
Agricultural Experiment Station Bull. No. 507.
Plummer, F. G. 1912. Forest fires: Their causes, extent and effects with a
summary of recorded destruction and loss. USDA Forest Service Bull. 117.
39 pp.
Popay, A. I., and E. H. Roberts. 1970. Factors involved in the dormancy and
germination of Capsella bursa-pastoris (L.) Medik and Senecio vulgaris L. J.
Ecol., 58:103-122.
Ramberg, L. 1976. Effects of forestry operations on aquatic ecosystems. Pp.
143-149. In: Man and the Boreal Forest, C. O. Tamm, ed.; Ecol. Bull.,
Stockholm 21.
Raup, H. M. 1957. Vegetational adjustment to the instability of the site. Pp.
36-48. In: Proc. and Papers of the 6th Technical Meeting of the Internat.
Union for the Protection of Nature.
Raup, H. M. 1967. American forest biology. J. Forestr., 65:800-803.
Reiners, W. A., G. E. Likens, F. H. Bormann, and R. S. Pierce. 1979.
Vegetational recovery and biogeochemical behavior of a clear-cut watershed
ecosystem, ms in preparation.
Reinhart, K. G., A. R. Eschner, and G. R. Trimble, Jr. 1963. Effect on streamflow
of four forest practices in the mountains of West Virginia. USDA Forest
Service Research Paper NE-1. 79 pp.
Report of the Chief of the Forest Service: 1970-75. U.S. Govt. Printing Office,
Washington, DC.
Ribe, J. H. 1974. A review of short rotation forestry. Life Sciences and
Agricultural Experiment Station, Misc. Report No. 160. University of Maine,
Orono, ME. 52 pp.
Rice, E. L. 1974. Allelopathy. Academic Press, New York, NY. 353 pp.

References

241

Roberts, E. H. 1969. Seed dormancy and oxidative processes. Pp. 161-192.
Dormancy

and Survival Symposium, H. W. Woolhouse,

In:

ed. Academic Press,

New York, NY. 598 pp.
Romell, L. G., and S. O. Heiburg. 1931. Types of humus layer in the forests of
northeastern United States. Ecology, 12:567—608.
Roskoski, J. P. 1977. Nitrogen fixation in northern hardwood forests. Ph.D.
Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, CT. 112 pp.
Rowe,

J. S., and

G. W.

Scotter.

1973.

Fire in the boreal

forest.

Quat.

Res.,

3(3):444—464.
Ryan, D. F. 1978. Nutrient resorption from senescing leaves: A mechanism of
biogeochemical cycling in a northern hardwood forest ecosystem. Ph.D.
Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
Safford, L. O. 1974. Effect of fertilization on biomass and nutrient content of fine

roots in a beech-birch-maple stand. Plant Soil, 40:349-363.
Safford, L. O., and S. M. Filip. 1974. Biomass and nutrient content of a 4-year-old
fertilized and unfertilized northern hardwood stand. Canad. J. For. Res.,
4:549-554.
Salisbury, E. J. 1942. The Reproductive Capacity of Plants. G. Bell, London. 244

pp.
Sartz,

R.

S.,

and

W.

D.

Huttinger.

1950.

Some

factors

affecting

humus

development in the Northeast. J. Forestr., 48:341-344.
Schaller, F. 1968. Soil Animals. Ann Arbor Univ. Press, Ann Arbor, MI. 144 pp.
Schlesinger, W. H., W. A. Reiners, and D. S. Knopman. 1974. Heavy metal
concentrations and deposition in bulk precipitation in montane ecosystems of
New Hampshire, U.S.A. Environ. Pollut., 6:39—47.
Secrest, H. C., A. J. MacAlong, and R. C. Lorenz. 1941. Causes of the decadence

of hemlock at the Menominee Indian Reservation, Wisconsin. J. Forestr.,
39:3-12.
Siccama, T. G. 1971. Presettlement and present forest vegetation in northern
Vermont with special reference to Chittenden County. Amer. Midl. Natl.,
85:153-172.
Siccama, T. G. 1974. Vegetation, soil, and climate on the Green Mountains of
Vermont. Ecol. Monogr., 44:325-349.
Siccama,

T. G., F. H. Bormann, and G. E. Likens. 1970. The Hubbard Brook
Ecosystem Study: Productivity, nutrients, and phytosociology of the herbaceous layer. Ecol. Monogr., 40:389—402.
Siccama, T. G., and W. H. Smith. 1978. Lead accumulation in a northern
hardwood forest. Environ. Sci. Technol., 12:593-594.
Smith, D. H. 1946. Storm damage in New England forests. M.S. Thesis, Yale

University, New Haven, CT. 173 pp.
Smith, F. E. 1975. Ecosystems and evolution. Presidential
Ecological Society of America, Corvallis, OR. 20 pp.
Smith, W. H., F. H. Bormann,

Address

to the

and G. E. Likens. 1968. Response of chemoauto-

trophic nitrifiers to forest cutting. Soil Sci., 106(6):471—473.
Sopper, W. E., and H. W. Lull. 1965. The representativeness of small forested
experimental watersheds in northeastern United States. Internat. Assoc. Sci.
Hydrol., 66(2):441—456.
Sopper, W. E., and H. W. Lull. 1970. Streamflow characteristics of the
northeastern United States. Pennsylvania State Univ., University Park, PA.
Bull. No. 766. 129 pp.

242

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Spaulding, P., and J. R. Hansbrough. 1944. Decay of logging slash in the
Northeast. USDA Forest Service Tech. Bull. No. 876. 22 pp.
Sprugel, D. G. 1976. Dynamic structure of wave-regenerated Abies balsamea
forests in the northeastern United States. J. Ecology, 64:889-911.
1979. Natural disturbance and the
Sprugel, D. G., and F. H. Bormann.
steady-state in high altitude balsam fir forests, ms. in preparation.
Spurr, S. H. 1954. The forests of Itasca in the nineteenth century as related to fire.
Ecology, 35:21-25.
Spurr, S. H. 1956a. Natural restocking of forests following the 1938 hurricane in
central New England. Ecology, 37:443—451.
Spurr, S. H. 1956b. Forest associations in the Harvard forest. Ecol. Monogr.,
26:245-262.
Spurr, S. H., and B. V. Barnes. 1973. Forest Ecology. Ronald Press, New York.
571 pp.
Stearns, F. S. 1949. Ninety years of change in a northern hardwood forest in
Wisconsin. Ecology, 30:350-358.
Steinbauer, G. P., and B. Grigsby. 1957. Interaction of temperature, light, and
moistening agents in the germination of weed seeds. Weeds, 5:175—182.
Stephens, E. P. 1955. Research in the biological aspects of forest production. J.
Forestr., 53:183-186.
Stephens, E. P. 1956. The uprooting of trees: A forest process. Soil Sci. Soc.
Amer. Proc., 20(1):113-116.
Stevenson, F. J. 1967. Organic acids in soil. Pp. 119-146. In: Soil Biochemistry,
A. D. McLaren and G. H. Peterson, eds. Marcel Dekker, New York, NY.
Stone, E. 1973. The impact of timber harvest on soils and water. Pp. 427—463. In:
Report of the President’s Advisory Panel on Timber and the Environment. U.S.
Govt. Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Striffler, W. D. 1964. Sediment, streamflow and land use relationships in northern
lower Michigan. USDA Forest Service Paper LS-16. 12 pp.
Swain, A. M. 1973. A history of fire and vegetation in northeastern Minnesota as
recorded in lake sediments. Quat. Res., 3(3):383-396.
Swank, W. T., and J. E. Douglass. 1974. Streamflow greatly reduced by converting
deciduous hardwood stands to pine. Science, 185:857-859.
Swank, W. T., and J. E. Douglass. 1975. Nutrient flux in undisturbed and
manipulated forest ecosystems in the Southern Appalachian Mountains.
Publication n° 117 des l’Association Internationale des Sciences Hydrologiques
Symposium de Tokyo (Decembré 1975).
Swanston, D. N., and F. J. Swanson. 1976. Timber harvesting, mass erosion, and
steepland forest geomorphology in the Pacific Northwest. Pp. 199-221. In:
Geomorphology and Engineering, D. R. Coates, ed. Dowden, Hutchinson and
Ross, Stroudsburg, PA.
Tamm, C. O. 1974. Experiments to analyze the behavior of young spruce forests
at different nutrient levels. Pp. 266-272. In: Proc. First Internat. Congress of
Ecology: Structure, Functioning and Management of Ecosystems. Centre for
Agr. Publ. and Doc. Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Thompson,
D. Q., and R. H. Smith. 1970. The forest primeval in the
Northeast—A great myth? Pp. 255-265. In: Proc. Tall Timbers Fire Ecology
Conference No. 10. Frederickton, New Brunswick, Canada.
Thompson, J. N., and M. F. Willson. 1978. Disturbance and the dispersal of fleshy
fruits. Science, 200:1161-1163.

References

243

Todd, R. L. 1971. Microbial transformation of nitrogen in natural and
manipulated watersheds at Coweeta. EDFB Mimeo. Report No. 71-133.
Trimble, G. R., and H. W. Lull. 1956. The role of forest humus in watershed
management in New England. USDA Forest Service Research Paper. 85 pp.
Trimble, G. R., Jr., R. S. Sartz, and R. S. Pierce. 1958. How type of soil frost
affects infiltration. J. Soil Water Conserv., 13(2):81—82.
Trimble, G. R., Jr., and D. W. Seegrist. 1973. Epicormic branching on
hardwood trees bordering forest openings. USDA Forest Service Research
Paper NE-261. 6 pp.
Tubbs, C. H. 1963. Root development of yellow birch in humus and sandy loam.

USDA Forest Service Research Note LS-33. 2 pp.
Ugolini, F. C., H. Dawson, and J. Zachara. 1977. Direct evidence of particle
migration in the soil solution of a podzol. Science, 198:603—60S.
United States Dept. of Agriculture. 1955. Wood Handbook. USDA Handbook No.
72, Washington, DC.
Vitousek, P. M. 1977. The regulation of element concentrations in mountain
streams in the northeastern United States. Ecol. Monogr., 47:65-68.
Vitousek, P. M., and W. A. Reiners. 1975. Ecosystem succession and nutrient
retention: A hypothesis. BioScience, 25:376-381.
Walker, J. B., G. B. Chandler, and J. B. Harrison. 1891. Report of the Forestry
Commission of New Hampshire. J. B. Clarke, Manchester, NH. 53 pp.
Waring, H. D. 1973. Young stands: Early fertilization for maximum production.
Presented at FAO/IUFRO Internat. Symp. on Forest Fertilization, Paris.
Watt, A. S. 1925. On the ecology of British beech woods with special reference to
their regeneration:

II, The development and structure of beech communities

on the Sussex downs. J. Ecol., 13:27-73.
Watt, A. S. 1947. Pattern and process in the plant community. J. Ecol., 35:1-22.
Wein,

R. W.,

and

J. M. Moore.

1977.

Fire history and

rotations

in the New

Brunswick Acadian Forest. Canad. J. For. Res., 7:285-294.
Weingart, P. D. 1974. Forest plan: White Mountain National Forest. Eastern
Region, USDA Forest Service. 77 pp.
Wendel, G. W. 1972. Longevity of black cherry seed in the forest floor. USDA
Forest Service Research Note NE-149. 4 pp.
Whitney, G. G. 1976. The bifurcation ratio as an indicator of adaptive strategy in
woody plant species. Bull. Torrey Bot. Club, 103:67-72.
Whitney, G. G. 1978. A demographic analysis of Rubus idaeus L. and Rubus
pubescens Raf.: The reproductive traits and population dynamics of two
temporally isolated members of the genus Rubus. Ph.D. Thesis, Yale
University, New Haven, CT. 139 pp.
Whittaker, R. H. 1967. Gradient analysis of vegetation. Biol. Rev., 42:207-264.
Whittaker,

R. H. 1975. Communities and Ecosystems. MacMillan, New York, NY.

385 pp.
Whittaker,

R. H., F. H. Bormann,

G. E. Likens, and T. G. Siccama.

1974. The

Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study: Forest biomass and production. Ecol.
Monogr., 44:233-254.
Whittaker, R. H., G. E. Likens, F. H. Bormann, J. S. Eaton, and T. G. Siccama.
1978. The Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study: Forest nutrient cycling and
element behavior. Ecology, in press.
Whittaker,

R. H., and G. M. Woodwell.

1967.

Surface

area relations of woody

plants and forest communities. Amer. J. Bot., 54(8):931-939.

244

Pattern and Process in a Forested Ecosystem

Whittaker,

R. H., and G. M. Woodwell.

1972. Evolution of natural communities.

Pp. 137-156. In: Ecosystem Structure and Function, J. A. Wiens, ed. Oregon
State Univ. Press, Corvallis, OR.
Williams, W. T., M. Brady, and S. C. Willison. 1977. Air pollution damage to
the forests of the Sierra Nevada Mountains of California. APCA Jour.,
27(3):230-234.
Wilson, R. W., and V. S. Jensen. 1954. Regeneration after clear-cutting
second-growth northern hardwoods. USDA Forest Service Research Note 27.
3 pp.
Winer, H. I. 1955. History of the Great Mountain Forest. Ph.D. Thesis, Yale
University, New Haven, CT. 278 pp.
Wood, T., and F. H. Bormann. 1974. The effects of an artificial acid mist upon the
growth of Betula alleghaniensis Britt. Environ. Pollut., 7:259-268.

Woodwell, G. M. 1974. Success, succession and Adam Smith. BioScience,
24:81-87.
Woodwell, G. M., and A. H. Sparrow. 1965. Effects of ionizing radiation on
ecological systems. Pp. 20-38. In: Ecological Effects of Nuclear War, G. M.
Woodwell, ed. Brookhaven National Laboratory 917 (C-43).
Wright, H. E., Jr., and M. L. Heinselman. 1973. The ecological role of fire in
natural conifer forest of western and northern North America. Quat. Res.,
3(3):319-328.
Young, H. E. 1974. Biomass, nutrient elements, harvesting and chipping in the
complete tree concept. Consultant, 19:91-104.
Zasada,

Z. A. 1974. Effects of mechanical

harvesting upon the forest ecosystem

and silvicultural practices in the northern lake states. Pp. 337-348. In: Forest
Harvesting Mechanism and Automation, Proc. IUFRO, Division 3, Canad.
Forestry Service, Dept. of Environment, Ontario, Canada. Publ. 5.

Index

Acid Precipitation
on landscape
214, 215
Aggradation Phase
64—78,
biogeochemistry of

157—160
biomass accumulation during
42,
158=—159, 167—168
dead biomass in forest floor
49
regulation and inertia resulting
from
48—49
biotic regulation
of biogeochemistry
55-78,
157— 160
of energy flow
43—48
of hydrologic cycle
55-59
of nutrient input—output
67-70
of particulate matter export
59—64
of streamflow chemistry
64—67
detrital-grazing cycles
50—55
of ecosystem development
3-6,
26-2), 41-80, 186-187,
190
meteorologic input into
65, 73

nitrogen cycle in
73—78
nutrients in
64—78
circulation and retention
73—78
reservoirs
71—78
SOUNCES yn) 2— 75
transpiration in
56—59
weathering in
72—73
vegetation changes during
103137
Air Pollution
effects on landscape
213-215
Alosophila pometaria
defoliation by
53
Aluminum (see Chemistry and
Nutrients)
Ash (Fraxinus americana)

105— 1067 121-122; 124
Autogenic Development
_1—ff, 177,
205—207
relationship to disturbance
192-193, 210-211

Balsam Fir (Abies balsamea)

106, 151

7, 31,

246

Index

Beech (Fagus grandifolia)
7, 31,
105=1065 121 12270124
Biogeochemistry
of ecosystem development
180—186
Hubbard Brook Nutrient Flux and
Cycling Model
33-39
input-output
34—37
study of by small watershed
technique
33—39
Biomass
accumulation of after clear-cutting
27
role in regulating nutrient
export
183-186
of aggrading ecosystem
48—49
dead
5451227,
(see Forest Floor, Dead Wood, and

Soil)
decrease
during Reorganization Phase
12-27, $1
during Transition Phase
167
fluctuations on individual plots
168—171
living
4, 12—27, 42, 167—168
_ maximum in developmental
sequence
177—178
oscillations through time
AO2
increased regularity of due to
clear-cutting
211
steady-state mean
167—168
vertical distribution in forest
48—49
Biomass Accumulation Model (see
Model)
Biotic Regulation
30,397
98,
160-161
during Aggradation Phase
4178),
157—160
greatest regulation
183
during ecosystem development
181—186
during Reorganization Phase
160-161

143 —153
ecosystem export
138=163
loss of regulation
139-143
primary productivity
recovery of regulation
133 63
role of biomass
accumulation 183—186
and stability 186—190
(Also see Aggradation,
Reorganization and
Steady-State Phases, Energy
Flow, Forest Floor and
Transpiration
183
Birds, in Hubbard Brook Ecosystem

54
Boreal Forests
elevational relation to northern
hardwood forests
8—10
Buried-Seed Strategy
germination and growth in response
to fertilization
112,
123125
of revegetation
105, 108—113

Calcium

(see Chemistry and
Nutrients)

Canopy
changing composition with
ecosystem development
133135
differentiation of, in revegetation
LES 125
disturbance, response of
reproductive strategies to
Lil sie i3s
endogenous disturbance, effect on
Ie S13t
perturbations, reproductive and
growth strategies after
104—107
treefall, effects on
129-133
resource availability increase due to
destruction of 53,
138—139, 159-160,
12174

Index

Chemistry
(see Nutrients)
behavior during recovery following
clear-cutting
149—157
input-output budgets
67—70,
87—88, 149—150
of precipitation
65
of soils 24, 66—67, 143,
[32— 183
of stream-water
Oa
8.000
— Or
147-153
predictability of |66—67
regulation of

Chloride

64—67, 78

(see Chemistry and
Nutrients)

Clear-cutting
(see Harvesting)
acceptability of, as management
phactice
225-22]
export of nutrients after
PAG

86—88,

floristic response to
113-115
natural disturbance, compared to
195—196
plant community dynamics after
10313,
regeneration after
103—104
rotation time, effects of
One 22205
secondary succession after
103—104
slash
18—20
| Cliinaxu

snOMG

Community Dynamics
in ecosystem development
103137,
Convergence
in forest floor development
217-218
Dead Wood
13, 18—20, 26,
in forest, role of
74—75, 92-93, 162, 165,
170—174, 195, 224
12-16, 25-26, 46,
Decomposition

Age Slgehl,. 00-91, 141,
147, 153-157, 174, 186,
205

247

Deforestation
commercial clear-cutting
100—101, 216
experimental clear-cutting
82—100
Detrital-Grazing Cycles in Aggrading
Ecosystem
birds, role of in 54—55
defoliation
52—53
biogeochemistry, effect on
53—54
detritivores
51—52
disturbance, response to

energy flow
50—51
microflora.
51—52
predators
55
facultative nature of
Disturbance

52

525.55

endogenous, effect on ecosystem

development
129-135,
184
AiO
e192
896
exogenous
clear-cutting
4, 6
definition of |=194—195
tires,
4; 6.5197 —199
natural catastrophes, rotations
of Fe201205
wind 4, 6, 18, 199-201
postsettlement
207-211
presettlement
197—207
resource availability following
138139 el59—10615
Ngee Wile)
comparative effects of fire, wind,
clear-cutting
195—197
hypothesis of catastrophic
recycling
192—194,
206-207
Ecosystem
biogeochemical dynamics
41—80
in Aggradation Phase
in Reorganization Phase

Si=102, 138-163
in Steady-State Phase
177,
181—186

248

Index

sediment yield, selected
ecosystems
60

Ecosystem (cont.)

development
1 -—ff
based on individual plots
168— 174
biomass accumulation
living
167—168
total
168
corroborative studies of
TiS 1716
forest floor, as a regulator
of 162
Shifting-Mosaic Steady
State
174-175
186—190
stability-resilience
166-- 167
steady-state models
trends associated with
biomass
177—178
erosion
182
export of dissolved
substances and particulate
matter
183-186
habitat diversity
178
hydrology
181—182
P/R ratio 177
selection pressure
181
species richness
178—181
weathering
182—183
developmental model

soil, limit on ecosystem

development
11
in Steady-State Phase
184
streamflow, effects of rate
on)

6164579

weathering, relationship

182—183

Erythronium americanum
in ecosystem function, role of

45—46
Evaporation
5, 43, 56—57, 85 (see
Transpiration)
Even-agedness of forest
biogeochemistry, effect on
181—186
disturbance, imposition by

211

in ecosystem development
133-135 8195 1O7,
habitat diversity, effect on

178

shift to all-aged condition
172,
178, 186—190
species richness, effect on
178 —179
synchronization due to
170,
177-178

(see Model)

Energy Flow
in Aggradation Phase,
solar 43—48
direct and indirect uses of
44
in detrital-grazing cycles
50—55
photosynthetic strategy, according
to
45
vernal photosynthesis
45—46
processes (active and passive),
powered by solar 47
during Reorganization Phase

83—84
in transpiration
47
Erosion
in Aggradation Phase
59-64
during ecosystem development
182 Ase
in Reorganization Phase
95-98.
160

Fire

4,6
(see Grantham
Mountain)

decomposition and fuel
accumulation, relationship
to 205
ecosystems
dependent on and resistant
to 2012205
destruction by 188—189
vulnerability to 201—205
ignition, causes of

202

national forests, in 202—204
postsettlement forests,
ine 209-2
presettlement forests,

in. 193=1947,197—199"
201—205
Forest Canopy
(see Canopy)

Index

Forest Floor
13
(see Soil)
accretion in aggrading ecosystem

49
behavior after clear-cutting
20=23
as ecosystem regulator
49,
DO) O16
98.162
equilibrium
165
effect on hydrology and nutrient
cycling
49, 55, 64—65
management of
217-219
as nutrient reservoir
70—71
during reorganization
22—24, 81

Gifford Woods, Vermont
Grantham Mountain, New

Hampshire

14

188—189

Habitat
community dynamics, diversity in
178
Harvesting
clear-cutting
complete-tree
216
stem-only
216
whole-tree
216
effects on forests
216—227
long-term, effects of |221—225
nutrient export after
217
regeneration after
216
rotation times for 221—225
Heavy Metals
deposits from air
215
7, 106,
Hemlock (Tsuga canadensis)
121
Herbs of Hardwood Forests
105,
SiS
biogeochemistry, regulation
by 45—46
vernal dam hypothesis
45—46
Heterocampa guttiva
defoliation by
52—53
Homeostasis
160—163
in Reorganization Phase

249

Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study
25279
hardwood species in
del
33
herbs of

30, 45—46

hydrology of
29
regulation
55—59
Hydrogen Ion
(see Chemistry)
Hydrology
5
of Aggradation Phase
precipitation and streamflow of
5556
in ecosystem development
181—182
of Hubbard Brook Experimental
Forest
29
infiltration
5, 47, 49, 59
precipitation
streamflow and
evapotranspiration,
relationship to 57
regulation of |§55—59
84—86
of Reorganization Phase
changes with revegetation
146-147, 151

Impaction
plant architecture, as a function of
47
sulfur
69
Infiltration of Soil Water
Hydrology)

Input-Output Budget

(see

(see Chemistry

and Nutrients)

3437
in ecosystem studies
of nutrients
67—70
Iron
(see Chemistry and Nutrients)

JABOWA
living biomass trend estimation by
[ess lOi lJ 5 eIS4= 185

Land-Use Planning
for White Mountains

227-228

250

~=Index

Landscape(s)

acid precipitation effects
on
214-215
air pollution effects on 213-214
management of forest harvest
and 213-228
oxidant effects on
215
steady state as component
of 192-212
Logging
(see Harvesting)
hardwood forests, effects on
208 —209

Magnesium

(see Chemistry and

Nutrients)

Management

(see Harvesting,

Landscape, Clear-Cutting,
Roads)

goals of conservationists
goals of forest managers

213
213

Metals, Heavy

landscapes, effects on

215

Mineralization
[S315]
and storage processes
in Reorganization Phase
90=91
Models
dead wood

21, 22,26

for ecosystem development

1—ff

fOTeStahl OOLme>
lEeLeme. O
Hubbard Brook Biomass

Accumulation Model
3-7
phases of
3—6)26—27
Hubbard Brook Nutrient Flux and

Cycling Model
38—39
JABOWA Forest Growth
Simulator

17-19

(see

JABOWA)
Odum
166—ff
Steady-state
166—167
Mount Moosilauke, New Hampshire

2

Nitrogen

(see Chemistry and
Nutrients)

accretion

74

behavior during recovery following
clear-cutting
153-157
cycles so 16
denitrification
75
fixation
74—75
nitrification
75—77. 9l-92

chemoautotrophic
76
effects of devegetation

on 91-97
in intact forests
resorption
75

77

Northern Hardwood Forest
(see Fire
and Wind)
ecosystem development, as model
for
1—40

elevational variation of 8—11
Hubbard Brook at 30—33
postsettlement history 207-211
presettlement history
197—201,
206
range of 7-11
species composition of 7
Nutrient Cycling
(see Chemistry,
Aggradation and
Reorganization Phases,
Biotic Regulation,
Ecosystem, Nutrients)
nitrogen
73-78
study of, by small watershed
technique
33—39
Nutrients
accumulation in biomass
67—70;
153157 S85
circulation and retentionof
73—78
export during development, factors
influencing
183—186
export in relation to biomass
accumulation
183—186
exports of, after clear-cutting
86—88, 217
reservoirs of
70—71
resorption of 75

Organic Matter
(see Biomass)
Outgrowth
in vegetation development
105

Index

Oxidants
effects on landscapes,

215

Particulate Matter
in Aggradation Phase

59-62

erosion of

59—60, 95—98,

145—149
export of, in ecosystem
development
183—186
Patch (Plot)

in ecosystem development
168— 174
Perturbations
(see Disturbance)
effects of, major, comparative

195197
Phosphorus
(see Chemistry and
Nutrients)

Nutrients)

P/R Ratio
in ecosystem development
Precipitation
28—29,

buried seeds
108-113
Red Spruce (Picea rubens)
De oils
106, 151
Reorganization Phase
26—27,
41, 81-163, 186
biotic regulation
loss‘of)
781
— 102
recovery of
138—163
commercial clear-cutting
alter.
150153
hydrology
146—147
primary productivity
139—143
stream-water chemistry
147—150
experimental deforestation
commercial clear-cutting,

Photosynthesis
evergreen vs. deciduous
45
strategies
45—47
Pin Cherry (Prunus pensylvanicas)
23, tOS5—106, 120—124,
140
108—113
buried seeds
germination of
111-113
seed longevity
110-111
Plant Community Dynamics
after clear-cutting
103—137
Potassium
(see Chemistry and

amount of

251

177

55—S7

chemistry of
64—66
33-58
effects on ecosystem
Productivity
gross primary productivity (GPP)
12—16, 26, 43, 141-143,
1592169 1741765195
net primary productivity (NPP)
16, 46, 120, 139-141,
143-146, 151
Raspberry (Rubus idaeus)
23, 105,
MO 120 F123
= 124,
139—140

relationship to
100-101
dissolved substance losses, factors
governing
88—94
decomposition and
mineralization
90-91
integration of processes
93-94
living to dead biomass
92—93
nitrification
91—92
nutrients, origin of
89—90
energy flow, effect on
83-84
erosion of particulate matter
95—101
hydrology, effect on
84-86
net losses of dissolved substances,

effecton
87-88
stream-water chemistry, effect
on
86—87
homeostasis in
160—163
vegetation changes during
103=157
Resorption, Nutrient

75

Resource Availability
increase after disturbance

138-139, 159-161, 173
Roads
forest management, effect on
NO
27
Rotation Time

252

~=Index

Rotation time (cont.)
clear-cutting, effect of

determinate and indeterminate

growth

©222—225

natural catastrophic rotations
201—205

125-128

fertilization, effects on
123—125
morphogenesis, role in
125—128

Second-Growth Forests
4, 16
Secondary Succession
after clear-cutting
103—104
Seeds

(see Vegetation)

Selection Pressure in Community
Dynamics
181
Shade-Tolerance Ratings
106,
Lia
S19
Shifting-Mosaic Steady State
174-175

Silicon

(see

Steady-State Phase)
(see Chemistry and
Nutrients)

Sodium
Soil

(see Chemistry and
Nutrients)
(see Forest Floor, Biomass,

Erosion, Chemistry)
Hubbard Brook
15, 20—26, 29,
42
age of

23, 24

mineral, organic matter in
13,
24—26, 42
mor
29,71
mull, relation to fire-resistant
ecosystem
205
podzols, nitrification in
76—77
relation to fire and wind damage
204 —205
secondary mineral formation
1=73, 182 —183
spodosol
15
Species Richness
113-115,
135—136, 178-181
Species Strategies
buried-seed
108-113
conservative
119-125, 143, 181
exploitive

119, 125, 140, 142,

181]
fertilization, effects on
112
growth strategies
104—108,
LiS=128,, 131
= 133

“t vand) Ko typess
i193!
reproductive strategies
104—113,
134
buried-seed
108-113
relation to size of canopy opening
Pista 35
Stability

138—139,160—163

(see

Biotic Regulation)
in Aggradation Phase
78—79
in ecosystem development
5—6
erosion-controlling mechanisms,
role in 97
forest floor as regulator of 162
hypothesis of homeostasis

160-161
productivity-resource availability
interaction, resulting from
159-160; 162—163
stability-resilience throughout
ecosystem development
186—190
Steady-State Phase
of ecosystem development
3-6,
164—191
evidence for
165
as landscape component
living biomass accumulation in
167—168
models for
166—167
plot as aunit of studyin
168—170
potential examples of 19
probability of | 206—207
shifting-mosaic type
174-175
total biomass accumulation in
168
Storage Processes and
Mineralization
153—157
Stream(s), Dissolved Substances

(see Chemistry, Aggradation
and Reorganization Phases)
concentrations

147-150

64—67, 86—87,

Index

ecosystem development, as an
index of
185
factors affecting
88—94
interactions affecting
93
net losses of
87—88
Succession
(see Vegetation)
secondary defined
103—104
Sugar Maple (Acer saccharum)
7,

30 105-108, 121 —122,
124
Sulfur
(see Chemistry and Nutrients)
input-output budget
67—68

Tolerance Scale

floristic response to
clear-cutting
es kena is)
growth strategies
LIS 128;
131133
conservative
128
exploitive
128
reproductive and growth strategies
134
response to canopy openings
104—108
108—113
buried-seed strategy
synchronization of — 170
’Nareinehorests > 55.1705 175
misconception of 170

106, 114, 117, 119

Transition Phase
decrease in biomass
167
in ecosystem development
3-6;
187
net losses of biomass and nutrients
184—186
Transpiration

253

43, 47, 173

calculation of energy requirement
43, 47—48
in ecosystem development
186
evergreenness, effect on

56, 151

regulatory process of the
ecosystem
57-58
in Reorganization Phase
84
Tree Species of Hardwood Forest
105—106, 114
Treefall
(see Disturbance)
vegetation, effects on
129-133,

168—170,

174, 184

Upgrowth
in vegetation development
105100133

Vegetation
development after clear-cutting

1031377.
canopy differentiation
10eee Os)

Watershed-Ecosystems
3, 27—40
Watershed-Technique
as method for biogeochemical
Study = 3339
Weathering
in aggrading ecosystem
IZ—=73
in ecosystem development
182—183
erosion relationship
182—183
White Mountains, New Hampshire
[oe lt
land-use planning
227-228
postsettlement forests
207—211
presettlement forests
198—201
Wind
hurricanes
193, 199—200
localized
200
as perturbation in forest
195—201
presettlement forest, role in
199—201
Windthrow Mounds
used in reconstruction of forest

history

200—201

Yellow Birch (Betula

alleghaniensis)
7, 31,
LOS
OGRE OM?
1 22124

Also available from Springer-Verlag

Biogeochemistry of a Forested Ecosystem
By G.E. Likens, F.H. Bormann, R.S. Pierce, J.S. Eaton, and

N.M. Johnson
1977. xii, 146p. 37 illus. paper
The most in-depth study of biogeochemical dynamics of a terrestrial ecosystem yet
presented, Biogeochemistry of a Forested Ecosystem is based on the well-known
“Hubbard Brook” ecosystem studies. It brings together long-term data on precipitation and stream-water chemistry, hydrology, and weathering, and also considers
the dynamics of atmospheric gases and water as they flow through the system.
Major emphasis throughout is on the physical and chemical aspects of nutrient and
hydrologic flow through the ecosystem and the nutrient budget. In addition to the
presentation of data and conclusions that may be drawn from them, the book
discusses methodology as it influences results. The material presented in this book
can serve as a basis for decision-making and management schemes, including
modeling within the northern hardwood forest landscape.

Physiological Plant Ecology
By W. Larcher
Translated from the German by M.A. Biederman-Thorson
1975. xiv, 252p. 152 illus. 40 tables. cloth
This book examines plant physiology in terms of its modification by fluctuating
external influences. The author explores the conceptual framework on which this
rapidly developing discipline is based, offering insights into the fundamental
mechanisms and interactions within the plant/environment system and presenting
examples of current problems in the field. Topics covered include the vital
processes in plants, plant metabolism and energy transformations as they are
affected by environmental factors, and the ability of plants to adapt to such factors.

Vegetation of the Earth

In Relation to Climate and the Eco-Physiological Conditions
By H. Walter
Translated from the German by J. Wieser
1973. xvi, 240p. 79 illus. paper
(Heidelberg Science Library, Volume 15)
Vegetation of the Earth describes various kinds of zonal vegetation into which
eco-physiological data must fit. The book presents this information in a consistent
frame of reference and suggests where more factual data are needed. This excellent
introduction to plant eco-physiology analyzes past research in the field and indicates the need for further investigation into plant and vegetation structure and
function, their correlations, and their relationships to environment.

An Interdisciplinary Journal from Springer-Verlag
Environmental Management
Editor-in-Chief: Robert S. De Santo

Editorial Board: Karl E. Shaefer, Francesco di Castri,
John MacKinnon, William Bennetta, John Yamamoto,

Jerome P. Harkins, Percy Knauth, Ralph A. Fine, Joseph A. Miller,
and Vytautas Klemas
Geared to real environmental problems and their solution, Environmental Management brings together ideas from such diverse areas as law, science, engineering, sociology, government, political science and pyschology as they relate to
applied environmental management and research, planning and analysis. The
journal’s objective is to foster an atmosphere of mutual strategy and understanding
among decision-makers involved in these areas, and thus to help answer the urgent
need for environmental protection we are faced with today.
Environmental Management is divided into four major areas. The forum section
—presenting editorials, brief communications, essays and letters to the editor— is
designed to promote communication between contributors and readers. The
profiles sections offers descriptions of individuals and institutions active in environmental affairs. With articles by experts from every corner of the world, the
research section provides insight into new materials and ideas, discusses present
methods and case studies and sheds light on those facets of the field which create,

control or complicate environmental management. Finally, the literature section
gives information on current important world literature in the field.
International in flavor and interdisciplinary in scope, Environmental Management is truly a state-of-the-art publication. To read it routinely is to stay abreast of
new discoveries in a vital and rapidly changing field.

For sample copies, descriptive and subscription information, write to:
Springer-Verlag New York Inc.
175 Fifth Ave.
New York, NY 10010

Springer-Verlag
New York ® Heidelberg @ Berlin

<3

DEC 0 ¢ 2002

DAN © 2 2003
DEC 2 0 2004

: eeisa ¢

QH

Bormann

105
N4

Pattern and process
forested ecosystem.

in a

2
eee

Hier

gg

QH105.N4 B67 ENE STATE COLLEGE /Mason LIBRARY
Bormann, F. Herbert,

Pattern and Process

ce Por the jaa 15 apes: ‘the ‘aiinee .

ogy, biogeochemistry, and ecology of six sme

ina f

)

a)

ecosystems at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest. This i
a book draws heavily onthese well--known studies in presenting an

sa

ie integrated picture of the structure, function, and development ’ |

*

England. Topics covered include important ecological problems —
such as the limits to primary production and biomass accumulation, biotic regulation of energy flow and felfeforstooarcvanlicitavam tals
‘relationship between species diversity and stability, variations
§ in biogeochemical behavior over time, and the effect of the -

over time of the northern hardwood ecosystem in northern New.

s weathering- erosion interaction on productivity. According to the.
; authors, a carefully defined and documented case history pro-..’.

vides, at this stage of evolutionofecosystem science, the best
means for determining the principlesofecosystem structure and
_ function. ,In addition, froma holistic standpoint, such a case
_history enables ecologically sound programs of cane man-

ne eoenont to beieeahntoan

